LAYERS 1, 2 AND 3, THE SUBATOMIC, ATOMIC, AND IONIC AND SIMPLE MOLECULAR LAYERS: THE COGNITIVELY LOAD-BEARING SUBSTRATE

The Physical and Chemical Entities That Cognition Cannot Be Built Without

A Targeted Manuscript

Companion volume to the Layer 4 and 5 dossier and to the Layer 6 through Layer 11 catalogues in the Certified_Neuroscientist corpus of D. R. Dison, Founder, Artificial Intelligence University (AIU).

Date of compilation: August 12, 2026.


PROVENANCE OF THIS DOCUMENT

This document was added to the corpus on 12 August 2026.

It was added by the konnectome build, acting under the owner's explicit authority granted on that same date, and it is therefore this build's writing living in the corpus's directory rather than an original document of the corpus.

The distinction matters and the corpus asks that it be respected: where this document and any original corpus document disagree, the original document governs, because this one does not outrank it and was never meant to.

It exists to fill a specific hole, namely the Layers 1 to 3 catalogue gap recorded in the konnectome gap analysis of 12 August 2026, which observed that every other catalogued layer of the framework had a dossier of its own while the three physical and chemical layers beneath them had none at all.

The quantitative content of this manuscript was checked against the published literature by web search on 12 August 2026, with the sources named in the per-part SOURCES sections at the end of each part, and every source there was consulted on that date.

The corpus's own documents outrank anything found that way, which is the same rule this project applies to its own evidence directory: a search result is a witness, and the corpus is the record.

A reader who wants the corpus's settled voice should read the Layer 6 through Layer 11 volumes; a reader who wants to know what those volumes are standing on should read this one.


INTRODUCTION: WHY THIS IS NOT A PHYSICS TEXTBOOK, AND WHAT IT IS INSTEAD

This is deliberately NOT a full catalogue of Layers 1, 2 and 3.

A full catalogue of those layers would be a textbook of particle physics, a textbook of inorganic chemistry, and a textbook of physical chemistry bound together, and it would tell a cognitive architect almost nothing, because the overwhelming majority of physics and chemistry is true of a rock as much as of a mind.

The Layer 4 and 5 dossier made the same refusal for the same reason, and this volume follows its precedent exactly: those layers as wholes are substrate, the framework abstracts them away, and what is written instead is the dossier of their cognitive elite.

What follows, then, is the dossier of the COGNITIVELY LOAD-BEARING entries: the small set of particles, elements, ions and simple molecules that a cognitive architecture must be able to name, because some construct at Layer 4 or above depends on that entry specifically and would have to be redesigned if the entry were different.

The selection rule is stated once and applied throughout: an entry is admitted if, and only if, removing or altering it would change the behaviour of a named construct in the corpus's upper volumes.

That rule admits the photon, because vision's input quantum is a photon and not anything else; it admits the potassium ion, because the resting potential is a potassium equilibrium; and it excludes, without apology, the strong nuclear force, the noble gases, and the entire lanthanide series.

Twenty-two entries in three parts, one part per layer, each entry given a full chapter under the corpus's standard aspect template.

Tags as always: (COG) for substrate that participates directly in cognition, and (NON-COG) for substrate that supports it without carrying information.

A warning the corpus wishes stated on the face of the document: this is the layer at which speculation is cheapest and most seductive, and several fashionable claims about quantum effects in the brain are examined here and graded honestly, including the ones this dossier judges to be overclaimed.

The aspect template is fixed and runs in the same order in every chapter, because the corpus's tooling parses the headers: WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES, WHERE IT LIVES, PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES, MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS, DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY, HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE, SYSTEMS INTERFACE, DISEASES AND DISORDERS, TIME CONSTANTS, ENGLISH READABLE CODE, CODE SAMPLE, and WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE.

A note for the beginner, who is the reader this volume is written for: every technical term is defined at the point where it first appears in a chapter, every acronym is spelled out before it is abbreviated, and no chapter assumes that the one before it was read.

One sentence governs everything that follows: the substrate does not compute, but it sets the terms on which everything above it must compute.


PART ONE. LAYER 1, THE SUBATOMIC SUBSTRATE

Four entries, because only four subatomic facts are load-bearing for cognition.

Layer 1 is the layer of quarks, electrons, protons and photons, governed by quantum mechanics, and almost none of it matters to a cognitive architect.

The nucleus is a black box that never opens at body temperature, the strong nuclear force never appears in a physiology paper, and the whole apparatus of particle physics is as true of a paving stone as of a person.

Four things do matter, and they matter absolutely.

A photon is the actual quantum of the visual input, so vision's signal-to-noise ratio is a photon-counting problem and not a metaphor for one.

An electron carries the elementary charge in which every membrane potential is denominated, so a patch-clamp current is literally a count of charges per second.

Quantum tunnelling is real and measured in two named biological places, and is loudly overclaimed in several others, and a corpus that means to be trusted must say which is which.

And the thermal energy of a body at 37 degrees Celsius sets a noise floor that no nervous system can lower, only outvote.

Read Part One as four constraints, not four mechanisms.


CHAPTER 1. THE PHOTON (The Counted Quantum) (COG)

Everything you have ever seen arrived as a countable object, one at a time, and on a dark night the counting is close enough to the limit that you can feel the graininess of the world.

A rod cell in your retina is a photon detector operating within a factor of a few of the best any physical device can do, and its failures are not engineering sloppiness but the irreducible statistics of small numbers.

Counted names the fact that vision is arithmetic on integers at its lower end.

Quantum names the fact that light is not a continuous fluid but a stream of indivisible packets, each carrying a fixed energy set by its wavelength.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A photon is the indivisible packet of electromagnetic energy, the smallest amount of light that can exist at a given wavelength, and it is the entire physical input to the visual system.

What it does, in the nervous system, is exactly one thing: it is absorbed by a molecule of retinal held inside a protein, and it changes that molecule's shape.

Every colour you have ever perceived, every face you have recognised, and every word you have read entered the nervous system through that single event repeated a great many times.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Photons reach the nervous system only at the retina, in the outer segments of rod and cone photoreceptors, where stacked membrane discs pack the light-absorbing protein at very high density.

The human retina holds roughly 92 million rods and roughly 4.6 million cones, with substantial individual variation, on the counts of Curcio and colleagues, 1990, in the Journal of Comparative Neurology.

There is a second, much smaller photon-sensitive population, the intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells using the pigment melanopsin, which are roughly 0.2 to 0.8 percent of retinal ganglion cells and which feed the circadian and pupillary systems rather than image-forming vision.

Beyond the retina, the human nervous system is optically dark, and this dossier records no other physiological photon receiver in the human body.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

A photon's energy is Planck's constant times the speed of light divided by the wavelength, which at 500 nanometres, a nanometre being a millionth of a millimetre, gives about 3.97 times 10 to the power minus 19 joules, or about 2.48 electronvolts.

That energy is roughly 96 times the thermal energy unit at body temperature discussed in Chapter 4, which is precisely why a photon can drive a chemical change that heat alone almost never drives.

The rod pigment rhodopsin absorbs most strongly at about 498 to 500 nanometres, and the whole scotopic, meaning dark-adapted, sensitivity curve peaks at about 507 nanometres, while the photopic, meaning light-adapted, cone-driven curve peaks at about 555 nanometres, on the standard values of the International Commission on Illumination.

The three human cone pigments peak at approximately 420 nanometres for short-wavelength, 534 nanometres for medium-wavelength, and 564 nanometres for long-wavelength, on the microspectrophotometry of Bowmaker and Dartnall, 1980, in the Journal of Physiology, with roughly 3 nanometre variation between reports.

The absorbed photon isomerises 11-cis retinal to all-trans retinal, a change of shape about a single double bond, and this is one of the fastest chemical reactions known in biology, complete in roughly 50 to 200 femtoseconds, a femtosecond being a millionth of a billionth of a second, on the ultrafast spectroscopy of Wang and colleagues, 1994, in Science.

The quantum yield of that isomerisation, meaning the fraction of absorbed photons that actually produce the useful shape change, is about 0.65, a value reported consistently since Dartnall, 1968, and which means roughly two in every three absorbed photons do work.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

The photon itself has no modes, because it is created, travels, and is destroyed; the mode register belongs to the receiving pigment, and it is that register which is catalogued here.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ dark_resting - The Loaded Trap - rhodopsin holding 11-cis retinal, the protein inactive, the receptor cell held at a relatively depolarised resting potential of about minus 40 millivolts by a standing current.

◦ photoactivated - The Sprung Trap - the metarhodopsin two state, an active enzyme that catalyses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate for guanosine triphosphate on the G protein transducin.

◦ quenched - The Marked Trap - the active state after phosphorylation by rhodopsin kinase and capping by arrestin, shut off but not yet reset.

◦ bleached - The Spent Trap - all-trans retinal released, the opsin protein empty and unable to respond until fresh 11-cis retinal is supplied.

◦ thermally_activated - The False Alarm - a rhodopsin that has isomerised without any photon, purely from thermal energy, and which is indistinguishable downstream from a real photon.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ dark_resting: no transducin activation; the cell holds a circulating dark current of roughly 20 to 70 picoamperes carried by cyclic-nucleotide-gated channels (well established).

◦ photoactivated: one active rhodopsin activates on the order of tens to a few hundred transducin molecules before quenching, and the resulting single-photon response suppresses roughly 0.5 to 1 picoampere of the dark current for about one second in primate rods (well established; the amplification gain figure varies between species and preparations and reports range from about 20 to several hundred, so the corpus quotes a range rather than a point value).

◦ quenched: transducin activation ceases within tens to a few hundred milliseconds, set by rhodopsin kinase and arrestin kinetics (well established).

◦ bleached: no response; sensitivity recovers only as the retinoid cycle in the retinal pigment epithelium resupplies 11-cis retinal, over minutes to tens of minutes (well established).

◦ thermally_activated: identical downstream response to a real single-photon event, occurring at roughly 0.004 to 0.012 events per rod per second in primate rods at body temperature, on Baylor, Nunn and Schnapf, 1984, in the Journal of Physiology, and later work; this is the dark noise that sets the absolute visual threshold (well established, with a genuine spread between species and laboratories).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ dark_resting to photoactivated: absorption of one photon; trigger is optical, timescale femtoseconds for the isomerisation and about 1 to 10 milliseconds for the full active state to form.

◦ photoactivated to quenched: multi-site phosphorylation then arrestin binding; tens to a few hundred milliseconds.

◦ quenched to bleached: hydrolysis of the retinal-opsin bond and release of all-trans retinal; seconds to minutes.

◦ bleached to dark_resting: retinoid cycle resupply of 11-cis retinal; minutes to about 30 minutes for full human dark adaptation.

◦ dark_resting to thermally_activated: spontaneous thermal isomerisation; mean waiting time of hundreds of seconds per rod, and steeply temperature-dependent.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: bleaching outpacing retinoid resupply, giving the after-image and the temporary blindness of a camera flash.

◦ Warning condition: accumulation of all-trans retinal adducts, which form the retinal pigment epithelium's lipofuscin and are implicated in macular degeneration.

◦ Watchdog: the retinal pigment epithelium's retinoid cycle, pupillary constriction, and the rapid gain control of horizontal and bipolar cells.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Human photoreceptors are generated from about the seventh week after conception, with cone genesis leading rod genesis, and the fovea's cone packing continues to mature well after birth.

Outer segments begin to form around mid-gestation and the retina is capable of light responses before term, but visual acuity at birth is roughly 20/400 and reaches adult values over the first three to five years.

The outer segment is not built once: each rod sheds roughly a tenth of its discs daily to the retinal pigment epithelium and rebuilds them, so the whole photon-catching apparatus is replaced about every ten days, which is one of the most striking turnover rates in the body.

The three cone pigment genes are the products of gene duplication, with the medium- and long-wavelength genes sitting adjacent on the X chromosome and recombining readily, which is the direct cause of the common red-green colour vision variants.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

Every construct in the corpus's visual chapters inherits its dynamic range and its noise from this chapter.

Because the input arrives as counted quanta, the retina's Layer 8 microcircuits are built as noise-rejection machinery first and feature detectors second: the rod bipolar pathway's nonlinear thresholding exists to discard single-photon-sized events that are probably thermal false alarms, and the convergence of many rods onto one ganglion cell exists to trade acuity for photon count.

Because a photon's energy is set by wavelength and nothing else, colour at Layer 9 and above cannot be a property of light but only a comparison across three noisy detectors, which is why colour constancy is a computation rather than a measurement.

Because the retinoid cycle takes minutes, the whole-organism state called dark adaptation at Layer 11 has a time constant set by a chemical resupply rate at Layer 3.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 1 electromagnetic field, photons in the 380 to 780 nanometre band, at retinal illuminance from about 10 to the power minus 6 to 10 to the power 5 trolands.

◦ Layer 3 retinoid supply, 11-cis retinal delivered from the retinal pigment epithelium, ultimately from dietary vitamin A.

◦ Layer 11 pupillary aperture state, which modulates delivered flux by a factor of roughly 16 between 2 and 8 millimetres of pupil diameter.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 4 conformational change, metarhodopsin two, the active G-protein-coupled receptor state.

◦ Layer 6 photoreceptor membrane potential, a graded hyperpolarisation from about minus 40 millivolts toward about minus 70 millivolts at saturating light.

◦ Layer 10 circadian and pupillary systems, through the melanopsin ganglion cells, as irradiance rather than image.

• STATE.

◦ Fraction of rhodopsin in each mode register entry, observable as pigment density by fundus reflectometry.

◦ Circulating dark current, observable by suction electrode recording as 20 to 70 picoamperes in a single rod.

◦ Adaptation state, observable behaviourally as the dark adaptation curve with its rod-cone break at about 7 to 10 minutes.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Photon energy at 500 nanometres, about 3.97 times 10 to the power minus 19 joules, about 2.48 electronvolts.

◦ Isomerisation quantum yield about 0.65.

◦ Scotopic peak about 507 nanometres, photopic peak about 555 nanometres.

◦ Rod count about 92 million, cone count about 4.6 million, with wide individual variation.

◦ Thermal isomerisation rate about 0.004 to 0.012 per rod per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Retinal isomerisation, about 50 to 200 femtoseconds.

◦ Active state formation, about 1 to 10 milliseconds.

◦ Single-photon response duration in primate rods, about 300 milliseconds to 1 second.

◦ Shut-off by phosphorylation and arrestin, tens to a few hundred milliseconds.

◦ Full human dark adaptation, about 20 to 40 minutes.

◦ Outer segment disc renewal, about 10 days.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Vitamin A deficiency starves the retinoid cycle and produces night blindness before it produces anything else, and it remains a major cause of preventable childhood blindness worldwide.

Retinitis pigmentosa, a family of inherited photoreceptor degenerations of which rhodopsin mutations are one cause, kills rods first and so presents as night blindness and tunnel vision.

Congenital stationary night blindness includes mutations that leave rhodopsin constitutively active, so the system behaves as though light were always present.

Red-green colour vision deficiency, affecting roughly 8 percent of men of northern European descent and under 0.5 percent of women, is a Layer 2 and 3 change - an altered pigment absorbance peak - producing a Layer 12 perceptual difference with no lesion anywhere above.

Age-related macular degeneration involves the retinal pigment epithelium's handling of the all-trans retinal adducts generated by the process described above.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The femtosecond isomerisation is the fastest event catalogued anywhere in this corpus, and the roughly 30-minute dark adaptation is among the slowest sensory settings, so this single chapter spans about 20 orders of magnitude in time.

The behaviourally important number is the roughly 300 milliseconds to 1 second of the single-photon response, because that integration window is what allows a rod to accumulate evidence, and it is also why vision at absolute threshold is unavoidably slow.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a dark-adapted observer says yes on a trial, given a dim flash, by counting real photon absorptions against thermal false alarms.
Create a number variable called flash photons at cornea with initial value the mean number of photons delivered.
Create a number variable called ocular transmission with initial value 0.5, the fraction reaching the retina.
Create a number variable called absorption probability with initial value 0.2, the chance a delivered photon is caught by a pigment molecule.
Create a number variable called quantum yield with initial value 0.65.
Create a number variable called dark event rate with initial value 0.008 per rod per second.
Create a number variable called pooled rods with initial value 500, the rods feeding one decision.
Create a number variable called integration seconds with initial value 0.3.
Create a number variable called threshold count with initial value 6, the number of events the observer requires before saying yes.
For each trial, perform the following actions.
    Compute the mean number of real isomerisations as flash photons at cornea times ocular transmission times absorption probability times quantum yield.
    Draw a random Poisson count using that mean and call it real events.
    Compute the mean number of false alarms as dark event rate times pooled rods times integration seconds.
    Draw a random Poisson count using that mean and call it false events.
    If real events plus false events is at least threshold count, record the answer yes, otherwise record the answer no.
End the loop.
Report the fraction of trials answered yes.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the claim of this chapter is that seeing, at threshold, is Poisson statistics wearing a coat, and a short simulation reproduces the classical frequency-of-seeing curve without any further assumptions.

'''Frequency-of-seeing at absolute threshold. Parameters follow the
classical Hecht, Shlaer and Pirenne 1942 analysis and the primate rod
dark-noise rate of Baylor, Nunn and Schnapf 1984. Multiplication is
written with operator.mul only to keep this file free of asterisks.'''
import random
from operator import mul
from functools import reduce

OCULAR, ABSORB, YIELD_ = 0.5, 0.2, 0.65
DARK_RATE, RODS, WINDOW = 0.008, 500, 0.3
THRESHOLD, TRIALS = 6, 20000

def poisson(mean):
    if mean <= 0:
        return 0
    import math
    limit, k, p = math.exp(-mean), 0, 1.0
    while True:
        p = mul(p, random.random())
        if p <= limit:
            return k
        k += 1

false_mean = reduce(mul, [DARK_RATE, RODS, WINDOW])
for corneal in [10, 20, 40, 60, 90, 130, 200]:
    real_mean = reduce(mul, [corneal, OCULAR, ABSORB, YIELD_])
    seen = 0
    for _ in range(TRIALS):
        if poisson(real_mean) + poisson(false_mean) >= THRESHOLD:
            seen += 1
    print(corneal, "photons at cornea ->", round(seen / TRIALS, 3), "seen")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only input to the human nervous system that arrives as a countable integer, and the only one whose detector's own warmth generates events the detector cannot tell from the real thing.


CHAPTER 2. THE ELECTRON AND THE CARRIAGE OF CHARGE (The Denominating Unit) (COG)

Every voltage a neuroscientist has ever measured is a statement about a number of electrons that are somewhere rather than somewhere else.

A patch-clamp trace showing two picoamperes is not an analogue quantity at all: it is a count of about twelve and a half million elementary charges per second, and the graininess of that count is visible in the recording.

Denominating names the role: the electron supplies the unit in which the whole of electrophysiology is priced.

Unit names the fact that charge comes in indivisible amounts and cannot be subdivided.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The electron is the light, negatively charged particle whose charge magnitude, called the elementary charge, is the quantum of electrical charge, and since 2019 it has been an exactly defined constant rather than a measured one, at 1.602176634 times 10 to the power minus 19 coulombs.

In the nervous system the electron does two distinct jobs, and it is important not to confuse them.

First, it defines the unit of charge that ions carry, so that a sodium ion crossing a membrane moves exactly one elementary charge and a calcium ion moves exactly two.

Second, in the mitochondrion the electron is itself the moving particle, hopping between metal centres down the respiratory chain and paying for every unit of the energy currency catalogued in Chapter 18.

WHERE IT LIVES:

As the unit of ionic charge, it lives everywhere a membrane potential exists, which is every cell in the body.

As a freely transferred particle, it lives in a very restricted set of addresses: the iron-sulphur clusters, haems, flavins and copper centres of the inner mitochondrial membrane's respiratory complexes, and a smaller set of cytosolic and endoplasmic reticulum oxidoreductases.

Free electrons do not exist in the cytosol; the electron in biology is always held by a carrier, and the whole design problem of bioenergetics is arranging carriers close enough together to hand it on.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

One picoampere is 10 to the power minus 12 coulombs per second, which divided by the elementary charge is about 6.24 million elementary charges per second, and this conversion is the single most useful arithmetic in this chapter.

A single open ion channel typically passes a current of about 0.5 to 20 picoamperes at physiological driving forces, corresponding to roughly 3 million to 125 million ions per second, and this is why a channel is described as a pore rather than a pump: it does not touch each ion.

The specific membrane capacitance of a lipid bilayer is close to 0.9 to 1.0 microfarads per square centimetre, a value stable enough across cell types to be treated as a constant, and it yields the famous result that changing a neuron's membrane potential by 100 millivolts requires only about 10 to the power minus 12 moles of charge per square centimetre, which is a vanishing fraction of the ions present.

That result is the reason a neuron can fire for a long time before its gradients run down, and the reason the sodium-potassium pump can be slow relative to the action potential.

Biological electron transfer is by quantum tunnelling between fixed centres, and its rate falls off exponentially with edge-to-edge distance, an angstrom being a ten-billionth of a metre, with a decay coefficient of about 1.4 per angstrom through protein medium in the Moser-Dutton expression, which corresponds to roughly a tenfold drop for every additional 1.6 to 1.7 angstroms, on Page, Moser, Chen and Dutton, 1999, in Nature, volume 402, pages 47 to 52.

That distance law produces the celebrated design rule that respiratory chain redox centres are packed no more than about 14 angstroms apart edge to edge, because beyond that distance transfer becomes too slow to sustain metabolism, and any longer transfer always proceeds through a chain of intermediate cofactors.

The 14 angstroms is an empirical upper bound on a single hop rather than a hard physical wall, and Page and colleagues themselves suggest it may reflect selection against designs more vulnerable to mutation rather than a limit of physics.

The full redox span from the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH), at a standard biochemical reduction potential of about minus 320 millivolts, to oxygen at about plus 820 millivolts, is about 1.14 volts, and the chain harvests that drop in stages rather than all at once, which is what makes the energy capturable rather than merely destructive.

That span corresponds to about minus 220 kilojoules per mole of NADH oxidised, a figure that two independent routes of calculation agree on to better than 1 percent.

The proton stoichiometry of the chain is not as settled as textbooks imply: complex one is now well supported at 4 protons per 2 electrons, complex three at 4, but complex four is genuinely disputed, with the modern Wikstrom position of 1 proton pumped per electron set against older non-integer measurements and against Mitchell's outright denial that it pumps at all, so the commonly quoted total of about 10 protons per NADH should be read as a modal figure rather than a measured constant.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

The mode register here is the redox state of a carrier, because that is the discrete operating regime that changes behaviour.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ oxidised - The Empty Hand - a carrier with its electron given away, ready to accept another.

◦ reduced - The Full Hand - a carrier holding its electron, ready to donate.

◦ semiquinone - The Half Hand - the one-electron intermediate of ubiquinone and of flavins, the state that makes one-electron and two-electron chemistry interconvertible.

◦ leaking - The Slipped Hand - a reduced carrier that hands its electron to molecular oxygen instead of the next carrier, producing superoxide.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ oxidised and reduced: transfer rate follows the Moser-Dutton relation, a tenfold change per 1.7 angstroms, with rates spanning roughly 10 to the power 2 to 10 to the power 12 per second across the chain (well established).

◦ semiquinone: enables the Q cycle at complex three, doubling proton translocation per pair of electrons (well established).

◦ leaking: superoxide production is commonly quoted as around 0.1 to 2 percent of oxygen consumption, but this figure is strongly contested and depends heavily on the substrate and the membrane potential used in the preparation, and in-vivo values are not firmly established (low confidence; direct in-vivo measurement would settle it).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ oxidised to reduced: arrival of an electron from the upstream donor; picoseconds to microseconds depending on distance and driving force.

◦ reduced to oxidised: donation to the downstream acceptor; same timescale.

◦ reduced to leaking: high membrane potential plus a reduced upstream pool, especially reverse electron transport at complex one; milliseconds and upward.

◦ leaking to oxidised: superoxide dismutase and the glutathione system clear the product; the enzymatic step is close to diffusion-limited.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: a fully reduced chain with the downstream step blocked, which is what cyanide and rotenone produce.

◦ Warning condition: rising superoxide and a falling reduced-glutathione ratio.

◦ Watchdog: superoxide dismutases, catalase, the glutathione and thioredoxin systems, and the uncoupling proteins that lower membrane potential.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

The respiratory complexes are assembled from subunits encoded by two genomes, the nuclear and the mitochondrial, and complex one alone has 45 subunits in humans with 7 encoded by mitochondrial deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).

Assembly requires dedicated factors for inserting the iron-sulphur clusters and haems, and mutations in those assembly factors rather than in the subunits themselves are a common cause of mitochondrial disease.

Mitochondrial density in neurons is set during development and continuously adjusted afterwards, with mitochondria positioned at synapses and at nodes of Ranvier where the ionic bill is highest, as catalogued in the Layer 4 and 5 dossier's mitochondrial provisioning entry.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

The elementary charge sets the entire unit system of the corpus's upper volumes: conductances in siemens, currents in amperes, and potentials in volts are all bookkeeping over electron counts.

The 14-angstrom packing rule explains why the corpus's energy chapters treat mitochondria as discrete objects that must be physically delivered to a synapse rather than as a diffuse supply, because electron transfer cannot be done at a distance.

And the capacitance arithmetic explains one of the framework's most important abstractions: because so few ions move per spike, Layer 6 can treat the concentrations of Layer 3 as constants over the timescale of a spike, and only Layer 5 and above need worry about running the pump.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 reduced substrates, principally NADH at about 50 to 500 micromolar free in the mitochondrial matrix, and the reduced form of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2).

◦ Layer 3 oxygen, as the terminal electron acceptor, at tissue partial pressures of roughly 10 to 35 millimetres of mercury in brain.

◦ Layer 5 mitochondrial membrane potential, about minus 140 to minus 180 millivolts, which sets the back-pressure on transfer.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane, feeding the energy currency of Chapter 18.

◦ Layer 6 membrane current, in the sense that every ionic current is a charge count.

◦ Layer 5 reactive oxygen species, as an unintended but signalling-competent by-product.

• STATE.

◦ Redox poise of each carrier, observable spectroscopically as the reduced-minus-oxidised difference spectrum of cytochromes.

◦ Charge on the membrane capacitor, observable directly as the membrane potential.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Elementary charge, exactly 1.602176634 times 10 to the power minus 19 coulombs.

◦ One picoampere equals about 6.24 million elementary charges per second.

◦ Specific membrane capacitance, about 0.9 to 1.0 microfarads per square centimetre.

◦ Maximum useful electron transfer distance, about 14 angstroms.

◦ Redox span from NADH to oxygen, about 1.1 volts.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Single electron tunnelling step, about 1 picosecond to 1 millisecond depending on distance.

◦ Complete traverse of the respiratory chain by one electron pair, of the order of milliseconds.

◦ Membrane charging time constant of a neuron, about 10 to 50 milliseconds, being the product of membrane resistance and capacitance.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Blockade at a single carrier, as by cyanide at complex four, which stops the whole chain within seconds; and electron leak to oxygen under high membrane potential, producing oxidative damage over hours to years.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Leber hereditary optic neuropathy is caused by point mutations in mitochondrial complex one subunits and destroys retinal ganglion cells, typically in young adult men, which is a Layer 1 defect producing a Layer 9 lesion.

Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes, known as MELAS, and myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibres, known as MERRF, are transfer ribonucleic acid mutations that impair the chain and present neurologically because the brain has the least tolerance for a shortfall.

Cyanide, carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulphide at toxic doses all inhibit complex four, and the resulting clinical picture is a pure demonstration of the brain's dependence on this one step.

Parkinson disease has a long-standing association with complex one dysfunction, supported by the fact that the toxin MPTP, a complex one inhibitor, causes parkinsonism in humans, although whether complex one failure is cause or consequence in idiopathic disease is not settled.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The electron's own hop is picoseconds, the membrane's charging is tens of milliseconds, and the consequences of chronic leak accumulate over decades, so this chapter also spans more than ten orders of magnitude.

The number a modeller most often needs is the membrane time constant, the product of specific membrane resistance and specific capacitance, which is about 10 to 50 milliseconds in cortical neurons at rest and falls to a few milliseconds during intense synaptic bombardment.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert an electrophysiological measurement into a count of elementary charges and to check the classical claim that very few ions move during a spike.
Create a number variable called elementary charge with initial value 1.602176634 divided by 10 to the power 19, in coulombs.
Create a number variable called single channel current with initial value 2, in picoamperes.
Create a number variable called specific capacitance with initial value 1, in microfarads per square centimetre.
Create a number variable called voltage swing with initial value 100, in millivolts.
Compute ions per second as single channel current in amperes divided by elementary charge.
Compute charge needed per square centimetre as specific capacitance in farads times voltage swing in volts.
Compute ions needed per square centimetre as charge needed divided by elementary charge.
Compute the internal ion supply for a cell of radius 10 micrometres at 140 millimolar and divide the ions needed by it.
Report ions per second, ions needed per square centimetre, and the fraction of the internal supply consumed by one spike.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the point of this chapter is that a current is a count, and the fastest way to feel that is to print the count.

'''Charge bookkeeping for a neuron. Elementary charge is the exact
CODATA-defined value adopted in the 2019 redefinition of the ampere.
Multiplication uses operator.mul to keep the file free of asterisks.'''
from operator import mul
from functools import reduce
import math

E = 1.602176634e-19
pA = 2e-12
ions_per_s = pA / E
print("ions per second through one open channel:", round(ions_per_s / 1e6, 2), "million")

C_spec = 1e-6              # farads per square centimetre
dV = 0.100                 # volts
q_per_cm2 = mul(C_spec, dV)
ions_per_cm2 = q_per_cm2 / E
print("ions per square centimetre for a 100 mV swing:", "%.3e" % ions_per_cm2)

r = 10e-4                  # 10 micrometres, in centimetres
area = reduce(mul, [4.0, math.pi, r, r])
volume = reduce(mul, [4.0 / 3.0, math.pi, r, r, r])   # cubic centimetres
internal_ions = reduce(mul, [0.140, 1e-3, volume, 6.02214076e23])
print("fraction of internal sodium moved by one spike:",
      "%.2e" % (mul(ions_per_cm2, area) / internal_ions))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only entry in this dossier whose value is exact by definition rather than by measurement, and the only particle that is both the unit of every voltage above it and a physically moving object in the mitochondrion.


CHAPTER 3. QUANTUM TUNNELLING IN ENZYME CATALYSIS, AND WHERE IT IS OVERCLAIMED (The Honest Frontier) (COG)

This chapter exists because the corpus has a duty to say, out loud and in one place, which quantum effects in biology are measured and which are advertised.

Two are measured, with isotope experiments that would be hard to explain any other way; several more are asserted with a confidence the evidence does not carry; and the difference between the two categories is the difference between a science and a mood.

Honest names the intent: nothing here is graded up to be interesting.

Frontier names the fact that this is genuinely a live area, and the corpus is not claiming the question is closed, only that some particular answers are not yet earned.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Quantum tunnelling is the passage of a particle through an energy barrier that classical physics says it does not have the energy to cross, and it happens because a particle is described by a wave whose extent leaks through thin barriers.

Its probability falls very steeply with both the barrier's width and the particle's mass, which is why it is routine for an electron, marginal but real for a proton or a hydrogen atom, and effectively impossible for anything heavier.

In biology it does two established jobs: it moves electrons between fixed centres in redox chains, as described in Chapter 2, and it transfers hydrogen in the catalytic step of a set of named enzymes.

What it does not do, on present evidence, is compute.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Electron tunnelling lives in the redox proteins already listed: the respiratory complexes, photosynthetic reaction centres in other organisms, and cytochrome P450 and nitric oxide synthase in humans.

Hydrogen tunnelling lives in a specific and well-studied roster of enzymes, of which soybean lipoxygenase is the flagship experimental system, with methylamine dehydrogenase, alcohol dehydrogenase, thermophilic dihydrofolate reductase and aromatic amine dehydrogenase as the other principal cases.

Microtubules live in every neuron, which is why the quantum-consciousness proposals chose them, but the presence of the structure is not evidence for the proposed function.

Olfactory receptors live in the olfactory epithelium and are ordinary G-protein-coupled receptors, and the claim examined below is that they read molecular vibrations by inelastic electron tunnelling.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

The decisive experimental signature of hydrogen tunnelling is an anomalously large kinetic isotope effect, meaning the ratio by which a reaction slows when hydrogen is replaced by its heavier isotope deuterium.

Classical transition state theory permits a ratio of at most about 7 at room temperature, and soybean lipoxygenase shows a ratio of roughly 80, with some variants reported far higher, which is the strongest single piece of evidence for tunnelling in enzyme catalysis, on Knapp, Rickert and Klinman, 2002, in the Journal of the American Chemical Society.

A second signature is a weak or anomalous temperature dependence of that ratio, which is what motivated the proposal that specific protein motions, variously called promoting vibrations or donor-acceptor distance sampling, gate the tunnelling event.

Here the corpus must record a genuine and continuing disagreement: Klinman, Kohen, Schwartz, Scrutton and colleagues argue that these motions are an evolved catalytic feature, while Warshel and colleagues argue that tunnelling contributes only a modest factor to the rate and that the enzyme's catalytic power lies in electrostatic preorganisation rather than in dynamics.

The corpus does not adjudicate that dispute; it records that tunnelling occurs, that the magnitude of its contribution to catalytic rate enhancement is contested, and that the settling experiment would be a system in which the proposed promoting motion can be removed without altering the electrostatic environment.

On the quantum-consciousness side, the arithmetic that motivates the corpus's refusal is decoherence time, meaning how long a quantum superposition survives contact with a warm, wet environment before it behaves classically.

Tegmark, 2000, in Physical Review E, computed decoherence times for microtubule states of the order of 10 to the power minus 13 seconds, which is roughly ten orders of magnitude shorter than the millisecond scale of neural events; Hagan, Hameroff and Tuszynski, 2002, in Physical Review E, rebutted with revised assumptions giving 10 to the power minus 5 to 10 to the power minus 4 seconds.

Even taking the rebuttal's own figure at face value, a hundred microseconds is shorter than a single synaptic event, and the corpus therefore records the Orchestrated Objective Reduction proposal of Penrose and Hameroff as not supported, while noting honestly that the debate has continued and that proponents have published further defences as recently as 2025 in Neuroscience of Consciousness.

Two more recent lines are recorded with their grades: Fisher's 2015 proposal in Annals of Physics that phosphorus nuclear spins in calcium phosphate Posner molecules could carry long-lived quantum information is a well-posed and testable hypothesis with no confirming in-vivo evidence to date, and the 2024 reports of superradiance in tryptophan networks in microtubules are in-vitro optical observations whose relevance to cognition is not established.

Quantum olfaction is the clearest case of a live disagreement: Turin's vibrational theory predicts that deuterated odorants smell different, Franco and colleagues, 2011, in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, reported that fruit flies can be trained to discriminate them, and Block and colleagues, 2015, in the same journal, tested human and mouse receptors directly and found no vibrational discrimination in a musk receptor system, concluding against the theory.

The corpus reports both and averages neither: the fly behavioural result stands and the human receptor result stands, they concern different systems, and the settling experiment is a direct measurement of receptor activation by isotopologues in a human receptor where the shape difference is provably negligible.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

The mode register here is a register of evidential grades rather than of physical states, because this chapter's subject is a claim landscape.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ established_electron_tunnelling - The Settled Case - biological electron transfer over up to about 14 angstroms, with a measured distance law.

◦ established_hydrogen_tunnelling - The Isotope Case - enzymatic hydrogen transfer with kinetic isotope effects well above the classical ceiling.

◦ contested_catalytic_contribution - The Live Argument - whether protein dynamics are evolved to promote tunnelling, and how much of catalysis tunnelling explains.

◦ unsupported_quantum_cognition - The Refused Case - microtubule quantum computation as a substrate of consciousness.

◦ open_but_unconfirmed - The Waiting Case - Posner molecule nuclear spins, and microtubule superradiance.

◦ contradicted_across_systems - The Split Case - vibrational olfaction, positive in one insect behavioural assay and negative in a direct human receptor assay.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ established_electron_tunnelling: rate falls about tenfold per 1.7 angstroms, packing limit about 14 angstroms (well established).

◦ established_hydrogen_tunnelling: kinetic isotope effect about 80 in soybean lipoxygenase against a classical ceiling near 7 (well established).

◦ contested_catalytic_contribution: proposed rate contribution ranges from a factor of a few to several orders of magnitude depending on the school (low confidence, actively disputed).

◦ unsupported_quantum_cognition: required coherence time milliseconds, best proponent estimate 10 to the power minus 4 seconds, critic estimate 10 to the power minus 13 seconds (the corpus grades the claim not supported).

◦ open_but_unconfirmed: no in-vivo measurement exists; grade is honestly unknown rather than negative.

◦ contradicted_across_systems: fly discrimination reported, human receptor discrimination not found (irreconcilable as published).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ open_but_unconfirmed to established: an in-vivo measurement with a manipulation that changes the quantum parameter without changing anything chemical; no timescale can be given because no such experiment is yet designed for the Posner proposal.

◦ contested_catalytic_contribution to settled: a mutant that abolishes the proposed promoting motion while preserving electrostatics; feasible within the current decade.

◦ unsupported_quantum_cognition to reopened: a direct measurement of a coherence time in living neural tissue exceeding a millisecond; no such measurement exists.

◦ contradicted_across_systems to settled: isotopologue testing across a panel of human receptors with computed shape equivalence; feasible now.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: a claim whose only support is that the structure exists and the mathematics is possible.

◦ Warning condition: press coverage running ahead of replication, and the citation of a rebuttal's own most favourable number as though it were a confirmation.

◦ Watchdog: the corpus's selection rule, which admits an entry only if a named construct above it would change, and the requirement that a quantum claim state its decoherence time budget explicitly.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Tunnelling is not assembled; it is a property of the geometry, and what development builds is the geometry.

Protein folding places redox centres at their fixed separations, and it is that placement, encoded at Layer 4, which converts a quantum-mechanical possibility into a reliable biological rate.

The evolutionary observation of Page, Moser and Dutton is that the 14-angstrom rule is a conserved design constraint across all known respiratory and photosynthetic chains, which is about as strong a statement of engineering necessity as comparative biology offers.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

The established cases colour the layers above quietly: they make the respiratory chain fast enough to power a brain, and they set the turnover numbers of a handful of enzymes that appear in the corpus's monoamine synthesis chapters.

The unsupported cases would, if true, colour everything, which is precisely why the corpus states its refusal explicitly rather than passing over them in silence.

The practical lesson for a cognitive architect is that no construct in the corpus's upper volumes requires a quantum computation to work, and every one of them has a classical mechanism that is measured, so a synthetic mind built on this corpus does not need to wait for physics.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 4 protein geometry, specifically donor-acceptor edge-to-edge distances of 3 to 14 angstroms.

◦ Layer 1 thermal energy, which supplies the fluctuations that bring donor and acceptor into tunnelling range.

◦ Layer 3 substrate identity, including isotopic substitution as an experimental input.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 chemical transformation rate, as an enzyme turnover number.

◦ Layer 5 respiratory chain flux, feeding the energy budget of Chapter 18 and Chapter 22.

◦ Layer 15 evidential grade, published to the corpus itself as a claim status rather than to a biological construct.

• STATE.

◦ Donor-acceptor distance distribution, observable by crystallography and by molecular dynamics.

◦ Measured kinetic isotope effect and its temperature dependence, observable by steady-state and pre-steady-state kinetics.

◦ Claim grade, observable by reading this chapter.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Electron tunnelling distance decay, about tenfold per 1.7 angstroms; practical limit about 14 angstroms.

◦ Classical ceiling on the hydrogen kinetic isotope effect at room temperature, about 7.

◦ Soybean lipoxygenase kinetic isotope effect, about 80.

◦ Microtubule decoherence time, 10 to the power minus 13 seconds by Tegmark 2000 against 10 to the power minus 5 to 10 to the power minus 4 seconds by Hagan and colleagues 2002.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Electron tunnelling step, about 1 picosecond to 1 millisecond.

◦ Hydrogen transfer step in a tunnelling enzyme, of the order of 10 to the power minus 4 to 10 to the power minus 2 seconds as a turnover, with the barrier crossing itself on the femtosecond scale.

◦ Decoherence in warm wet tissue, 10 to the power minus 13 to 10 to the power minus 4 seconds depending on whose assumptions are used.

◦ The shortest neural event that would need protecting, about 10 to the power minus 3 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Physically, a redox centre displaced beyond about 14 angstroms stops conducting; evidentially, the failure mode of this chapter is a claim that cites a possibility as a mechanism.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

No human disease is currently attributable to a change in tunnelling probability as such, and the corpus states that plainly rather than inventing one.

The nearest thing is the deuterium isotope effect exploited pharmacologically, where replacing hydrogen with deuterium at a metabolically labile position slows the enzyme that clears a drug, and deutetrabenazine, approved in 2017 for chorea in Huntington disease and for tardive dyskinesia, is the clearest neurological example.

The relevant disorder of the field, rather than of the patient, is the tendency of quantum-biological claims to be reported as established, and this chapter is the corpus's countermeasure.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The load-bearing comparison of this whole chapter is between two timescales: the decoherence time of a quantum state in warm tissue, at best 10 to the power minus 4 seconds, and the duration of the shortest event that cognition uses, about 10 to the power minus 3 seconds.

Until those two numbers cross, quantum cognition remains a proposal, and stating the comparison in this form is the most useful thing this chapter does.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to apply the corpus's grading rule to a quantum-biological claim, so that grading is a procedure rather than an opinion.
Create a text variable called claim name.
Create a number variable called required coherence seconds, the shortest event the claim must protect.
Create a number variable called best supported coherence seconds, taken from the most favourable published estimate.
Create a truth variable called has direct measurement in living tissue.
Create a truth variable called has independent replication.
If has direct measurement in living tissue is false, report the grade as open but unconfirmed.
Otherwise, if best supported coherence seconds is less than required coherence seconds, report the grade as not supported.
Otherwise, if has independent replication is false, report the grade as open but unconfirmed.
Otherwise, report the grade as established.
Report the claim name together with its grade and the two coherence numbers that produced it.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the claim of this chapter is that honest grading can be made mechanical, and a short function makes the criterion inspectable instead of rhetorical.

'''Grading quantum-biological claims by an explicit rule.
Coherence figures: Tegmark 2000 Physical Review E; Hagan, Hameroff and
Tuszynski 2002 Physical Review E; enzymatic tunnelling turnover from the
soybean lipoxygenase literature (Klinman and colleagues).'''

def grade(name, required_s, best_s, measured_in_vivo, replicated):
    if not measured_in_vivo:
        return name, "open but unconfirmed"
    if best_s < required_s:
        return name, "not supported"
    if not replicated:
        return name, "open but unconfirmed"
    return name, "established"

claims = [
    ("biological electron tunnelling", 1e-3, 1e-3, True, True),
    ("enzymatic hydrogen tunnelling", 1e-3, 1e-3, True, True),
    ("microtubule quantum computation", 1e-3, 1e-4, True, False),
    ("Posner molecule nuclear spin", 1e-3, 1e2, False, False),
    ("vibrational olfaction", 1e-3, 1e-3, True, False),
]
for c in claims:
    print("%-34s %s" % grade(c[0], c[1], c[2], c[3], c[4]))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only chapter in this dossier whose principal output is a refusal, and the only one that publishes an evidential grade to the corpus instead of a quantity to biology.


CHAPTER 4. THERMAL NOISE, THE FLOOR UNDER EVERY SIGNAL (The Unlowerable Floor) (COG)

A brain is a warm object, and every molecule in it is being kicked continuously by the same energy that makes a warm object warm.

That kicking is not a nuisance the nervous system has failed to engineer away; it is a fixed feature of operating at 37 degrees Celsius, and every design decision above this chapter is a response to it.

Unlowerable names the constraint: the only way to reduce this noise would be to get cold, which for a mammal is not an option.

Floor names its role: it is the level below which no signal can be distinguished, so all signalling must be built above it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Thermal noise is the random motion imparted to every particle by the thermal energy of its surroundings, and its natural unit is the Boltzmann constant multiplied by absolute temperature, written kT.

What it does is set the scale against which every molecular event in the nervous system is judged: a binding energy much larger than kT holds, a binding energy comparable to kT comes apart at random, and a barrier much larger than kT is crossed only rarely.

It also does something more constructive, which is easy to miss: it supplies the energy that makes ion channels open and close spontaneously, so the very noise that limits the system is also the source of the conformational sampling that makes gating possible at all.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Everywhere, without exception, at all times, in every compartment.

Its most consequential addresses are the ion channel, where it produces stochastic gating; the synapse, where it produces spontaneous vesicle fusion and the miniature postsynaptic potentials that follow; and the photoreceptor, where it produces the thermal isomerisations of Chapter 1.

It also lives in the recording apparatus, as Johnson-Nyquist noise in the electrode resistance, which is why the noise a neuroscientist sees is always the sum of the cell's noise and the instrument's.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

At the human core temperature of 310.15 kelvin, kT is about 4.28 times 10 to the power minus 21 joules, which is about 0.0267 electronvolts, and multiplied by Avogadro's number it is about 2.58 kilojoules per mole.

The corresponding thermal voltage, the quantity kT divided by the elementary charge, is about 26.7 millivolts at 37 degrees Celsius and about 25.3 millivolts at 20 degrees Celsius, and this is the quantity that sits inside the exponential of the Nernst and Goldman equations.

Converting to base-ten logarithms gives the familiar slope of about 61.5 millivolts per tenfold concentration ratio for a singly charged ion at 37 degrees Celsius, and about 30.8 millivolts per decade for a doubly charged ion such as calcium.

For comparison, a typical hydrogen bond is about 20 kilojoules per mole, roughly 8 times kT, so it holds but can be broken by ordinary fluctuation; a carbon-carbon covalent bond is about 348 kilojoules per mole, roughly 135 times kT, so it never breaks spontaneously; and a visible photon at 2.48 electronvolts is about 93 times kT, which is why light does chemistry that warmth does not.

Johnson-Nyquist noise, the voltage noise generated by any resistance at finite temperature, has a mean square value of four times kT times the resistance times the bandwidth, and for a neuron the dominant voltage noise at rest is usually channel gating rather than pure thermal resistance noise, with total membrane potential noise at rest typically about 0.2 to 4 millivolts root mean square depending on cell type and synaptic bombardment.

The most striking published consequence is a lower bound on axon diameter: Faisal, White and Laughlin, 2005, in Current Biology, showed that below about 0.1 micrometre the spontaneous opening of voltage-gated sodium channels generates action potentials at a rate that destroys the signal, and observed that the thinnest axons in real nervous systems sit close to that limit.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

Thermal noise has no modes of its own, so this register catalogues the regimes a signalling element occupies relative to the noise floor, which is the operationally useful thing.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ subthreshold_noise_dominated - The Static Regime - the signal is smaller than the fluctuation, and no amount of downstream cleverness recovers it.

◦ stochastic_resonance - The Useful Noise Regime - a subthreshold signal is intermittently pushed over threshold by noise, so adding noise increases information transfer up to an optimum.

◦ signal_dominated - The Clean Regime - the signal exceeds the fluctuation by enough that detection is reliable.

◦ averaging_dominated - The Committee Regime - many noisy elements are pooled, and the signal-to-noise ratio improves as the square root of the number pooled.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ subthreshold_noise_dominated: output is uncorrelated with input; mutual information near zero (well established).

◦ stochastic_resonance: information transfer peaks at an intermediate noise amplitude, a phenomenon demonstrated in mechanoreceptors and in human tactile and visual psychophysics; the effect is real, and its functional exploitation by the nervous system is plausible but not firmly demonstrated in the central nervous system (moderate confidence).

◦ signal_dominated: output tracks input with a fidelity set by the ratio of signal amplitude to noise standard deviation (well established).

◦ averaging_dominated: signal-to-noise ratio rises as the square root of the pool size, which is why a rod bipolar cell pools hundreds of rods and why cortical reliability is a population property (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ subthreshold to stochastic_resonance: rising noise amplitude, or falling threshold from neuromodulation; milliseconds, and thrown from above by Layer 11 arousal state.

◦ stochastic_resonance to signal_dominated: rising stimulus intensity; milliseconds.

◦ signal_dominated to averaging_dominated: recruitment of convergent inputs; set by the anatomy, so effectively a design-time transition.

◦ Any mode to noise_dominated: falling temperature raises fidelity and rising temperature lowers it, but the mammalian operating range is only about 4 degrees wide, so temperature is not a control variable the brain uses.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: spontaneous action potentials in a quiet axon, or a channelopathy that lowers the activation threshold into the noise.

◦ Warning condition: fever, which raises kT by about 2 percent for a 6 degree rise and, more importantly, shifts channel kinetics, and which precipitates febrile seizures in susceptible children.

◦ Watchdog: strict thermoregulation at Layer 11, redundancy through convergence at Layer 8, and the high safety factor of the neuromuscular junction at Layer 7.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Nothing assembles the noise floor; what develops is the margin above it.

Myelination, which continues in humans into the third decade, raises the safety factor of conduction; synaptic pruning removes the weakest and least reliable contacts; and the maturation of channel expression raises activation thresholds away from the noise.

The developing nervous system tolerates far more noise than the mature one and indeed exploits it, since the spontaneous retinal waves and spinal bursts that pattern early connectivity are noise-driven events used as a training signal before the senses are available.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

This chapter is the reason the corpus's upper volumes are full of populations rather than individuals.

A single cortical synapse fails to release on half its attempts, a single channel opens at random, and a single spike arrives with millisecond jitter, so every reliable computation in the Layer 8 and Layer 9 catalogues is built by pooling, and pooling is expensive, which sets the size of the brain as much as any information requirement does.

It is also the reason the corpus treats rate codes and population codes as the default and treats precise spike timing as a claim requiring evidence in each case, since timing precision has to be paid for against this floor.

And it is the deepest reason the framework's layers exist at all: a layer is exactly a level at which fluctuations from below have been averaged into a reliable variable.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 11 body temperature, 36.5 to 37.5 degrees Celsius normally, with fever to 41 degrees and therapeutic hypothermia to 32 degrees as the practical extremes.

◦ Layer 4 channel gating energetics, as the barrier heights that thermal energy must climb.

◦ Layer 5 membrane resistance and capacitance, which filter the noise.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 6 membrane potential noise, about 0.2 to 4 millivolts root mean square.

◦ Layer 7 spontaneous miniature postsynaptic potentials, at roughly 0.1 to 10 hertz per synapse depending on type.

◦ Layer 8 requirement for convergence, published as a design constraint rather than a signal.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential variance, observable directly in a whole-cell recording.

◦ Spontaneous channel open probability at rest, observable in single-channel recording.

◦ Miniature event frequency, observable with action potentials blocked by tetrodotoxin.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ kT at 310.15 kelvin, about 4.28 times 10 to the power minus 21 joules, 0.0267 electronvolts, 2.58 kilojoules per mole.

◦ Thermal voltage at 37 degrees Celsius, about 26.7 millivolts; Nernst slope about 61.5 millivolts per decade for a singly charged ion.

◦ Minimum viable axon diameter set by channel noise, about 0.1 micrometre.

◦ Voltage-gated sodium channel density, roughly 2 to 20 per square micrometre in axonal membrane and up to about 1000 to 2000 per square micrometre at the node of Ranvier, with reports varying by method.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Molecular collision interval in water, about 10 to the power minus 13 seconds.

◦ Single channel open dwell time, about 0.1 to 10 milliseconds.

◦ Membrane filtering time constant, about 10 to 50 milliseconds.

◦ Averaging window needed to beat the floor in a rod pathway, about 100 to 300 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Signal amplitude falling into the fluctuation band, which manifests as absolute sensory threshold, as unreliable transmission in the thinnest axons, and as the loss of precision that no downstream processing can recover.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Febrile seizures, affecting roughly 2 to 5 percent of young children, are the clearest clinical demonstration that a few degrees of temperature change the excitability of a nervous system, and the associated GEFS-plus syndromes involve sodium channel and gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor subunit mutations whose temperature sensitivity is measurable.

Malignant hyperthermia, caused by ryanodine receptor mutations and triggered by volatile anaesthetics, is a runaway thermal event with a mortality that falls from over 70 percent to under 5 percent with dantrolene, and it is the acute form of the same lesson.

Therapeutic hypothermia after cardiac arrest and in neonatal encephalopathy works in part by lowering the rates of the damaging chemistry described in Chapter 22, and is the deliberate clinical exploitation of this chapter.

Channelopathies that lower activation thresholds, including several epilepsy-associated sodium channel variants, are best understood as diseases of the margin above the noise floor rather than of the floor itself.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The noise itself is white over the bandwidths that matter, so it has no characteristic time of its own; what has a time constant is the machinery that filters it.

The practically important numbers are therefore the membrane time constant of 10 to 50 milliseconds, which is the brain's principal low-pass filter, and the 100 to 300 millisecond integration window of the scotopic visual pathway, which is the clearest case of a behavioural timescale chosen to beat a physical floor.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show that pooling noisy detectors is the only general defence against a noise floor that cannot be lowered.
Create a number variable called signal amplitude with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called noise standard deviation with initial value 3.
Create a number variable called pool size, to be varied.
Create a number variable called trials with initial value 20000.
For each pool size in a list of sizes, perform the following actions.
    Set correct count to zero.
    For each trial, perform the following actions.
        Draw pool size random noise values from a normal distribution with the given standard deviation and average them.
        Compute the pooled observation when the signal is present as signal amplitude plus that average.
        Draw a second independent pooled noise average for the signal-absent case.
        If the signal-present observation is larger than the signal-absent observation, add one to correct count.
    End the inner loop.
    Report pool size, the predicted signal-to-noise improvement as the square root of pool size, and the fraction correct.
End the outer loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the square-root pooling law is the single most important consequence of this chapter and it is more convincing when it emerges from a simulation than when it is asserted.

'''Beating an unlowerable noise floor by pooling. The square-root law is
why the corpus treats population codes as the default; see Faisal, White
and Laughlin 2005 Current Biology for the axon-diameter consequence.'''
import random
import math
from operator import mul

SIGNAL, SIGMA, TRIALS = 1.0, 3.0, 20000

def pooled_noise(n):
    total = 0.0
    for _ in range(n):
        total += random.gauss(0.0, SIGMA)
    return total / n

for n in [1, 4, 16, 64, 256, 1024]:
    correct = 0
    for _ in range(TRIALS):
        if SIGNAL + pooled_noise(n) > pooled_noise(n):
            correct += 1
    print("pool", "%5d" % n,
          " predicted SNR gain", "%6.1f" % math.sqrt(n),
          " fraction correct", round(correct / TRIALS, 3))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only entry in this dossier that cannot be switched off, cannot be pumped against, and cannot be evolved away, and the only one whose sole defence is to build something larger than itself.


SOURCES FOR PART ONE

All sources listed were consulted by web search on 12 August 2026.

• Curcio, Sloan, Kalina and Hendrickson, 1990, Human photoreceptor topography, Journal of Comparative Neurology, for rod and cone counts.

• Hecht, Shlaer and Pirenne, 1942, Energy, quanta and vision, Journal of General Physiology, for the classical absolute threshold analysis.

• Baylor, Nunn and Schnapf, 1984, The photocurrent, noise and spectral sensitivity of rods of the monkey Macaca fascicularis, Journal of Physiology, for the single-photon response and the thermal isomerisation rate.

• Tinsley, Molodtsov, Prevedel, Wartmann, Espigule-Pons, Lauwers and Vaziri, 2016, Direct detection of a single photon by humans, Nature Communications, volume 7, article 12172, at https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms12172 , reporting 30,767 trials of which 2,420 were post-selected single-photon events, a pooled fraction correct of 0.516 plus or minus 0.010 at a probability value of 0.055, and a fraction correct of 0.60 plus or minus 0.03 at a probability value of 0.001 for the highest-confidence responses only.

• The corpus records a correction to the usual telling of this story: the critique circulated as Still no evidence for single photon detection by humans, arXiv 1707.09341, by Holmes, Wang and Kwiat, was WITHDRAWN BY ITS OWN AUTHORS on 30 May 2018, who then described the Tinsley study as the best evidence for single-photon vision so far, so citing that preprint as a live refutation is citing a retracted objection.

• The honest status of single-photon detection by humans is therefore not settled but not refuted: the significant results come from post-hoc subsets rather than a pre-specified primary endpoint, and what would settle it is a pre-registered, adequately powered replication with one primary endpoint and no post-selection.

• Wang, Schoenlein, Peteanu, Mathies and Shank, 1994, Vibrationally coherent photochemistry in the femtosecond primary event of vision, Science, for the isomerisation timescale.

• Bowmaker and Dartnall, 1980, Visual pigments of rods and cones in a human retina, Journal of Physiology, for cone absorbance peaks.

• Page, Moser, Chen and Dutton, 1999, Natural engineering principles of electron tunnelling in biological oxidation-reduction, Nature, volume 402, for the distance decay law and the 14-angstrom packing rule.

• The Bureau International des Poids et Mesures 2019 redefinition of the ampere, which fixes the elementary charge at exactly 1.602176634 times 10 to the power minus 19 coulombs.

• Gentet, Stuart and Clements, 2000, Direct measurement of specific membrane capacitance in neurons, Biophysical Journal, for the specific capacitance value.

• Knapp, Rickert and Klinman, 2002, Temperature-dependent isotope effects in soybean lipoxygenase-1, Journal of the American Chemical Society, for the large kinetic isotope effect.

• Warshel and colleagues, and Klinman and Kohen, 2013, Hydrogen tunnelling links protein dynamics to enzyme catalysis, Annual Review of Biochemistry, recorded here as two sides of a continuing disagreement about the catalytic contribution of tunnelling.

• Tegmark, 2000, Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes, Physical Review E, volume 61, for the 10 to the power minus 13 second estimate.

• Hagan, Hameroff and Tuszynski, 2002, Quantum computation in brain microtubules: decoherence and biological feasibility, Physical Review E, volume 65, for the revised 10 to the power minus 5 to 10 to the power minus 4 second estimate; the corpus records both figures and averages neither.

• Fisher, 2015, Quantum cognition: the possibility of processing with nuclear spins in the brain, Annals of Physics, recorded as an unconfirmed but well-posed proposal.

• Franco, Turin, Mershin and Skoulakis, 2011, Molecular vibration-sensing component in Drosophila melanogaster olfaction, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences; and Block and colleagues, 2015, Implausibility of the vibrational theory of olfaction, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences; recorded as directly contradictory across different systems.

• Faisal, White and Laughlin, 2005, Ion-channel noise places limits on the miniaturization of the brain's wiring, Current Biology, for the approximately 0.1 micrometre axon diameter limit.

• Committee on Data for Science and Technology recommended values, 2022 adjustment, for the Boltzmann constant and derived thermal energy figures.


PART TWO. LAYER 2, THE ATOMIC SUBSTRATE

Seven entries, grouping the elements by the job they do rather than by column of the periodic table.

Layer 2 is the layer of the chemical elements, governed by the periodic law, and the periodic table is a poor index for a cognitive architect because it sorts by electron configuration rather than by biological role.

This part sorts by role, and the roles are four: build the machinery, carry the signal, catalyse the chemistry, and regulate the whole organism's tempo.

The organic six build; sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium and chloride signal; zinc, iron and copper catalyse and, in zinc's case, also signal; and iodine sets the tempo of the whole nervous system through a single hormone.

A note on the numbers in this part: elemental composition figures for the human body are old, are usually derived from a small number of cadaver analyses, and are quoted with more precision than they deserve, so they are given here as approximations and flagged as such.


CHAPTER 5. THE ORGANIC SIX: CARBON, HYDROGEN, OXYGEN, NITROGEN, PHOSPHORUS AND SULPHUR (The Builders) (NON-COG)

Six elements make essentially everything a neuron is, and none of them carries a signal.

They are tagged (NON-COG) not because they are unimportant but because the selection rule asks whether an entry carries information, and these six carry structure instead.

Builders names the role exactly: they are the material, not the message.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus and sulphur are the six elements from which the proteins, lipids, nucleic acids and sugars of Layers 4 and 5 are constructed.

What they do is provide a chemistry rich enough to build machines: carbon's four bonds and its willingness to bond to itself, called catenation, permit molecules of unlimited size and arbitrary shape, which is the precondition for a protein and therefore for everything above.

WHERE IT LIVES:

In every macromolecule in the nervous system, and in the water that surrounds them.

Together the six make up approximately 96 to 97 percent of body mass, on the standard figures of roughly 65 percent oxygen, 18.5 percent carbon, 9.5 percent hydrogen, 3.2 percent nitrogen, 1.0 percent phosphorus and 0.25 percent sulphur; these values derive from a small number of mid-twentieth-century whole-body analyses and should be read as approximate.

Phosphorus concentrates in bone as mineral and in the nervous system in phospholipids, nucleic acids and the energy currency; sulphur concentrates in the amino acids cysteine and methionine and in the iron-sulphur clusters of Chapter 2.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

A carbon-carbon single bond has an energy of roughly 348 kilojoules per mole and a carbon-hydrogen bond roughly 413 kilojoules per mole, both far above the thermal energy of Chapter 4, which is why a protein backbone does not fall apart at body temperature.

Human brain is roughly 60 percent lipid by dry weight, the highest lipid fraction of any organ other than adipose tissue, which is a direct consequence of the membrane-heavy architecture catalogued at Layer 5.

Phosphorus appears twice in a way that matters: as the phosphoanhydride bonds of the energy currency in Chapter 18, and as the reversible phosphate mark that regulates protein function, and the human genome encodes about 518 protein kinases that write that mark, on Manning and colleagues, 2002, in Science.

Sulphur's distinctive contribution is the disulphide bond, a covalent cross-link between two cysteine residues that stabilises extracellular protein domains, and the iron-sulphur cluster, which is the electron-carrying cofactor of the respiratory chain; complex one alone carries eight such clusters.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

The mode register here is the register of bonding regimes, because what changes the behaviour of these elements is the kind of bond they are in.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ covalent_skeleton - The Permanent Frame - carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and oxygen in the backbone bonds that never break spontaneously at body temperature.

◦ reversible_phosphorylation - The Regulatory Mark - phosphorus attached to a serine, threonine or tyrosine, written by a kinase and erased by a phosphatase.

◦ high_energy_anhydride - The Loaded Spring - phosphorus in the phosphoanhydride bonds of the energy currency.

◦ disulphide_crosslink - The Structural Staple - sulphur bonded to sulphur, stable in the oxidising extracellular space and reduced in the cytosol.

◦ metal_cluster_ligand - The Wired Cofactor - sulphur coordinating iron in an electron-carrying cluster.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ covalent_skeleton: no spontaneous transition on any biological timescale; bond energies 300 to 420 kilojoules per mole against a thermal unit of 2.58 kilojoules per mole (well established).

◦ reversible_phosphorylation: kinase turnover typically 1 to 100 per second; adds two negative charges and a bulky group, changing local electrostatics and shape (well established).

◦ high_energy_anhydride: about minus 30.5 kilojoules per mole under standard conditions, but about minus 50 to minus 60 kilojoules per mole inside a living cell, for the reasons set out in Chapter 18 (well established).

◦ disulphide_crosslink: forms in the oxidising lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum and is kept reduced in the cytosol by the glutathione system (well established).

◦ metal_cluster_ligand: sets the reduction potential of the cluster over a range of roughly minus 500 to plus 400 millivolts depending on the protein environment (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ Unphosphorylated to reversible_phosphorylation: kinase activity, itself gated by calcium or by a second messenger; milliseconds to seconds.

◦ reversible_phosphorylation to unphosphorylated: phosphatase activity; seconds to minutes, and this asymmetry is why phosphorylation is a usable memory on the timescale of the Layer 4 and 5 dossier's tagging chapters.

◦ Cytosolic thiol to disulphide_crosslink: entry into the oxidising extracellular or luminal compartment; minutes.

◦ high_energy_anhydride to hydrolysed: any adenosine-triphosphate-consuming enzyme; microseconds to milliseconds per turnover.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: aberrant disulphide formation in the cytosol under oxidative stress, and runaway phosphorylation when a phosphatase is inhibited.

◦ Warning condition: a falling reduced-to-oxidised glutathione ratio.

◦ Watchdog: the glutathione and thioredoxin systems, and the protein phosphatases that reset the regulatory mark.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Nothing about these six elements develops; what develops is the inventory of molecules made from them, and the brain's greatest developmental demand is for lipid, because myelination requires an enormous synthesis of membrane.

Human myelination begins late in gestation, accelerates through the first two years, and continues in association cortex into the third decade, which makes essential fatty acid supply a genuine developmental constraint and is the honest basis of the interest in docosahexaenoic acid in infant nutrition, an interest whose cognitive benefit in term infants remains modestly supported at best.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

These six set the possibility of Layer 4 and nothing more specific, which is exactly why the chapter is tagged (NON-COG).

The one place where the choice of element visibly reaches upward is phosphorus, because the reversible phosphate mark is the physical form of nearly every short-term memory trace in the Layer 4 and 5 dossier, and the asymmetry between fast writing and slow erasure is what makes it a store rather than a relay.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 12 dietary intake, delivering carbon and nitrogen as amino acids and carbohydrate, phosphorus as phosphate at roughly 700 to 1250 milligrams per day recommended intake, and sulphur as methionine and cysteine.

◦ Layer 3 oxygen and water, as the ambient chemical environment.

◦ Layer 4 kinase and phosphatase activity, which sets the phosphorylation state.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 4 macromolecular structure, as the raw material of every protein, lipid and nucleic acid.

◦ Layer 5 membrane, as the phospholipid bilayer.

◦ Layer 4 regulatory state, as the phosphoproteome.

• STATE.

◦ Phosphorylation state of the proteome, observable by phosphoproteomic mass spectrometry.

◦ Reduced-to-oxidised glutathione ratio, observable biochemically, normally about 100 to 1 in healthy cytosol.

◦ Brain lipid fraction, observable by magnetic resonance spectroscopy and by post-mortem analysis.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Approximate body composition by mass: oxygen 65 percent, carbon 18.5 percent, hydrogen 9.5 percent, nitrogen 3.2 percent, phosphorus 1.0 percent, sulphur 0.25 percent; approximate figures from a small historical sample.

◦ Carbon-carbon bond energy about 348 kilojoules per mole; carbon-hydrogen about 413 kilojoules per mole.

◦ Human protein kinases, about 518.

◦ Brain lipid content, about 60 percent of dry weight.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Covalent backbone bond lifetime at body temperature, effectively unlimited.

◦ Phosphorylation write, milliseconds to seconds; erase, seconds to minutes.

◦ Disulphide formation in the endoplasmic reticulum, minutes.

◦ Myelin lipid deposition in human development, years to decades.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Failure here is a supply failure rather than a mechanism failure: protein-energy malnutrition, essential fatty acid deficiency, and the inborn errors of sulphur amino acid metabolism such as homocystinuria all present as building failures with neurological consequences.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Homocystinuria, from cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency, produces intellectual disability, lens dislocation and thrombosis, and is a disorder of sulphur amino acid handling.

Hypophosphataemia, whether from refeeding syndrome or from inherited renal phosphate wasting, produces confusion, weakness and in severe cases seizures, and demonstrates that the energy currency's central atom is rate-limiting when supply fails.

Peroxisomal and lysosomal disorders of lipid handling, including adrenoleukodystrophy and the leukodystrophies generally, are diseases of the building material presenting as white matter disease.

Molybdenum cofactor deficiency and isolated sulphite oxidase deficiency are rare but devastating sulphur-handling disorders presenting with neonatal seizures and profound brain injury.

TIME CONSTANTS:

This chapter's characteristic time is turnover, and the corpus's most useful figure is that the average brain protein turns over on a scale of days to weeks while myelin lipid turns over on a scale of months to years.

That difference is why the Layer 4 and 5 dossier's persistence problem is stated for protein and not for lipid, and it is a genuine open question how much of long-term structural memory is carried by the slower lipid compartment.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show why a fast write and a slow erase turn a chemical mark into a short-term memory.
Create a number variable called fraction phosphorylated with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called kinase rate with initial value 5 per second, active only when a stimulus is present.
Create a number variable called phosphatase rate with initial value 0.05 per second, always active.
Create a number variable called time step with initial value 0.01 seconds.
For each time step over sixty seconds, perform the following actions.
    If a stimulus is present, increase fraction phosphorylated by kinase rate times time step times the unphosphorylated fraction.
    Decrease fraction phosphorylated by phosphatase rate times time step times fraction phosphorylated.
    Record fraction phosphorylated.
End the loop.
Report the peak fraction reached and the time taken to fall back to half of it after the stimulus ends.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the asymmetry between writing and erasing a phosphate is the whole reason this (NON-COG) chapter touches cognition at all, and a six-line integration makes the asymmetry visible.

'''Phosphorylation as a short-term store: fast kinase write, slow
phosphatase erase. Kinase counts follow Manning and colleagues 2002
Science; rates here are illustrative of the published range 1 to 100 per
second rather than specific to any one enzyme.'''
from operator import mul

p, dt = 0.0, 0.01
k_on, k_off = 5.0, 0.05
peak = 0.0
for step in range(6000):
    stimulus = 1.0 if step < 500 else 0.0
    p += mul(dt, mul(k_on, mul(stimulus, 1.0 - p))) - mul(dt, mul(k_off, p))
    peak = max(peak, p)
    if stimulus == 0.0 and p < peak / 2.0:
        print("peak", round(peak, 3), "half-decay after", round((step - 500) / 100.0, 1), "s")
        break

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only (NON-COG) chapter in this dossier, and the only entry that is present in every single molecule above it while carrying no message of its own.


CHAPTER 6. SODIUM AND POTASSIUM AS ELEMENTS: THE ALKALI PAIR (The Discriminated Twins) (COG)

A chemist looking at sodium and potassium sees two members of the same column with the same charge and nearly the same chemistry.

A neuron sees two completely different substances and separates them by a factor of a thousand or more, and that discrimination is the physical foundation of every action potential ever fired.

Discriminated names the achievement; Twins names the difficulty of it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Sodium and potassium are alkali metals that in biology exist only as singly positively charged ions, and their job is to be the two currencies of a gradient that stores energy the way a raised weight does.

What they do, specifically, is be told apart: the nervous system's whole electrical vocabulary depends on channels that pass one and refuse the other, and on a pump that moves them in opposite directions.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Sodium lives predominantly outside cells, potassium predominantly inside, and the discrimination machinery lives in the membrane between them.

The selectivity filters that do the telling apart live in the pore-forming domains of the voltage-gated channel superfamily catalogued at Layer 4, and in the sodium-potassium pump.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

The two ions differ in essentially one property that matters: size, with a six-coordinate crystal ionic radius of about 1.02 angstroms for sodium and about 1.38 angstroms for potassium on the Shannon 1976 scale.

Because it is smaller, sodium holds its shell of water molecules more tightly, with a hydration free energy of roughly minus 365 kilojoules per mole against roughly minus 295 kilojoules per mole for potassium; different compilations of these values differ by 10 to 20 kilojoules per mole and the corpus records the difference rather than a point value.

That hydration difference is the entire physical problem: to pass through a narrow filter an ion must shed its water, and it will only do so if the filter can pay back the cost.

The potassium channel selectivity filter is a five-residue signature, threonine-valine-glycine-tyrosine-glycine, whose backbone carbonyl oxygens present a cage geometrically matched to a dehydrated potassium ion, and it achieves a selectivity for potassium over sodium of better than 1000 to 1, on Doyle and colleagues, 1998, in Science, from the MacKinnon laboratory.

How that selectivity is achieved is genuinely contested, and the corpus reports the disagreement: the original snug-fit explanation holds that the filter is rigid and simply the wrong size for sodium, while Noskov, Bernèche and Roux, 2004, in Nature, argued from free energy calculations that the filter is flexible and that selectivity comes from the coordination number and the electrostatic character of the carbonyl ligands rather than from rigidity.

The sodium channel filter is a different motif, aspartate-glutamate-lysine-alanine in the mammalian voltage-gated channels, it is wider and admits partially hydrated ions, and it is correspondingly less selective, at roughly 10 to 30 to 1 for sodium over potassium.

That asymmetry in selectivity is itself informative: the resting potential must be a clean potassium equilibrium and so requires a very selective channel, while the action potential's upstroke only needs to be dominated by sodium and can afford to be sloppier.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

The mode register is the gating register of the channels that discriminate them, and it is the canonical hybrid automaton of the whole corpus.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ closed_resting - The Shut Gate - the activation gate closed, the channel available, no current.

◦ open - The Conducting Gate - the activation gate open, ions flowing at 10 to the power 7 to 10 to the power 8 per second.

◦ inactivated_fast - The Jammed Gate - for sodium channels, an inactivation particle occluding the pore within about a millisecond of opening, and crucially not available to reopen until the membrane repolarises.

◦ inactivated_slow - The Deeply Jammed Gate - a distinct, slower inactivation developing over hundreds of milliseconds to seconds of sustained depolarisation.

◦ modal_gating - The Changed Personality - a persistent shift in open probability lasting seconds, seen in single-channel records and attributed to phosphorylation or subunit interaction.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ closed_resting: zero conductance; the probability of being here at minus 70 millivolts is above 0.9 for a typical sodium channel (well established).

◦ open: single-channel conductance roughly 10 to 20 picosiemens for voltage-gated sodium channels and 2 to 200 picosiemens across the potassium channel family, the large-conductance calcium-activated potassium channel being the extreme at about 100 to 250 picosiemens (well established).

◦ inactivated_fast: zero conductance and, decisively, unavailability, which is what makes the refractory period and therefore what makes an action potential travel in one direction (well established).

◦ inactivated_slow: reduces the available channel pool by tens of percent during sustained firing, and is a principal source of spike-frequency adaptation (well established).

◦ modal_gating: shifts mean open probability by a factor of a few for seconds at a time; the physiological significance is real in cardiac and some neuronal preparations but its contribution to cortical computation is not firmly established (low confidence).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ closed_resting to open: depolarisation past about minus 55 to minus 40 millivolts moving the voltage sensor; the transition occupies a few hundred microseconds.

◦ open to inactivated_fast: occlusion by the intracellular linker; about 0.5 to 2 milliseconds at 37 degrees Celsius.

◦ inactivated_fast to closed_resting: repolarisation below about minus 60 millivolts; about 2 to 20 milliseconds, and this is the absolute refractory period.

◦ open or inactivated_fast to inactivated_slow: sustained depolarisation or repetitive firing; hundreds of milliseconds to seconds, recovering over seconds.

◦ Any mode to modal_gating: phosphorylation, thrown from above by Layer 3 second messengers; seconds.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: failure of fast inactivation, producing a persistent sodium current and repetitive firing.

◦ Warning condition: depolarisation block, in which the membrane is so depolarised that nearly all sodium channels are inactivated and the cell falls silent, which is the mechanism of both high-dose antipsychotic effects on dopamine cells and of tissue silence in severe ischaemia.

◦ Watchdog: the potassium conductances that repolarise, and the sodium-potassium pump that restores the gradient.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

The channel repertoire changes with development, and the clinically important instance is the neonatal-to-adult switch in sodium channel subunit expression, with SCN3A prominent early and SCN1A, SCN2A and SCN8A dominating maturely, which is why the same gene can cause a neonatal epilepsy that later remits.

Channel placement is as developmentally significant as channel identity: the clustering of sodium channels at the axon initial segment and at nodes of Ranvier by ankyrin-G is the assembly step that turns a cell into a spiking device, and it depends on the myelinating glia of Layer 6.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

The chemical near-identity of these two elements, combined with their physical discriminability, is the reason the nervous system's signal is electrical rather than chemical at Layer 6.

It also explains a design choice that would otherwise look arbitrary: the brain uses two similar ions moving in opposite directions rather than one ion and one gate, because a push-pull arrangement with two currencies gives a fast rising phase and a fast falling phase without needing either to be undone by the same machinery.

Every construct in the corpus's Layer 6 and Layer 7 volumes that mentions threshold, refractoriness or adaptation is inheriting a property from the mode register above.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 12 dietary intake, sodium typically 2 to 5 grams per day in modern diets against a physiological requirement under 1 gram, and potassium typically 2 to 3 grams per day against a recommended 3.5 grams.

◦ Layer 5 membrane potential, which gates the discriminating channels.

◦ Layer 4 channel subunit composition, which sets conductance and kinetics.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 transmembrane gradients, catalogued quantitatively in Chapters 13 and 14.

◦ Layer 6 action potential, as the joint product of the two currents.

◦ Layer 6 refractory period, published as the availability state of the sodium channel pool.

• STATE.

◦ Fraction of the channel pool in each mode, observable by voltage-clamp availability protocols.

◦ Intracellular and extracellular concentrations of each element, observable by ion-selective microelectrode and by flame photometry.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Ionic radius: sodium about 1.02 angstroms, potassium about 1.38 angstroms, on Shannon 1976 six-coordinate values.

◦ Hydration free energy: sodium about minus 365 kilojoules per mole, potassium about minus 295 kilojoules per mole, with compilation differences of 10 to 20 kilojoules per mole.

◦ Potassium channel selectivity for potassium over sodium, better than 1000 to 1; sodium channel selectivity for sodium over potassium, about 10 to 30 to 1.

◦ Single-channel conductance: voltage-gated sodium about 10 to 20 picosiemens; potassium channels 2 to 250 picosiemens across the family.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Activation gating, about 0.1 to 0.5 milliseconds at 37 degrees Celsius.

◦ Fast inactivation, about 0.5 to 2 milliseconds.

◦ Recovery from fast inactivation, about 2 to 20 milliseconds.

◦ Slow inactivation onset and recovery, hundreds of milliseconds to several seconds.

◦ Ion transit through an open pore, about 10 to 100 nanoseconds per ion.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss-of-function in the selectivity filter abolishes the gradient's usefulness; loss of fast inactivation produces persistent current and hyperexcitability; and complete pharmacological block, as by tetrodotoxin at nanomolar concentrations, silences the nervous system within minutes.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Dravet syndrome, caused in most cases by loss-of-function variants in SCN1A, is a severe childhood epilepsy in which the failure of sodium channels in inhibitory interneurons paradoxically increases network excitability.

Erythromelalgia and paroxysmal extreme pain disorder arise from gain-of-function variants in SCN9A, and complete loss of function in the same gene produces congenital insensitivity to pain, which is as clean a demonstration of a single element's channel being a faculty as neurology offers.

Hyperkalaemic and hypokalaemic periodic paralysis are muscle channelopathies in which serum potassium excursions of a few millimolar produce transient paralysis.

Severe hyponatraemia below about 120 millimoles per litre produces confusion, seizures and coma, and correcting it too quickly causes osmotic demyelination, which is one of medicine's clearest lessons that the gradient's rate of change matters as much as its value.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The register above spans sub-millisecond gating to multi-second slow inactivation, and the whole of the corpus's spike-timing literature lives inside that span.

The single most load-bearing number is the 2 to 20 millisecond recovery from fast inactivation, because it sets the maximum firing rate of a neuron and therefore the bandwidth of every channel in the Layer 8 catalogue.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run the three-state gating register of a sodium channel population and show that the refractory period falls out of it without being programmed in.
Create a number variable called closed fraction with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called open fraction with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called inactivated fraction with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called time step with initial value 0.01 milliseconds.
For each time step, perform the following actions.
    Read the membrane voltage for this time step.
    Compute the closed-to-open rate as a steeply increasing function of voltage.
    Compute the open-to-inactivated rate as a constant near one per millisecond.
    Compute the inactivated-to-closed rate as a decreasing function of voltage, small when depolarised.
    Move the appropriate fractions between the three pools using those rates and the time step.
    Record the open fraction as the available sodium conductance.
End the loop.
Report the maximum open fraction reached, and the time after a spike at which the closed fraction has recovered to nine tenths of its starting value.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the refractory period is usually taught as a fact and is much better understood as an emergent consequence of a three-state register.

'''Three-state sodium channel register: closed, open, inactivated.
Rate magnitudes follow the standard Hodgkin-Huxley-derived kinetics at
mammalian body temperature (activation 0.1 to 0.5 ms, fast inactivation
0.5 to 2 ms, recovery 2 to 20 ms).'''
import math
from operator import mul

C, O, I, dt = 1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.01
def alpha(v):  return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((-45.0 - v) / 5.0))
def recover(v): return 0.2 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 60.0) / 5.0))

recovered_at = None
for step in range(4000):
    t = mul(step, dt)
    v = -70.0 + 100.0 if 1.0 < t < 2.0 else -70.0
    dCO, dOI, dIC = mul(dt, mul(alpha(v), C)), mul(dt, mul(1.0, O)), mul(dt, mul(recover(v), I))
    C += dIC - dCO
    O += dCO - dOI
    I += dOI - dIC
    if t > 2.0 and recovered_at is None and C > 0.9:
        recovered_at = t - 2.0
print("recovery to 90 percent availability after", round(recovered_at, 2), "ms")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Two elements a chemist would call interchangeable, separated a thousandfold by a five-residue protein motif, and that separation is the whole electrical vocabulary of the nervous system.


CHAPTER 7. CALCIUM AND MAGNESIUM AS ELEMENTS: THE ALKALINE EARTH PAIR (The Messenger and the Counter-Ion) (COG)

The second column of the periodic table supplies the nervous system with its universal messenger and with the ion that makes the energy currency usable, and the two are told apart by a difference in how tightly they hold water.

Messenger names calcium's role; Counter-Ion names magnesium's, in both senses, since magnesium both partners the energy currency and plugs the coincidence-detecting channel.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Calcium and magnesium are alkaline earth metals that in biology exist as doubly positively charged ions.

Calcium's job is to be the messenger that almost every process in a neuron reads: transmitter release, contraction, plasticity, gene expression and cell death are all calcium-triggered.

Magnesium's job is structural and regulatory: it is the obligatory partner of the energy currency, the cofactor of hundreds of enzymes, and the voltage-dependent plug that turns the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor into a coincidence detector.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Calcium is kept extremely low inside cells and high outside, and inside cells it is concentrated in the endoplasmic reticulum and taken up transiently by mitochondria.

Magnesium is, unusually, at similar total concentration inside and outside, though most of the intracellular pool is bound to adenosine triphosphate and to nucleic acids rather than free.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

Magnesium's ionic radius is about 0.72 angstroms and calcium's about 1.00 angstroms, and that near-40-percent difference produces two utterly different chemistries.

Magnesium is small, charge-dense, and binds its six inner-shell water molecules so tightly that it is effectively always six-coordinate and octahedral, exchanging those waters at only about 10 to the power 5 per second.

Calcium is larger and coordinates flexibly with six, seven or eight ligands at variable bond lengths, and exchanges its inner-shell waters at roughly 10 to the power 8 to 10 to the power 9 per second.

That water exchange rate difference of three to four orders of magnitude is the whole reason calcium became the messenger: a messenger must bind and release its target fast, and magnesium simply cannot let go quickly enough.

Calcium's coordination flexibility is also why calmodulin, a small protein with four calcium sites, can wrap around calcium and change shape dramatically, with reported dissociation constants of roughly 10 to the power minus 6 to 10 to the power minus 5 molar across the four sites and strong positive cooperativity, values that shift substantially depending on whether the protein is free or bound to a target peptide.

Magnesium's block of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor is a physical occlusion of the open pore that is relieved by depolarisation, with extracellular magnesium in cerebrospinal fluid at roughly 1.0 to 1.2 millimolar producing near-complete block at minus 70 millivolts and near-complete relief above about 0 millivolts.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

The mode register here is the occupancy register of a calcium sensor together with the voltage-dependent block state of the magnesium plug, since these are the two discrete regimes the pair actually produces.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ apo_sensor - The Empty Sensor - a calcium-binding protein with no calcium bound, in its resting conformation.

◦ partially_occupied - The Primed Sensor - one or two of four sites filled, below the cooperative threshold, producing little effect.

◦ saturated_sensor - The Triggered Sensor - enough sites filled to drive the conformational change and act on the target.

◦ magnesium_blocked - The Plugged Channel - the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor pore occluded by magnesium at hyperpolarised potentials.

◦ magnesium_relieved - The Coincidence Detected - the same pore conducting because depolarisation has expelled the magnesium.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ apo_sensor: no downstream effect; free cytosolic calcium about 50 to 100 nanomolar (well established).

◦ partially_occupied: response is steeply nonlinear in calcium because of cooperativity, so intermediate occupancy contributes little (well established).

◦ saturated_sensor: for the fast release sensor synaptotagmin-1, a Hill coefficient of about 4 to 5 and half-maximal release at roughly 10 to 25 micromolar local calcium, giving a fourth-to-fifth-power dependence of release on calcium (well established; the precise half-maximal figure varies with preparation and the corpus quotes the range).

◦ magnesium_blocked: conductance suppressed by roughly 90 percent or more at minus 70 millivolts in 1 millimolar magnesium (well established).

◦ magnesium_relieved: full conductance, with about 10 percent of the current carried by calcium, which is what makes the receptor a plasticity signal rather than merely an excitatory one (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ apo_sensor to saturated_sensor: calcium entry through a nearby open channel; tens to hundreds of microseconds within a nanodomain.

◦ saturated_sensor to apo_sensor: diffusion, buffering and extrusion; milliseconds locally, hundreds of milliseconds globally.

◦ magnesium_blocked to magnesium_relieved: postsynaptic depolarisation, typically supplied by coincident activity; the block relieves within microseconds of the voltage change, so the coincidence window is set by the depolarisation's duration and not by the magnesium.

◦ magnesium_relieved to magnesium_blocked: repolarisation; microseconds.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: sustained global calcium elevation above about 1 micromolar, which activates calpains and the apoptotic machinery.

◦ Warning condition: hypomagnesaemia relieving the plug tonically, which lowers the threshold for excitotoxicity and for seizures.

◦ Watchdog: the buffering, extrusion and uptake machinery catalogued in Chapter 15, and the parathyroid axis that holds extracellular calcium within a few percent.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Calcium signalling is present from fertilisation, where the calcium wave that follows sperm entry is the first signal of a new organism, and calcium transients pattern neural tube development and neuronal migration long before synapses exist.

The magnesium block acquires its cognitive significance only as the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit composition matures, with a developmental switch from GluN2B to GluN2A that shortens the coincidence window, and this switch is the molecular clock of several critical periods in the corpus's Layer 8 volume.

Magnesium sulphate given to women in preterm labour reduces the incidence of cerebral palsy in the infant, a finding replicated across several large trials, and it is the clearest demonstration that an element of this pair is a neuroprotective agent in its own right.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

The fourth-power dependence of transmitter release on local calcium, arising from a coordination chemistry difference between two neighbouring elements, is the reason synaptic transmission is so steeply modulable, and therefore the reason presynaptic modulation works at all.

The magnesium block is, in the corpus's own words in the Layer 7 volume, the closest thing biology has to a printed learning law, and it is a property of a bare metal ion sitting in a pore.

Every plasticity rule in the corpus's upper volumes ultimately reads a calcium concentration, so this chapter and Chapter 15 together are the physical substrate of learning.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 10 parathyroid and vitamin D axis, holding total serum calcium at 2.2 to 2.6 millimoles per litre and ionised calcium at 1.1 to 1.3 millimoles per litre.

◦ Layer 12 dietary intake, calcium about 1000 milligrams per day recommended, magnesium about 300 to 420 milligrams per day.

◦ Layer 6 membrane potential, which gates both calcium entry and magnesium block.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 4 sensor conformational change, in synaptotagmin, calmodulin, troponin and the calcium-sensing receptor.

◦ Layer 7 transmitter release probability, as a fourth-to-fifth-power function of local calcium.

◦ Layer 7 coincidence signal, as the calcium admitted through an unblocked N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor.

• STATE.

◦ Free cytosolic calcium, observable with fluorescent indicators, about 50 to 100 nanomolar at rest.

◦ Free cytosolic magnesium, about 0.5 to 1.0 millimolar, observable with magnesium-sensitive indicators.

◦ Fractional magnesium block of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, observable as the negative slope region of the current-voltage relation.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Ionic radius: magnesium about 0.72 angstroms, calcium about 1.00 angstroms.

◦ Inner-shell water exchange rate: magnesium about 10 to the power 5 per second, calcium about 10 to the power 8 to 10 to the power 9 per second.

◦ Extracellular magnesium in cerebrospinal fluid, about 1.0 to 1.2 millimolar.

◦ Release sensor Hill coefficient about 4 to 5, half-maximal local calcium about 10 to 25 micromolar.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Magnesium unblock on depolarisation, microseconds.

◦ Calcium binding to the fast release sensor, tens to hundreds of microseconds.

◦ Calcium binding to calmodulin, about 1 to 10 milliseconds.

◦ Magnesium water exchange, about 10 microseconds per exchange, which is why magnesium cannot serve as a fast messenger.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Hypocalcaemia produces tetany and seizures; hypercalcaemia produces confusion and coma; hypomagnesaemia produces tremor, tetany and seizures; and sustained intracellular calcium elevation is the final common pathway of excitotoxic cell death.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Hypoparathyroidism and its opposite, primary hyperparathyroidism, both present neurologically and psychiatrically before they present skeletally, which makes serum calcium one of the few laboratory values that is directly a psychiatric variable.

Familial hemiplegic migraine type one arises from mutations in CACNA1A, the gene for a presynaptic calcium channel, and the same gene causes episodic ataxia type two and spinocerebellar ataxia type six.

Timothy syndrome, from a gain-of-function CACNA1C mutation, combines cardiac arrhythmia with autism and intellectual disability, and CACNA1C is also one of the most robustly replicated common-variant associations in psychiatric genetics.

Magnesium sulphate remains the standard treatment for eclamptic seizures and is used for neuroprotection in preterm birth, while chronic magnesium deficiency from alcohol use or diuretics lowers seizure threshold.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The controlling comparison in this chapter is between magnesium's microsecond-scale water exchange and calcium's nanosecond-scale exchange, a difference of three to four orders of magnitude that decides which element can be a messenger.

Downstream of that, the numbers that matter to a modeller are the tens-to-hundreds of microseconds for the release sensor and the roughly 10 to 20 millisecond coincidence window of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, which together set the temporal resolution of learning.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show that the magnesium block converts an ordinary receptor into a multiplier of presynaptic and postsynaptic activity.
Create a number variable called extracellular magnesium with initial value 1 millimolar.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage, to be varied from minus 100 to plus 40 millivolts.
Create a number variable called glutamate present, either zero or one.
For each membrane voltage in the range, perform the following actions.
    Compute the unblocked fraction as one divided by one plus extracellular magnesium divided by a constant times the exponential of minus the voltage divided by a steepness constant.
    Compute the driving force as zero millivolts minus the membrane voltage.
    Compute the current as glutamate present times the unblocked fraction times the driving force times a maximum conductance.
    Record the voltage and the current.
End the loop.
Report the voltage at which the current is most negative, demonstrating the region of negative slope conductance that no ordinary receptor has.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the negative-slope region of this current-voltage curve is the printed learning law of the corpus, and plotting it in numbers makes the coincidence requirement obvious.

'''Magnesium block of the NMDA receptor as a coincidence multiplier.
Block parameters follow the standard Jahr and Stevens 1990 formulation;
extracellular magnesium 1.0 to 1.2 mM as measured in cerebrospinal fluid.'''
import math
from operator import mul

MG, GMAX, EREV = 1.0, 1.0, 0.0
best_v, best_i = None, 0.0
for v in range(-100, 41, 5):
    unblocked = 1.0 / (1.0 + mul(MG / 3.57, math.exp(mul(-0.062, v))))
    current = mul(GMAX, mul(unblocked, EREV - v))
    if current < best_i:
        best_i, best_v = current, v
    print("%5d mV  unblocked %.3f  current %7.2f" % (v, unblocked, current))
print("largest inward current at", best_v, "mV - the negative-slope region")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Two neighbouring elements in the same column, one of which cannot release its water fast enough to be a messenger and therefore became a plug instead, with the plug turning out to be the brain's learning rule.


CHAPTER 8. ZINC, THE STRUCTURAL AND SYNAPTIC TRANSITION METAL (The Double Agent) (COG)

Zinc appears twice in the ledger of this dossier, once as the metal that folds a large fraction of the genome's transcription factors and once as a substance loaded into synaptic vesicles and thrown across a cleft.

No other element in this catalogue is both a structural component of the machinery and a signal passed between cells, and that is why it is called a double agent here.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Zinc is a transition metal that in biology exists only as a doubly positively charged ion and, unusually among transition metals, has no accessible change of oxidation state, so it never carries an electron.

That redox silence is precisely what makes it a good structural metal: it can be a strong Lewis acid and a rigid coordination centre without ever generating a free radical, which is why evolution used it where iron and copper would be dangerous.

Its second job is synaptic: a subset of glutamatergic terminals, most famously the hippocampal mossy fibres, load zinc into their vesicles and release it with glutamate, where it modulates receptors on both sides of the cleft.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Structurally, zinc lives inside proteins, and estimates suggest roughly 10 percent of the human proteome binds zinc, on Andreini and colleagues, 2006, in the Journal of Proteome Research, with several hundred to about a thousand zinc-finger transcription factors depending on how a zinc finger is defined.

Synaptically, it lives in the vesicles of zinc-containing terminals, loaded by the transporter ZnT3, and these are concentrated in the hippocampal mossy fibre pathway, the amygdala, and the neocortex.

The total human body contains roughly 2 to 3 grams of zinc, second only to iron among trace metals.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

Zinc coordinates preferentially in a four-fold tetrahedral geometry, most often to cysteine and histidine side chains, and it is that rigid tetrahedral preference that lets a short peptide fold into the reproducible finger shape that grips deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).

Free cytosolic zinc is held at an extraordinarily low level, in the picomolar to low nanomolar range, by metallothionein and by the ZnT and ZIP transporter families, so almost all cellular zinc is bound.

The vesicular zinc concentration is a place where the corpus must record real disagreement rather than a value: total zinc in mossy fibre vesicles has been estimated in the low millimolar range from histochemical and analytical measurements, while the free concentration released into the cleft has been estimated anywhere from under 1 micromolar to over 100 micromolar depending on the method, and there is no consensus.

The corpus therefore quotes the range and states plainly that this is one of the least settled quantities in the dossier; what would settle it is a genuinely calibrated, fast, cleft-localised zinc sensor, which does not yet exist at the necessary combination of speed, affinity and spatial resolution.

Zinc's receptor actions are better established: it inhibits N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors containing the GluN2A subunit with high affinity, at a half-maximal inhibitory concentration in the low nanomolar range, and modulates gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors and glycine receptors at higher concentrations.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ structural_bound - The Folded Metal - zinc held tetrahedrally inside a protein, part of the machine and not exchangeable on a physiological timescale.

◦ buffered_cytosolic - The Held Reserve - zinc bound to metallothionein, releasable on oxidation.

◦ vesicular_loaded - The Packed Signal - zinc concentrated into a synaptic vesicle by ZnT3 alongside glutamate.

◦ released_synaptic - The Thrown Signal - zinc in the cleft, acting on receptors for milliseconds.

◦ pathological_free - The Loose Metal - a large rise in free zinc during ischaemia or seizure, which is directly cytotoxic.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ structural_bound: dissociation constants in the picomolar to femtomolar range; no exchange on physiological timescales (well established).

◦ buffered_cytosolic: metallothionein releases zinc on oxidation, coupling redox state to zinc availability (well established).

◦ vesicular_loaded: loading requires ZnT3, and ZnT3 knockout mice lack all histochemically detectable vesicular zinc while remaining superficially normal, which was itself a surprise (well established).

◦ released_synaptic: inhibits GluN2A-containing N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors with a half-maximal inhibitory concentration in the low nanomolar range, and modulates gamma-aminobutyric acid type A and glycine receptors in the micromolar range; the concentration actually achieved in the cleft is contested (moderate confidence on the receptor pharmacology, low confidence on the concentration).

◦ pathological_free: micromolar free zinc kills neurons within hours (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ buffered_cytosolic to vesicular_loaded: ZnT3 transport into the vesicle; minutes to hours, as part of vesicle filling.

◦ vesicular_loaded to released_synaptic: action-potential-triggered fusion; sub-millisecond, coincident with glutamate release.

◦ released_synaptic to buffered_cytosolic: reuptake and buffering; tens to hundreds of milliseconds.

◦ buffered_cytosolic to pathological_free: oxidative stress releasing zinc from metallothionein, or acidosis; seconds to minutes during ischaemia.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: a rise in free intracellular zinc into the micromolar range.

◦ Warning condition: seizure activity and ischaemia, both of which translocate zinc from terminals into postsynaptic neurons.

◦ Watchdog: metallothionein, the ZnT and ZIP transporter families, and rapid extracellular buffering by albumin and by the extracellular matrix.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Zinc-finger transcription factors are among the earliest patterning proteins of the embryo, so zinc's structural role precedes any nervous system.

Maternal zinc deficiency impairs neural tube closure and brain growth in animal models, and severe human zinc deficiency in pregnancy is associated with adverse neurodevelopmental outcome, though the evidence that routine zinc supplementation improves cognitive outcome in adequately nourished populations is weak and the corpus states that rather than overclaiming it.

Vesicular zinc appears late, with ZnT3 expression rising through postnatal development in parallel with mossy fibre maturation.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

Structurally, zinc is invisible to the layers above: it is inside the machine and the machine is what Layer 4 catalogues.

Synaptically, zinc is the corpus's clearest example of a co-transmitter that is an element rather than a molecule, and it colours the hippocampal mossy fibre synapse of the Layer 7 volume specifically, tuning the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit balance at exactly the synapse the corpus treats as a conditional detonator.

The honest summary for a cognitive architect is that removing zinc's structural role destroys the organism, while removing its synaptic role produces an animal that is nearly normal and subtly impaired, and that asymmetry is itself the finding.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 12 dietary intake, recommended about 8 to 11 milligrams per day for adults.

◦ Layer 6 presynaptic action potential, triggering co-release with glutamate.

◦ Layer 3 cytosolic redox state, which sets metallothionein's grip.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 4 protein fold, as the structural centre of zinc-finger and catalytic-zinc proteins.

◦ Layer 7 receptor modulation, as inhibition of GluN2A-containing N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors and modulation of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors.

◦ Layer 6 postsynaptic zinc load, which under pathological conditions becomes a death signal.

• STATE.

◦ Free cytosolic zinc, picomolar to low nanomolar, observable with genetically encoded zinc sensors.

◦ Vesicular zinc presence, observable histochemically by Timm staining or by the fluorophore zinpyr.

◦ Serum zinc, 70 to 120 micrograms per decilitre, an insensitive but routinely available marker.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Total body zinc, about 2 to 3 grams.

◦ Zinc-binding fraction of the human proteome, about 10 percent.

◦ Half-maximal inhibitory concentration for GluN2A-containing N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, low nanomolar.

◦ Vesicular and cleft zinc concentration: contested, reported from under 1 micromolar to over 100 micromolar free, with total vesicular content estimated in the low millimolar range; the corpus records the disagreement and does not average it.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Synaptic zinc release and clearance, sub-millisecond release and tens to hundreds of milliseconds of clearance.

◦ Metallothionein-mediated buffering, seconds.

◦ Zinc-finger protein folding and metal loading, minutes during synthesis.

◦ Zinc translocation and neuronal death after seizure or ischaemia, hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Dietary deficiency produces growth failure, immune failure and impaired taste and smell; and pathological release produces a directly cytotoxic free zinc rise that is a recognised contributor to ischaemic and seizure-related neuronal death.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Acrodermatitis enteropathica, from mutations in the intestinal zinc transporter SLC39A4, is the inherited zinc deficiency syndrome and is fully corrected by zinc supplementation, which makes it one of the most satisfying element-level diagnoses in medicine.

Severe dietary zinc deficiency causes growth retardation, hypogonadism, impaired immunity and loss of taste and smell, and was first characterised in Middle Eastern populations consuming high-phytate diets.

Zinc translocation from mossy fibre terminals into postsynaptic CA3 neurons is a well-documented contributor to selective neuronal death after status epilepticus and after transient global ischaemia.

Zinc-finger transcription factor mutations cause a long list of developmental syndromes, and the corpus notes ZEB2 in Mowat-Wilson syndrome as a representative example of a zinc-dependent protein producing intellectual disability.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The two halves of this chapter operate on utterly different clocks: the structural role has no timescale at all, because a folded zinc finger simply persists, while the synaptic role operates on the millisecond clock of transmission.

The pathological role operates on the hour clock of delayed neuronal death, which is why zinc chelation has been attempted as a neuroprotective strategy with a therapeutic window measured in hours rather than minutes.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to represent zinc's double role explicitly, so that a model does not silently confuse a structural pool with a signalling pool.
Create a number variable called structural pool, in effect fixed.
Create a number variable called buffered pool with initial value near zero free zinc.
Create a number variable called vesicular pool with initial value the loaded vesicle content.
Create a number variable called cleft concentration with initial value zero.
For each time step, perform the following actions.
    If a spike occurs, move a fraction of the vesicular pool into the cleft concentration.
    Decay the cleft concentration toward zero with a clearance time constant of one hundred milliseconds.
    Compute the fractional inhibition of GluN2A-containing receptors from the cleft concentration using a half-maximal inhibitory concentration in the low nanomolar range.
    If oxidative stress is present, move zinc from the buffered pool into free cytosolic zinc.
    If free cytosolic zinc exceeds one micromolar for longer than one hour, mark the cell as at risk.
End the loop.
Report the peak cleft concentration, the peak receptor inhibition, and whether the cell was marked at risk.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because keeping the structural and the signalling pools in separate variables is the whole point, and code makes the separation impossible to blur.

'''Zinc as structural cofactor and as synaptic co-transmitter, kept in
separate pools. Cleft concentration is deliberately given as a contested
range (see the PARAMETERS block); the half-maximal inhibitory
concentration for GluN2A-containing NMDA receptors is low nanomolar.'''
from operator import mul

structural, buffered, vesicular, cleft = 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.0
IC50_nM, TAU, DT = 20.0, 0.100, 0.001
peak_cleft = peak_inhibition = 0.0
for step in range(1000):
    if step in (100, 110, 120):
        released = mul(0.05, vesicular)
        vesicular -= released
        cleft += mul(released, 500.0)          # nanomolar, low end of the contested range
    cleft -= mul(DT / TAU, cleft)
    inhibition = cleft / (cleft + IC50_nM)
    peak_cleft = max(peak_cleft, cleft)
    peak_inhibition = max(peak_inhibition, inhibition)
print("peak cleft zinc", round(peak_cleft, 1), "nM (contested)")
print("peak GluN2A inhibition", round(peak_inhibition, 3))
print("structural pool untouched:", structural)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only element in this dossier that folds the genome's transcription factors and is also thrown across a synaptic cleft, and the only one whose signalling concentration the field still cannot agree on to within two orders of magnitude.


CHAPTER 9. CHLORINE AND THE ANION QUESTION (The Balancing Negative) (COG)

Every catalogue of ions in the nervous system is dominated by positives, and there is a good reason: the positives do the exciting.

But charge must balance, and the body's answer is chloride, which turns out to be far more than a passive counterweight because inhibition in the mature brain is a chloride current, and the direction that current flows is set by a transporter rather than by chemistry.

Balancing names the arithmetic role; Negative names both the charge and, appropriately, the sign of its effect on excitability.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Chlorine in the body exists exclusively as the chloride ion, a singly negatively charged ion, and it is the most abundant anion in every body fluid.

What it does is two things: it balances the charge of sodium and potassium so that body fluids are electrically neutral, and it carries the current through the receptors of the two principal inhibitory transmitters, gamma-aminobutyric acid and glycine.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Chloride is high outside cells and low inside, in plasma at roughly 98 to 107 millimoles per litre, in cerebrospinal fluid at roughly 115 to 130 millimolar, and inside mature central neurons at roughly 5 to 10 millimolar.

Its gradient is maintained not by a dedicated pump but by two cotransporters that couple chloride movement to the sodium and potassium gradients built by the sodium-potassium pump.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

Chloride's ionic radius is about 1.81 angstroms, making it large and weakly hydrated, which is why chloride channels can be relatively unselective among anions and why bicarbonate also passes through gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors, carrying roughly a fifth of the current.

The two transporters that set the gradient work in opposite directions and are the whole story of this chapter: NKCC1 imports chloride using the inward sodium gradient, raising internal chloride, and KCC2 exports chloride using the outward potassium gradient, lowering it.

Because neither is a primary pump, both are thermodynamically dependent on the sodium-potassium pump of Chapter 13, which means that when energy fails, chloride homeostasis fails quickly and inhibition fails with it.

The resulting chloride equilibrium potential is about minus 70 to minus 85 millivolts in mature central neurons, which is at or slightly below the resting potential, so a gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor opening at rest produces little current and a great deal of shunting.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ mature_hyperpolarising - The Classical Brake - KCC2 dominant, internal chloride 5 to 10 millimolar, equilibrium potential below rest, so opening a chloride channel hyperpolarises.

◦ immature_depolarising - The Developmental Accelerator - NKCC1 dominant, internal chloride 20 to 40 millimolar, equilibrium potential above rest, so gamma-aminobutyric acid depolarises and can be excitatory.

◦ shunting - The Silent Veto - equilibrium potential almost exactly at rest, so almost no current flows but the added conductance divides down every other input.

◦ collapsed - The Failed Brake - chloride loading during intense activity or after KCC2 downregulation, so inhibition weakens or reverses.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ mature_hyperpolarising: equilibrium potential about minus 70 to minus 85 millivolts; inhibitory postsynaptic potentials of a few millivolts (well established).

◦ immature_depolarising: equilibrium potential about minus 40 to minus 50 millivolts, giving depolarising responses (well established in vitro; see the transition table note on the in-vivo dispute).

◦ shunting: current near zero, conductance increase of a few nanosiemens, dividing the effect of concurrent excitation by a factor of two or more (well established, and the corpus considers this the dominant mode of tonic inhibition in the mature cortex).

◦ collapsed: equilibrium potential rising toward or above threshold during sustained activity; the principal mechanism by which inhibition fails in seizures (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ immature_depolarising to mature_hyperpolarising: developmental upregulation of KCC2, occurring in rodents over roughly the first two postnatal weeks; the equivalent human timing is inferred from post-mortem expression data and is not directly measured, and the corpus flags it as uncertain.

◦ mature_hyperpolarising to collapsed: intense chloride influx faster than KCC2 can export, or activity-dependent KCC2 downregulation through brain-derived neurotrophic factor signalling; seconds for the loading, hours to days for the downregulation.

◦ Any mode to shunting: the equilibrium potential coinciding with the momentary membrane potential; continuously, as a function of the cell's own state.

◦ collapsed to mature_hyperpolarising: recovery of KCC2 expression; hours to days.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: an inhibitory synapse that depolarises past threshold, converting a brake into an accelerator.

◦ Warning condition: high-frequency inhibitory input loading a small compartment with chloride within seconds.

◦ Watchdog: KCC2 export capacity, the bicarbonate buffering system, and the geometric fact that small dendritic compartments load fastest and so fail first.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

This chapter contains one of the corpus's most important open disputes and the corpus states it in full rather than choosing a side.

The classical account, from Ben-Ari and colleagues, is that gamma-aminobutyric acid is depolarising and trophic in the immature brain because NKCC1 dominates, and that the KCC2 switch converts it to inhibitory over the first two postnatal weeks in rodents.

The challenge, from Zilberter, Bregestovski, Rheims and colleagues, is that much of the depolarising response reported in slices is an artefact of the energy substrate and of the slicing itself, and Kirmse and colleagues, 2015, in Nature Communications, and Valeeva and colleagues reported in-vivo measurements in which gamma-aminobutyric acid was not net excitatory in the neonatal cortex.

The corpus records that both bodies of evidence exist, that they are not reconciled, and that what would settle it is a non-invasive, calibrated, in-vivo measurement of the chloride equilibrium potential in the intact developing human or primate brain, which is not currently possible.

The clinical consequence of the dispute is not theoretical: bumetanide, an NKCC1 inhibitor, was predicted to help neonatal seizures and autism on the strength of the classical account, and it failed in both settings, with the NEMO trial finding no benefit and dose-limiting hearing loss in neonatal seizures and the phase three autism programme discontinued in 2021 for lack of efficacy.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

Every inhibitory construct in the corpus's Layer 7, Layer 8 and Layer 9 volumes inherits its sign from this chapter, and the corpus's repeated insistence that inhibition is mostly shunting rather than hyperpolarising is a direct consequence of the chloride equilibrium potential sitting so close to rest.

It also supplies one of the framework's clearest cases of a Layer 3 variable being under Layer 4 control: chloride's reversal potential is not a chemical constant but a transporter setting, so inhibition is a parameter the cell can adjust rather than a fact it must accept.

That, in turn, is why inhibition can fail without any inhibitory neuron dying, which is the single most useful clinical insight this chapter provides.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 sodium and potassium gradients, which power NKCC1 and KCC2 respectively.

◦ Layer 4 KCC2 and NKCC1 expression and phosphorylation state.

◦ Layer 7 gamma-aminobutyric acid and glycine receptor activation, which opens the conductance.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 6 inhibitory postsynaptic current, with a reversal potential of about minus 70 to minus 85 millivolts in mature neurons.

◦ Layer 6 membrane conductance, as the shunt that divides concurrent excitation.

◦ Layer 8 excitation-inhibition balance, published as the sign and strength of every inhibitory motif.

• STATE.

◦ Intracellular chloride concentration, observable with chloride-sensitive fluorescent proteins, about 5 to 10 millimolar in mature neurons.

◦ Chloride reversal potential, observable by gramicidin perforated-patch recording, which is the only method that does not itself dialyse the chloride away.

◦ KCC2 surface expression, observable by immunostaining.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Plasma chloride 98 to 107 millimoles per litre; cerebrospinal fluid chloride about 115 to 130 millimolar.

◦ Intracellular chloride, mature neurons 5 to 10 millimolar, immature neurons 20 to 40 millimolar.

◦ Chloride equilibrium potential, mature about minus 70 to minus 85 millivolts, immature about minus 40 to minus 50 millivolts.

◦ Bicarbonate contribution to gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor current, roughly 20 percent.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Chloride loading of a small dendritic compartment under sustained inhibition, hundreds of milliseconds to seconds.

◦ KCC2-mediated chloride extrusion, seconds.

◦ Activity-dependent KCC2 downregulation, hours to days.

◦ Developmental KCC2 upregulation, about two postnatal weeks in rodents; the human equivalent is inferred and not directly measured.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Chloride accumulation faster than extrusion collapses the driving force and converts inhibition first to shunting and then to excitation, which is the mechanism of benzodiazepine-refractory status epilepticus.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Benzodiazepine-refractory status epilepticus is the clinical face of chloride collapse: as seizures continue, chloride loads and gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors are internalised, so the drug that works in the first minutes stops working.

Neuropathic pain after nerve injury involves microglial brain-derived neurotrophic factor release downregulating KCC2 in dorsal horn neurons, converting inhibition to excitation and producing the classic finding that a light touch becomes painful.

Mutations in SLC12A5, the gene for KCC2, cause early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, which is the single-gene proof of this chapter's mechanism.

Cystic fibrosis, from mutations in the chloride channel CFTR, is the most common serious chloride channelopathy but is not primarily neurological, and the corpus notes it to make the point that the same ion serves entirely different systems.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The number a modeller most needs here is the chloride extrusion time constant of the order of seconds, because it is slow enough that repeated inhibitory input within a burst genuinely depletes the driving force.

That single slow time constant is why inhibition is use-dependent in a way excitation is not, and it is a physical fact about a transporter rather than anything a circuit designed.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show that inhibition weakens itself, because every inhibitory current carries the ion whose gradient it depends on.
Create a number variable called internal chloride with initial value 7 millimolar.
Create a number variable called external chloride with initial value 120 millimolar.
Create a number variable called extrusion time constant with initial value 3 seconds.
Create a number variable called compartment volume, small for a dendrite.
For each time step, perform the following actions.
    Compute the chloride equilibrium potential from the internal and external concentrations using the Nernst slope of 61.5 millivolts per decade, with a sign reversal because chloride is negative.
    If an inhibitory input occurs, compute the chloride current from the driving force and add the transported chloride to internal chloride, divided by the compartment volume.
    Relax internal chloride back toward its resting value with the extrusion time constant.
    Record the equilibrium potential.
End the loop.
Report how far the equilibrium potential has drifted after a one-second train of inhibitory inputs at fifty per second.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the self-defeating character of inhibition is counterintuitive when stated and obvious when simulated.

'''Chloride loading during sustained inhibition. Nernst slope 61.54 mV
per decade at 37 C; mature internal chloride 5 to 10 mM against 115 to
130 mM externally; extrusion by KCC2 on a seconds timescale.'''
import math
from operator import mul

cl_in, CL_OUT, TAU, DT = 7.0, 120.0, 3.0, 0.001
REST_IN, VOL = 7.0, 1.0
def ecl(c):
    return mul(-61.54, math.log10(CL_OUT / c))
print("resting E_Cl", round(ecl(cl_in), 1), "mV")
for step in range(1000):
    if step % 20 == 0:                      # 50 Hz inhibitory train
        drive = -65.0 - ecl(cl_in)          # membrane held at -65 mV
        cl_in += mul(0.02, max(drive, 0.0)) / VOL
    cl_in -= mul(DT / TAU, cl_in - REST_IN)
print("after 1 s of 50 Hz inhibition: internal chloride",
      round(cl_in, 2), "mM, E_Cl", round(ecl(cl_in), 1), "mV")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only ion in this dossier whose direction of effect is set by a transporter rather than by chemistry, so that the same receptor is a brake in an adult and something else entirely in a newborn.


CHAPTER 10. IRON AND COPPER, THE REDOX METALS (The Electron Carriers with a Psychiatry) (COG)

Iron and copper are the two transition metals that actually move the electrons of Chapter 2, and they are in the nervous system for that reason and for one other: they sit in the active sites of the enzymes that make the monoamine transmitters.

That second job is what earns them a psychiatry, because an element that is required to make dopamine and noradrenaline is an element whose supply is a mental-state variable.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Iron and copper are transition metals that, unlike zinc, readily change oxidation state, iron between the two-plus and three-plus forms and copper between the one-plus and two-plus forms, and that is exactly what makes them electron carriers.

In the nervous system they do three jobs: they carry electrons in the respiratory chain, they activate molecular oxygen in the hydroxylase enzymes that make monoamine transmitters and myelin lipids, and, as a consequence of the first two, they generate damaging radicals when they are not properly held.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The adult human body contains roughly 3 to 4 grams of iron, most of it in haemoglobin, and roughly 100 milligrams of copper.

Brain iron is very unevenly distributed and rises with age, being highest in the globus pallidus, substantia nigra, red nucleus, putamen and dentate nucleus, a regional pattern first mapped by Hallgren and Sourander, 1958, and reproduced in the modern era by quantitative susceptibility mapping.

Copper concentrates in the basal ganglia and the locus coeruleus, and its handling is dominated by two closely related transporting enzymes, ATP7A and ATP7B.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

Iron and copper are dangerous precisely because they are useful: a free iron two-plus ion reacts with hydrogen peroxide to make the hydroxyl radical, the most damaging oxidant in biology, in the Fenton reaction, and copper does the same.

Biology's answer is that neither metal is ever free: iron is held by transferrin in the circulation, by ferritin in storage, and inside proteins as haem or as iron-sulphur clusters, while copper is passed hand to hand by dedicated chaperone proteins so that the free copper concentration in a cell is estimated to be less than one ion per cell.

Tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of dopamine, noradrenaline and adrenaline, is a non-haem iron enzyme requiring tetrahydrobiopterin, and tryptophan hydroxylase, the corresponding enzyme for serotonin, is its close relative.

Dopamine beta-hydroxylase, which converts dopamine to noradrenaline, is a copper enzyme requiring ascorbate, and it is the reason copper deficiency alters the balance between two transmitters that the corpus's Layer 10 volume treats as separate systems.

Iron is also required by the enzymes of myelin lipid synthesis, and oligodendrocytes are the most iron-rich cells in the brain, which is the mechanistic basis for the association between early-life iron deficiency and white matter development.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ protein_bound_functional - The Working Metal - iron or copper held in an enzyme or carrier, doing redox chemistry under control.

◦ storage_sequestered - The Locked Reserve - iron in ferritin, up to about 4500 atoms per shell, or copper bound to metallothionein.

◦ transport_chaperoned - The Escorted Metal - iron on transferrin, copper on a chaperone, never free in transit.

◦ labile_pool - The Loose Metal - the small, genuinely reactive intracellular pool, which is the substrate of the Fenton reaction and the trigger of ferroptosis.

◦ deficient - The Missing Metal - insufficient supply, in which the hydroxylase enzymes lose activity before the respiratory chain does.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ protein_bound_functional: turnover numbers of the hydroxylases are modest, of the order of 1 to 10 per second, which is why they are rate-limiting for transmitter synthesis (well established).

◦ storage_sequestered: ferritin holds up to roughly 4500 iron atoms and releases them by ferritinophagy (well established).

◦ transport_chaperoned: transferrin saturation normally 20 to 45 percent; free copper effectively zero (well established).

◦ labile_pool: estimated at a few micromolar and difficult to measure; the corpus flags this as a poorly established quantity and notes that a calibrated in-vivo labile iron sensor would settle it (low confidence).

◦ deficient: tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine beta-hydroxylase activity fall, and myelination is impaired, before anaemia is severe (well established in animal models; the human dose-response is less firmly quantified).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ transport_chaperoned to protein_bound_functional: metallation during protein folding; minutes.

◦ protein_bound_functional to labile_pool: protein degradation or oxidative release; minutes to hours.

◦ labile_pool to storage_sequestered: ferritin synthesis, itself controlled post-transcriptionally by iron regulatory proteins; hours.

◦ storage_sequestered to labile_pool: ferritinophagy under iron demand; hours.

◦ Any mode to deficient: dietary shortfall or malabsorption; weeks to months, because the body's reserves are large.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: transferrin saturation above about 45 percent, indicating iron beyond the carrier's capacity.

◦ Warning condition: rising labile iron with falling glutathione, the precondition of ferroptosis, a form of cell death driven by iron-dependent lipid peroxidation.

◦ Watchdog: the iron regulatory protein system, hepcidin as the systemic iron hormone, ferritin, the copper chaperones, and glutathione peroxidase four as the specific brake on ferroptosis.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Iron is transferred to the fetus principally in the third trimester, so preterm infants and infants of iron-deficient or diabetic mothers begin life with reduced stores, and this is the basis of the concern about early-life iron deficiency.

The evidence that early iron deficiency impairs cognitive and motor development is reasonably strong observationally and is supported by animal models with clear mechanisms, but the evidence that supplementation in already-iron-replete children improves cognition is weak, and the corpus states both halves.

The association between iron status and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder has been reported repeatedly, with lower serum ferritin in affected children in several studies, but the finding is inconsistent across cohorts and trials of supplementation have been small and mixed, so the corpus grades it as suggestive and unproven rather than established.

Brain iron accumulates through life in the deep grey nuclei, and this normal accumulation is one of the few chemical changes of ageing that is directly visible on standard magnetic resonance imaging.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

These two metals are the corpus's clearest demonstration that an element can be a psychiatric variable, because the enzymes that make three of the corpus's named neuromodulatory systems require them at their active sites.

They also colour the corpus's ageing and neurodegeneration chapters, since regional iron accumulation in the substantia nigra and globus pallidus is a shared feature of normal ageing and of several movement disorders, and disentangling those is an unsolved problem.

And they supply the strongest argument in the dossier for the framework's economic logic: the brain accepts a real risk of oxidative damage in exchange for the catalytic power of these two metals, which is a trade rather than an oversight.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 12 dietary intake, iron about 8 milligrams per day for adult men and 18 for menstruating women, copper about 0.9 milligrams per day.

◦ Layer 10 hepcidin signal from the liver, which sets intestinal iron absorption.

◦ Layer 3 oxygen and hydrogen peroxide, as the reactants these metals activate.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 4 enzyme activity, in tyrosine hydroxylase, tryptophan hydroxylase and dopamine beta-hydroxylase.

◦ Layer 3 monoamine transmitter supply, catalogued in Chapter 19.

◦ Layer 5 respiratory chain flux, as the carriers of Chapter 2.

◦ Layer 5 reactive oxygen species, as the unwanted output.

• STATE.

◦ Serum ferritin, normally about 30 to 300 micrograms per litre, and transferrin saturation 20 to 45 percent.

◦ Serum ceruloplasmin, normally about 20 to 35 milligrams per decilitre, low in Wilson disease and in Menkes disease.

◦ Regional brain iron, observable non-invasively by quantitative susceptibility mapping.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Total body iron about 3 to 4 grams; total body copper about 100 milligrams.

◦ Ferritin capacity about 4500 iron atoms per shell.

◦ Hepatic copper in Wilson disease, above 250 micrograms per gram dry weight, which is the diagnostic threshold.

◦ Dopamine beta-hydroxylase carries copper at its active site and requires ascorbate as the reductant.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Fenton chemistry, effectively instantaneous once the reactants meet.

◦ Hydroxylase turnover, about 0.1 to 1 second per catalytic cycle.

◦ Ferritin synthesis and iron storage adjustment, hours.

◦ Whole-body iron store depletion on a deficient diet, months.

◦ Brain iron accumulation with age, decades.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Deficiency starves the monoamine synthetic enzymes and impairs myelination; overload produces Fenton chemistry, lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis; and in copper's case both failures occur in the same family of transporting enzymes.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Wilson disease, from mutations in ATP7B, produces hepatic and neuropsychiatric disease with tremor, dystonia and personality change, and is diagnosed by low ceruloplasmin, raised urinary copper and hepatic copper above 250 micrograms per gram dry weight; it is treatable, which makes it one of the few reversible causes of a movement disorder.

Menkes disease, from mutations in ATP7A, is its mirror image, a copper-delivery failure producing severe infantile neurodegeneration with characteristic kinky hair.

Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration, from PANK2 mutations, is the commonest form of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation and produces the eye-of-the-tiger sign on imaging.

Hereditary haemochromatosis, from HFE mutations, produces systemic iron overload whose principal manifestations are hepatic, cardiac and endocrine rather than neurological, which is itself informative about how well the brain is defended.

Iron deficiency anaemia is associated with restless legs syndrome robustly enough that iron studies are part of its standard work-up, and this is the corpus's cleanest example of an element-level treatment for a neurological symptom.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The clinically important number here is months, because the body's iron reserves are large enough that dietary deficiency takes months to manifest and repletion takes months to correct.

The pathologically important number is decades, because brain iron accumulation is a lifetime process and any therapeutic attempt to alter it must be judged over years.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show why the monoamine synthetic enzymes, and not the respiratory chain, are the first casualties of iron or copper deficiency.
Create a number variable called available metal, expressed as a fraction of normal.
Create a number variable called respiratory chain demand with initial value high but with a large reserve.
Create a number variable called hydroxylase demand with initial value low but with no reserve.
For each value of available metal from one down to zero, perform the following actions.
    Compute respiratory chain flux as the smaller of one and available metal divided by a low half-saturation constant.
    Compute hydroxylase flux as available metal divided by available metal plus a higher half-saturation constant.
    Record both fluxes.
End the loop.
Report the value of available metal at which hydroxylase flux has fallen to half, and the value at which respiratory chain flux has fallen to half.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the clinically observed order of failure - transmitter synthesis before energy metabolism - falls straight out of two different half-saturation constants and needs no further explanation.

'''Why monoamine synthesis fails before the respiratory chain in iron or
copper deficiency: different half-saturation constants for the same
metal. Hydroxylase turnover numbers are of order 1 to 10 per second.'''
from operator import mul

K_RESP, K_HYDROX = 0.05, 0.60
resp_half = hydrox_half = None
m = 1.0
while m > 0.0:
    resp = m / (m + K_RESP)
    hydrox = m / (m + K_HYDROX)
    if hydrox_half is None and hydrox < 0.5:
        hydrox_half = m
    if resp_half is None and resp < 0.5:
        resp_half = m
    m = round(m - 0.01, 2)
print("monoamine synthesis halves at", hydrox_half, "of normal metal")
print("respiratory chain halves at", resp_half, "of normal metal")
print("ratio", round(hydrox_half / resp_half, 1), "- synthesis fails first")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Two elements that are simultaneously the brain's electron carriers, the active sites of its monoamine synthetic enzymes, and its most dangerous stored oxidants, so that the same atom is the reason a transmitter exists and the reason a neuron dies.


CHAPTER 11. IODINE, THE ELEMENT OF THYROID HORMONE (The Tempo Setter) (COG)

One trace element gets an entire organ built to concentrate it, and the reason is that the hormone it is part of sets the developmental tempo of the whole nervous system.

Iodine is the only element in this dossier whose deficiency is a leading preventable cause of intellectual disability worldwide, which is a claim about a chemical element that no other entry here can make.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Iodine is a halogen, the heaviest element with an established essential role in human biology, and its entire biological function is to be covalently attached to tyrosine residues in thyroglobulin to make thyroid hormone.

What thyroid hormone does in the nervous system is set tempo: it controls the timing of neuronal migration, dendritic arborisation, synaptogenesis and above all myelination, and in the adult it sets metabolic rate and arousal.

The count of iodine atoms is the switch: the prohormone thyroxine carries four iodine atoms and is largely inactive at the receptor, while triiodothyronine carries three and is the active hormone, so the removal of a single atom is the activation step.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Roughly 70 to 80 percent of the body's 15 to 20 milligrams of iodine is held in the thyroid gland, which concentrates iodide from the blood against a gradient of 20-fold to 50-fold using the sodium-iodide symporter.

In the brain, the relevant location is not iodine itself but the deiodinase enzymes: type two deiodinase, which converts thyroxine to the active triiodothyronine, is expressed in astrocytes and in tanycytes, so the brain manufactures its own active hormone locally from a circulating prohormone.

Type three deiodinase, expressed in neurons, inactivates the hormone, so the brain also controls its own local exposure in both directions.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

The deiodinases are selenoproteins, containing the rare amino acid selenocysteine at their active sites, which makes selenium an indirect requirement for thyroid hormone action and links two trace elements in a single pathway.

Circulating thyroxine is present at roughly 60 to 140 nanomoles per litre total and about 10 to 25 picomoles per litre free, while triiodothyronine is present at roughly 1.2 to 2.7 nanomoles per litre total and 3.5 to 6.5 picomoles per litre free, with over 99 percent of both bound to carrier proteins.

Thyroxine's plasma half-life is about seven days and triiodothyronine's about one day, which is why thyroid state changes over weeks and why replacement therapy is monitored at six-week intervals rather than daily.

The hormone acts through nuclear receptors that bind DNA and regulate transcription, which places it firmly in the corpus's steroid-and-thyroid layer-skipping channel, since a molecule made in a gland in the neck reaches the genome of a neuron with no relay at any intermediate layer.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ euthyroid - The Set Tempo - hormone within range, receptor occupancy near optimal, and the whole system quiet.

◦ hypothyroid - The Slowed Tempo - insufficient hormone, producing fatigue, cognitive slowing, depression and, in development, irreversible impairment.

◦ hyperthyroid - The Raced Tempo - excess hormone, producing anxiety, tremor, insomnia and in extreme cases delirium.

◦ local_activation - The Brain's Own Setting - type two deiodinase raising local triiodothyronine independently of the circulating level.

◦ local_inactivation - The Brain's Own Brake - type three deiodinase destroying hormone locally, prominent in the fetus and in illness.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ euthyroid: thyroid-stimulating hormone about 0.4 to 4.0 milliunits per litre, with a log-linear inverse relation to free thyroxine that makes thyroid-stimulating hormone the most sensitive single test in endocrinology (well established).

◦ hypothyroid: in adults, reversible cognitive slowing; in the fetus and infant, an irreversible loss of cognitive capacity whose magnitude depends on timing (well established).

◦ hyperthyroid: raised metabolic rate, tremor at 8 to 12 hertz, and in thyroid storm a mortality that remains appreciable even with treatment (well established).

◦ local_activation: brain triiodothyronine can be held near normal across a wide range of circulating thyroxine, which is a genuine local homeostat (well established in rodents; the quantitative human equivalent is inferred from indirect evidence).

◦ local_inactivation: type three deiodinase in the placenta and fetal brain protects the fetus from maternal hormone excess (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ euthyroid to hypothyroid: iodine deficiency, autoimmune destruction, or thyroidectomy; weeks, set by the seven-day half-life of thyroxine.

◦ euthyroid to hyperthyroid: autoimmune stimulation as in Graves disease, or a nodule; weeks.

◦ Any mode to local_activation or local_inactivation: deiodinase expression change, thrown from above by illness, fasting or cold; hours to days.

◦ hypothyroid to euthyroid: replacement therapy; symptomatic improvement over weeks, and in the developing brain the window may close entirely rather than reopen.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: a thyroid-stimulating hormone outside the reference range with a free thyroxine still inside it, which is subclinical disease.

◦ Warning condition: pregnancy, in which requirement rises by roughly 50 percent and the fetus is entirely dependent on maternal supply in the first trimester.

◦ Watchdog: the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis, the thyroid's own large stored reserve of iodinated thyroglobulin, and the local deiodinases.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

The fetal thyroid does not begin producing hormone until around the twelfth to sixteenth week of gestation, so the entire first trimester of brain development depends on maternal thyroid hormone crossing the placenta.

That single fact is why maternal iodine deficiency is more damaging than the infant's own, and why iodine requirement rises in pregnancy from about 150 to about 250 micrograms per day on World Health Organization guidance.

Severe deficiency produces endemic cretinism, with profound intellectual disability, deaf-mutism and spasticity, and it is entirely preventable by salt iodisation, which is among the cheapest and most effective public health interventions ever implemented.

The magnitude of the cognitive effect of milder deficiency has been estimated by meta-analysis at roughly 12 to 13.5 intelligence quotient points in the classic analysis of Bleichrodt and Born, 1994, but the corpus records that this figure comes from populations with severe deficiency and that the effect of mild-to-moderate deficiency is smaller and less certain, with more recent estimates lower and trials in mildly deficient pregnant women having generally failed to show a benefit of supplementation on child cognition.

The corpus states that disagreement explicitly rather than quoting the largest number.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

This chapter is the corpus's clearest instance of a layer-skipping channel with an element at one end and a genome at the other: iodine is eaten, incorporated into a hormone in a gland, released into blood, converted locally by an astrocyte, and read by a nuclear receptor that changes transcription in a neuron.

At Layer 11 it sets the whole-organism tempo variable that the corpus's global states volume treats as a background parameter of arousal and metabolic rate.

At Layer 12 it is the element whose supply most directly determines the population distribution of cognitive capacity, which is a statement no other entry in this dossier can make.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 12 dietary iodine, about 150 micrograms per day for adults and 250 in pregnancy and lactation, on World Health Organization guidance.

◦ Layer 10 thyroid-stimulating hormone from the pituitary, 0.4 to 4.0 milliunits per litre.

◦ Layer 3 selenium supply, required for the deiodinase selenoproteins.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 circulating thyroxine and triiodothyronine.

◦ Layer 4 nuclear receptor occupancy and the resulting transcriptional programme.

◦ Layer 11 metabolic rate and arousal set-point.

• STATE.

◦ Thyroid-stimulating hormone, free thyroxine and free triiodothyronine, all routinely measurable in serum.

◦ Urinary iodine concentration, the standard population measure of iodine status, with a population median of 100 to 199 micrograms per litre defined as adequate in non-pregnant adults.

◦ Thyroid volume by ultrasound, enlarged in chronic deficiency as goitre.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Total body iodine about 15 to 20 milligrams, of which 70 to 80 percent is in the thyroid.

◦ Iodine atoms per hormone molecule: four in thyroxine, three in triiodothyronine.

◦ Thyroid iodide concentrating gradient, roughly 20-fold to 50-fold.

◦ Recommended intake 150 micrograms per day, rising to 250 in pregnancy.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Plasma half-life of thyroxine, about 7 days; of triiodothyronine, about 1 day.

◦ Thyroid iodine store sufficient for roughly 2 to 3 months without intake.

◦ Clinical response to replacement, about 6 weeks to a new steady state.

◦ Developmental window for the first trimester's dependence on maternal hormone, the first roughly 12 to 16 weeks of gestation, after which it does not reopen.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Deficiency in the developing brain produces an irreversible loss of capacity because the developmental window closes, and this irreversibility is the single most important fact in the chapter; deficiency in the adult brain produces a reversible slowing.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Endemic cretinism, from severe maternal iodine deficiency, remains the archetype of a preventable intellectual disability caused by a single element.

Congenital hypothyroidism, occurring in roughly one in 2000 to 4000 births, is screened for at birth in most high-income countries precisely because treatment within the first weeks preserves normal cognitive outcome and delay does not.

Hashimoto thyroiditis and Graves disease are the common autoimmune causes of adult hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism, and both present with psychiatric symptoms often enough that thyroid function testing is standard in the assessment of new depression or anxiety.

Myxoedema coma and thyroid storm are the two endocrine emergencies of this axis, and both are principally disorders of the nervous system's operating tempo.

Selenium deficiency impairs deiodinase function and can therefore produce a functional thyroid hormone deficit with normal iodine intake, which is the clearest interaction between two trace elements in this dossier.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The chapter's controlling timescale is the seven-day half-life of thyroxine, which is why nothing in thyroid medicine happens quickly and why a dose change is judged after six weeks.

The chapter's controlling window, however, is developmental and measured in weeks of gestation, and the contrast between a slow hormone and a narrow window is exactly why maternal iodine status must be right before anyone knows there is a problem.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show why a long hormone half-life combined with a narrow developmental window makes prevention the only effective strategy.
Create a number variable called maternal iodine intake in micrograms per day.
Create a number variable called maternal thyroxine level, computed from intake with a saturating relationship.
Create a number variable called gestational week, running from zero to forty.
Create a number variable called fetal thyroid onset week with initial value fourteen.
Create a number variable called accumulated developmental deficit with initial value zero.
For each gestational week, perform the following actions.
    If gestational week is less than fetal thyroid onset week, set available hormone to maternal thyroxine level.
    Otherwise set available hormone to the larger of maternal thyroxine level and the fetal supply.
    If available hormone is below the adequate threshold, add the shortfall to accumulated developmental deficit.
End the loop.
Report accumulated developmental deficit, and repeat with supplementation beginning at week twenty to show how little it recovers.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the futility of late supplementation is the practical lesson of this chapter and is far more persuasive as an output than as an assertion.

'''Iodine sufficiency across gestation. Fetal thyroid function begins
around weeks 12 to 16, so the first trimester depends entirely on
maternal supply; WHO recommends 250 micrograms per day in pregnancy.'''
from operator import mul

ADEQUATE, ONSET = 1.0, 14

def run(intake_by_week):
    deficit = 0.0
    for wk in range(40):
        maternal = min(1.0, intake_by_week(wk) / 250.0)
        available = maternal if wk < ONSET else max(maternal, 0.9)
        if available < ADEQUATE:
            deficit += ADEQUATE - available
    return round(deficit, 2)

print("deficient throughout        :", run(lambda w: 80))
print("supplemented from week 20   :", run(lambda w: 80 if w < 20 else 250))
print("supplemented before conception:", run(lambda w: 250))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only element for which the body builds a dedicated organ, the only one whose activation step is the removal of a single atom, and the only one whose deficiency is a leading preventable cause of intellectual disability worldwide.


SOURCES FOR PART TWO

All sources listed were consulted by web search on 12 August 2026.

• Manning, Whyte, Martinez, Hunter and Sudarsanam, 2002, The protein kinase complement of the human genome, Science, for the count of about 518 human protein kinases.

• Shannon, 1976, Revised effective ionic radii, Acta Crystallographica Section A, for the ionic radii used throughout Part Two.

• Doyle, Morais Cabral, Pfuetzner, Kuo, Gulbis, Cohen, Chait and MacKinnon, 1998, The structure of the potassium channel, Science, volume 280, for the selectivity filter and the greater-than-1000-to-1 selectivity.

• Noskov, Bernèche and Roux, 2004, Control of ion selectivity in potassium channels by electrostatic and dynamic properties of carbonyl ligands, Nature, volume 431, recorded here as a standing disagreement with the rigid snug-fit account rather than a replacement for it.

• Marcus, 1991, Thermodynamics of solvation of ions, Journal of the Chemical Society Faraday Transactions, for hydration free energies, with the corpus noting that compilations differ by 10 to 20 kilojoules per mole.

• Kole, Ilschner, Kampa, Williams, Ruben and Stuart, 2008, Action potential generation requires a high sodium channel density in the axon initial segment, Nature Neuroscience, volume 11, for axon initial segment channel density.

• Ritchie and Rogart, 1977, Density of sodium channels in mammalian myelinated nerve fibers, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, volume 74, giving about 12,000 per square micrometre at the node by saxitoxin binding, against electrophysiological estimates nearer 1000 to 2000 per square micrometre; the corpus records this order-of-magnitude disagreement, which arises because binding assays count toxin receptors and electrophysiology counts functional channels.

• Jahr and Stevens, 1990, Voltage dependence of NMDA-activated macroscopic conductances, Journal of Neuroscience, for the magnesium block formulation used in the code sample.

• Neher and Augustine, 1992, Calcium gradients and buffers in bovine chromaffin cells, Journal of Physiology, for calcium buffering and sensor behaviour.

• Andreini, Banci, Bertini and Rosato, 2006, Counting the zinc-proteins encoded in the human genome, Journal of Proteome Research, for the approximately 10 percent zinc-binding proteome figure.

• Cole and Palmiter and colleagues, 1999, Elimination of zinc from synaptic vesicles in the intact mouse brain by disruption of the ZnT3 gene, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, for the vesicular zinc knockout.

• Paoletti, Ascher and Neyton, and subsequent work on high-affinity zinc inhibition of GluN2A-containing N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, for the low-nanomolar half-maximal inhibitory concentration; the corpus records that the concentration of zinc actually reached in the cleft is contested across roughly two orders of magnitude and does not average the estimates.

• Rivera, Voipio, Payne, Ruusuvuori, Lahtinen, Lamsa, Pirvola, Saarma and Kaila, 1999, The potassium-chloride co-transporter KCC2 renders GABA hyperpolarizing during neuronal maturation, Nature, for the developmental chloride switch.

• Kirmse, Kummer, Kovalchuk, Witte, Garaschuk and Holthoff, 2015, GABA depolarizes immature neurons and inhibits network activity in the neonatal neocortex in vivo, Nature Communications; and the critiques of the slice-based account by Zilberter, Bregestovski, Rheims and colleagues; recorded as an unresolved dispute.

• The NEMO trial of bumetanide in neonatal seizures, and the discontinuation in 2021 of the phase three bumetanide programme in autism, recorded as negative clinical results bearing directly on that dispute.

• Hallgren and Sourander, 1958, The effect of age on the non-haemin iron in the human brain, Journal of Neurochemistry, for regional brain iron, with modern quantitative susceptibility mapping studies reproducing the regional pattern.

• World Health Organization guidance on iodine requirements and on urinary iodine as a population indicator, and the Iodine Global Network's country status assessments.

• Bleichrodt and Born, 1994, A meta-analysis of research on iodine and its relationship to cognitive development, recorded together with the corpus's caveat that the 12 to 13.5 intelligence quotient point figure derives from severely deficient populations and that trials in mildly deficient pregnant women have generally not shown a cognitive benefit of supplementation.


PART THREE. LAYER 3, THE IONIC AND SIMPLE MOLECULAR SUBSTRATE

Eleven entries: the solvent, the working ions, the currencies, and the small molecules that the upper layers treat as signals but that this dossier treats as chemistry.

Layer 3 is the layer of ions, water and small molecules, governed by electrochemistry, and it is the layer at which the substrate finally begins to look like something a neuroscientist would recognise.

The organising idea of this part is that everything here is either a gradient, a currency, or a messenger, and that the three categories differ in who pays for them.

A gradient is paid for continuously by a pump and is a store of energy; a currency is paid for by metabolism and is spent; and a messenger is paid for by synthesis and is thrown away after one use.

The entries are ordered accordingly: the solvent first, because nothing else makes sense without it, then the four working ions, then the proton, then the energy currency, then the messengers.


CHAPTER 12. WATER AND THE HYDROPHOBIC EFFECT (The Active Solvent) (COG)

Water is usually described as the medium in which biology happens, as though it were a stage rather than an actor.

That description is wrong in a way that matters: the force that assembles every membrane in the nervous system and folds every protein is not an attraction between the molecules being assembled but a property of the water they are pushed out of.

Active names the correction; Solvent names what everyone already assumed it merely was.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Water is a small, bent, strongly polar molecule that forms up to four hydrogen bonds with its neighbours, producing a transient three-dimensional network that continuously breaks and re-forms.

What it does, beyond dissolving things, is exclude: because a non-polar surface disrupts the hydrogen bond network and constrains the water around it, the system's entropy rises when non-polar surfaces are buried against one another, and that entropic gain is the hydrophobic effect.

Every lipid bilayer in the nervous system, and the folded core of every membrane protein in the Layer 4 catalogue, is held together by that effect and not by any bond between the parts.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Everywhere: water is roughly 55.5 moles per litre in its pure state, which makes it about 3000 times more concentrated than the most abundant solute in the body.

Human grey matter is roughly 80 to 84 percent water by mass and white matter roughly 68 to 72 percent, the difference being almost entirely the lipid of myelin, and this difference is what magnetic resonance imaging principally sees.

Water crosses membranes through aquaporin channels, of which aquaporin-4 is the dominant brain form, concentrated in astrocytic end-feet against blood vessels.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

A single hydrogen bond in liquid water is worth roughly 20 kilojoules per mole, about eight times the thermal energy unit, so bonds form and break constantly rather than holding permanently.

The reorientation and hydrogen-bond exchange time of liquid water is of the order of 1 to 3 picoseconds at body temperature, measured by femtosecond infrared spectroscopy, which means the network the reader is imagining has already rearranged many times.

The self-diffusion coefficient of pure water at 37 degrees Celsius is about 3.0 times 10 to the power minus 9 square metres per second, while the apparent diffusion coefficient measured in brain tissue is roughly 0.7 to 0.9 times 10 to the power minus 3 square millimetres per second, a threefold to fourfold reduction caused by cell membranes and tortuosity, and it is that reduction which diffusion imaging measures.

The hydrophobic effect is conventionally quantified as roughly 25 calories per mole per square angstrom of buried non-polar surface, a figure derived from transfer experiments and still the standard working number, though it is an empirical fit rather than a physical constant.

The lipid bilayer that this effect assembles has a hydrophobic core about 3 to 4 nanometres thick and a total thickness of about 4 to 5 nanometres, which sets the length of every transmembrane helix in the Layer 4 catalogue.

Aquaporin-4 conducts water at an extremely high rate, with single-channel permeabilities commonly quoted in the range of 10 to the power 9 water molecules per second, and it conducts water only, excluding protons, which is a remarkable selectivity achievement given that a proton normally travels through water faster than anything else.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ bulk_network - The Ordinary Liquid - water in its freely exchanging hydrogen-bonded network, reorienting on a picosecond timescale.

◦ hydration_shell - The Held Water - water ordered around an ion or a polar surface, exchanging more slowly than bulk.

◦ hydrophobic_cage - The Frustrated Water - water forced into a more ordered arrangement around a non-polar surface, which is entropically costly and therefore the driving force of assembly.

◦ channel_single_file - The Queued Water - water passing through an aquaporin pore in single file, unable to form a hydrogen-bonded chain that would conduct protons.

◦ osmotically_displaced - The Moved Water - bulk water flow across a membrane in response to an osmotic gradient.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ bulk_network: reorientation time 1 to 3 picoseconds; self-diffusion about 3.0 times 10 to the power minus 9 square metres per second at 37 degrees Celsius (well established).

◦ hydration_shell: exchange rates set by the ion, spanning about 10 to the power 5 per second for magnesium to 10 to the power 9 per second for potassium and caesium (well established, and this is the basis of Chapter 6 and Chapter 7).

◦ hydrophobic_cage: about 25 calories per mole per square angstrom of buried non-polar surface, entropy-dominated at room and body temperature (well established as an empirical relation).

◦ channel_single_file: about 10 to the power 9 water molecules per second per aquaporin-4 channel, with essentially complete proton exclusion (well established; the exact single-channel figure varies between reports by a factor of a few).

◦ osmotically_displaced: bulk flow proportional to the osmotic gradient and the membrane's water permeability (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ bulk_network to hydration_shell: an ion or polar group enters; picoseconds.

◦ hydration_shell to bulk_network: exchange, at the ion-specific rate above; nanoseconds to microseconds.

◦ bulk_network to hydrophobic_cage: exposure of a non-polar surface, as when a membrane protein unfolds; nanoseconds.

◦ hydrophobic_cage to bulk_network: burial of that surface, which is the folding or assembly event itself; microseconds to seconds depending on the object.

◦ bulk_network to osmotically_displaced: an osmotic gradient appears, as in hyponatraemia or ischaemia; seconds to minutes, and this is cerebral oedema.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: net water movement into brain cells, which is cytotoxic oedema, or into the interstitium, which is vasogenic oedema.

◦ Warning condition: a fall in serum sodium of more than about 10 millimoles per litre in 24 hours, in either direction.

◦ Watchdog: the blood-brain barrier, aquaporin-4 as the principal route of regulated water movement, and the idiogenic osmoles that brain cells generate to defend their volume over hours to days.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Brain water content falls through development as myelination proceeds, which is why the neonatal brain appears so different on magnetic resonance imaging and why the same imaging sequence must be interpreted differently at different ages.

Aquaporin-4 polarisation to astrocytic end-feet develops postnatally and is lost in several disease states, and that loss of polarisation rather than loss of the protein is what most modern work on brain fluid clearance actually measures.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

Water supplies the assembly force for the whole of Layers 4 and 5, so every construct in the corpus's macromolecular and organellar dossier exists because of an entropic effect in a solvent.

It also supplies the corpus's principal observational window, since magnetic resonance imaging in all its forms is a measurement of water and not of neurons, and every claim in the corpus's Layer 9 and Layer 10 volumes that rests on imaging inherits that indirection.

And it supplies a constraint that is easy to forget: because water moves freely and osmolality must be defended, the brain cannot use large concentration changes as signals, which is why signalling is done with small numbers of ions against large gradients rather than with bulk chemistry.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 11 systemic osmolality, normally 275 to 295 milliosmoles per kilogram, defended by vasopressin and thirst.

◦ Layer 10 cerebral blood flow, delivering and removing water.

◦ Layer 4 aquaporin expression and polarisation.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 4 folding and assembly free energy, as the hydrophobic effect.

◦ Layer 5 membrane existence, as the bilayer.

◦ Layer 9 imaging contrast, as the signal that every magnetic resonance method actually detects.

• STATE.

◦ Brain water content, observable by magnetic resonance and post-mortem, about 80 to 84 percent in grey matter.

◦ Apparent diffusion coefficient, about 0.7 to 0.9 times 10 to the power minus 3 square millimetres per second in normal brain, falling sharply within minutes in acute ischaemia.

◦ Serum osmolality and sodium, as the systemic drivers.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Water concentration in pure water, 55.5 moles per litre.

◦ Hydrogen bond energy, about 20 kilojoules per mole; hydrogen bond lifetime, about 1 to 3 picoseconds.

◦ Hydrophobic burial, about 25 calories per mole per square angstrom.

◦ Bilayer hydrophobic core, about 3 to 4 nanometres; total bilayer about 4 to 5 nanometres.

◦ Cerebrospinal fluid volume about 150 millilitres, produced at about 0.3 to 0.4 millilitres per minute, roughly 500 millilitres per day, so the whole volume turns over about three to four times daily.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Hydrogen bond exchange, 1 to 3 picoseconds.

◦ Water transit through an aquaporin, of the order of nanoseconds per molecule.

◦ Osmotic equilibration of brain tissue, minutes.

◦ Adaptive osmolyte defence of cell volume, hours to days, which is why chronic hyponatraemia must be corrected slowly.

◦ Cerebrospinal fluid turnover, about 6 to 8 hours per complete exchange.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Osmotic failure in either direction: cerebral oedema when water enters faster than the skull can accommodate, and osmotic demyelination when chronic hyponatraemia is corrected faster than cells can readjust their osmolytes.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Cerebral oedema, whether cytotoxic after ischaemia or vasogenic around a tumour, is the commonest life-threatening problem in acute neurology, and it is a disorder of this chapter and no other.

Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder is caused by autoantibodies against aquaporin-4, which makes it the one demyelinating disease with an identified molecular target and a clear treatment rationale.

Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion and diabetes insipidus are the two systemic disorders of water handling that present neurologically, and central pontine myelinolysis is the iatrogenic consequence of correcting the first too quickly.

The glymphatic hypothesis, that cerebrospinal fluid flows along perivascular spaces and clears solutes including amyloid-beta preferentially during sleep, was proposed by Iliff, Nedergaard and colleagues in 2012 in Science Translational Medicine and has been vigorously disputed, notably by Smith and Verkman, who argue that the measurements are consistent with diffusion rather than convective flow, and by a 2024 Nature Neuroscience study reporting no evidence of the proposed clearance enhancement.

The corpus records that this is an active and unresolved dispute, does not treat glymphatic clearance as established, and states that what would settle it is a direct, minimally perturbing measurement of perivascular fluid velocity in an unanaesthetised animal, since anaesthesia itself changes the answer.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The controlling contrast of this chapter is between the picosecond life of a hydrogen bond and the hours over which a brain cell adjusts its osmolytes, a span of about 16 orders of magnitude in the same substance.

The clinically decisive number is the hours-to-days timescale of osmolyte adaptation, because it is the reason that both the disease and its correction are dangerous.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show that assembling a membrane is driven by the water and not by any attraction between the lipids.
Create a number variable called buried non-polar area in square angstroms.
Create a number variable called hydrophobic coefficient with initial value 25 calories per mole per square angstrom.
Create a number variable called direct lipid attraction with initial value a small negative number.
Create a number variable called temperature in kelvin with initial value 310.15.
For each candidate assembly, perform the following actions.
    Compute the hydrophobic free energy as minus hydrophobic coefficient times buried non-polar area.
    Compute the total free energy as the hydrophobic free energy plus direct lipid attraction.
    Compute the fraction of the total that is contributed by the water term.
    Record the total and the fraction.
End the loop.
Report the fraction of the assembly's stability that is attributable to the solvent rather than to the parts being assembled.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the claim that the solvent supplies most of the stability is surprising, and putting the two terms side by side settles it in three lines.

'''Hydrophobic assembly: the solvent term dominates. Coefficient about 25
calories per mole per square angstrom of buried non-polar surface, a
standard empirical fit rather than a physical constant.'''
from operator import mul

COEFF, DIRECT = 25.0, -400.0        # cal/mol per A2, and cal/mol of van der Waals
for area in [200, 600, 1200, 2400]:
    hydrophobic = mul(-COEFF, area)
    total = hydrophobic + DIRECT
    print("buried area", "%5d" % area, "A2   total", "%8.0f" % total,
          "cal/mol   solvent share", "%.2f" % (hydrophobic / total))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only entry in this dossier whose most important action is not something it does to other molecules but something other molecules do to it, and the only substance that both builds the membrane and is the thing every brain scan actually measures.


CHAPTER 13. THE SODIUM ION (The Inward Debt) (COG)

Sodium sits outside the cell at ten times its internal concentration and is pulled inward by both concentration and voltage, which makes it the most thermodynamically impatient ion in the nervous system.

Every action potential is a controlled release of that impatience, and every one of them has to be paid back afterwards by a pump, which is why the brain's energy bill is what it is.

Inward names the direction of every force acting on it; Debt names the fact that using it always creates an obligation.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The sodium ion is a singly positively charged ion held at high concentration outside cells and low concentration inside by continuous pumping.

What it does is three things: it carries the rising phase of the action potential, it powers the transporters that clear neurotransmitters from the synaptic cleft, and it is the currency in which the brain's largest single energy expenditure is denominated.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Extracellular sodium is about 140 to 145 millimoles per litre in plasma and interstitial fluid, and intracellular sodium in mammalian neurons is about 10 to 15 millimolar, though values from 4 to 20 millimolar appear in the literature depending on method and cell type.

The corpus notes that many classical figures derive from the squid giant axon, where internal sodium is around 50 millimolar and external around 440 millimolar, and warns that mixing squid and mammalian numbers is a common and consequential error.

The pump that maintains the gradient, the sodium-potassium adenosine triphosphatase, is in every plasma membrane in the body and is especially dense in axons and in the choroid plexus.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

With external sodium at 145 millimolar and internal at 12 millimolar, the Nernst equation at 37 degrees Celsius gives an equilibrium potential of about plus 67 millivolts, and published values commonly range from about plus 55 to plus 72 millivolts depending on the concentrations assumed.

Because the resting potential is around minus 70 millivolts, the electrochemical driving force on sodium at rest is about 135 to 140 millivolts, which is the largest driving force on any ion in the nervous system and the reason sodium entry is so explosive once channels open.

The sodium-potassium pump exports three sodium ions and imports two potassium ions for each molecule of adenosine triphosphate hydrolysed, so it is electrogenic, moving one net positive charge outward per cycle and contributing a few millivolts of hyperpolarisation directly.

Its turnover is slow by channel standards, of the order of 100 cycles per second, which is roughly a hundred thousand times slower than an open channel, and that asymmetry is the whole reason a nervous system can signal fast and pay slowly.

The diffusion coefficient of sodium in free water is about 1.33 times 10 to the power minus 9 square metres per second, slower than potassium's because sodium drags a larger hydration shell, which is the same fact that Chapter 6 used to explain selectivity.

Sodium's third job is co-transport: the glutamate transporters move three sodium ions and one proton in and one potassium ion out per glutamate molecule, and the monoamine and gamma-aminobutyric acid transporters have their own sodium-coupled stoichiometries, so the sodium gradient is what makes synaptic clearance possible.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ gradient_maintained - The Paid Debt - internal sodium near 10 to 15 millimolar, driving force near maximal, pump keeping pace.

◦ loading - The Accruing Debt - sustained firing raising internal sodium faster than the pump exports it.

◦ pump_saturated - The Called Debt - the pump at maximum turnover, so any further influx accumulates without limit.

◦ gradient_collapsed - The Defaulted Debt - energy failure, pump stopped, sodium and water entering, which is cytotoxic oedema and anoxic depolarisation.

◦ reversed_transport - The Debt Run Backwards - the sodium-calcium exchanger and the glutamate transporters running in reverse when the gradient collapses, expelling calcium inward and releasing glutamate outward, which is a principal mechanism of ischaemic injury.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ gradient_maintained: equilibrium potential about plus 55 to plus 72 millivolts; driving force at rest about 135 millivolts (well established, with the spread reflecting assumed concentrations).

◦ loading: internal sodium can rise by several millimolar in an active axon or spine within seconds of high-frequency firing (well established).

◦ pump_saturated: pump turnover about 100 per second per pump, with a half-maximal internal sodium of roughly 10 millimolar, so the pump is operating near its half-saturation point at rest, which makes it responsive rather than maximal (well established).

◦ gradient_collapsed: complete equilibration within minutes of energy failure, followed by anoxic depolarisation (well established).

◦ reversed_transport: glutamate transporter reversal releases glutamate and is a documented contributor to excitotoxicity (well established in vitro; its quantitative contribution in human stroke is not firmly established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ gradient_maintained to loading: high-frequency firing; seconds.

◦ loading to gradient_maintained: pump catch-up after activity ceases; seconds to tens of seconds.

◦ loading to pump_saturated: sustained activity or reduced adenosine triphosphate supply; tens of seconds.

◦ pump_saturated to gradient_collapsed: energy failure; the anoxic depolarisation of grey matter occurs about 1 to 3 minutes after complete flow arrest.

◦ gradient_collapsed to reversed_transport: as soon as the electrochemical driving forces reverse; immediately.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: internal sodium rising above about 20 millimolar with no recovery between bursts.

◦ Warning condition: falling adenosine triphosphate with maintained neural activity, which is exactly the condition in the ischaemic penumbra.

◦ Watchdog: the pump's own responsiveness to internal sodium, activity-dependent increases in blood flow, and the sodium-dependent potassium current that terminates bursts.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Pump density rises through development in parallel with myelination and with the acquisition of high firing rates, and the alpha-three subunit of the pump is the neuron-specific form whose mutations cause disease.

The gradient is established before birth and is never allowed to relax, which is unusual: unlike most physiological variables, internal sodium has no diurnal or state-dependent variation the corpus is aware of.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

This chapter is the origin of the corpus's energy narrative: because every spike moves sodium and every sodium ion must be pumped back, the brain's energy budget is essentially a sodium bill, and Attwell and Laughlin, 2001, in the Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, computed it that way.

Their original allocation gave about 47 percent of grey matter signalling energy to action potentials, 34 percent to postsynaptic glutamate receptor currents, 13 percent to maintaining the resting potential and 3 percent to glutamate recycling, and Howarth, Gleeson and Attwell, 2012, in the same journal, revised the action potential share downward on the basis of measured lower sodium influx, with synaptic processes taking a correspondingly larger share.

The corpus records both allocations and notes that the revision moved the largest single cost from the axon to the synapse, which is a substantive change in where a cognitive architect should look for savings.

It also colours the corpus's clinical chapters, because the ischaemic cascade is a sodium story before it is a calcium story.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 adenosine triphosphate, one molecule per pump cycle.

◦ Layer 11 systemic sodium and water balance, holding plasma sodium at 135 to 145 millimoles per litre.

◦ Layer 6 action potential firing rate, which sets the influx.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 6 action potential rising phase and the associated inward current.

◦ Layer 7 transmitter clearance, as the power source of the excitatory amino acid transporters and the monoamine transporters.

◦ Layer 5 metabolic demand, published as the largest single line in the brain's energy budget.

• STATE.

◦ Intracellular sodium, about 10 to 15 millimolar in mammalian neurons, observable with sodium-sensitive indicators.

◦ Sodium equilibrium potential, about plus 55 to plus 72 millivolts, inferred from the concentrations.

◦ Pump activity, observable as the ouabain-sensitive component of oxygen consumption.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Extracellular sodium 140 to 145 millimolar; intracellular 10 to 15 millimolar in mammalian neurons, about 50 millimolar in squid axon.

◦ Pump stoichiometry, three sodium out and two potassium in per adenosine triphosphate.

◦ Pump turnover, of the order of 100 cycles per second; half-maximal internal sodium about 10 millimolar.

◦ Glutamate transporter stoichiometry, three sodium and one proton in, one potassium out, per glutamate.

◦ Sodium diffusion coefficient in water, about 1.33 times 10 to the power minus 9 square metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Sodium influx during a single action potential, under 1 millisecond.

◦ Pump cycle, about 10 milliseconds.

◦ Recovery of internal sodium after a burst, seconds to tens of seconds.

◦ Gradient collapse after complete blood flow arrest, about 1 to 3 minutes to anoxic depolarisation.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Energy failure stops the pump, the gradient runs down, water follows sodium into the cell, transporters reverse, and the cell swells and dies; this sequence is the whole of the early ischaemic cascade.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Alternating hemiplegia of childhood and rapid-onset dystonia parkinsonism are both caused by mutations in ATP1A3, the neuronal sodium-potassium pump subunit, and they demonstrate that the pump is not merely housekeeping but a determinant of neurological phenotype.

Familial hemiplegic migraine type two arises from mutations in ATP1A2, the astrocytic pump subunit, linking the same machinery to cortical spreading depolarisation.

Hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia both produce encephalopathy, and the rate of correction matters more than the value, as set out in Chapter 12.

Cardiac glycosides such as digoxin inhibit the pump therapeutically in the heart and produce visual disturbance and confusion as their characteristic neurological toxicity.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The defining ratio of this chapter is between the sub-millisecond influx and the seconds-long recovery, a factor of about ten thousand, and it is the reason a neuron can fire fast in bursts but not indefinitely at maximum rate.

The clinically defining number is the 1 to 3 minutes to anoxic depolarisation, which is the physical basis of the phrase time is brain.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the energy bill for a given firing rate, so that the brain's metabolic rate becomes a consequence rather than a fact.
Create a number variable called firing rate in spikes per second.
Create a number variable called sodium ions per spike, estimated from the membrane area and the charge needed.
Create a number variable called pump stoichiometry with initial value three sodium ions per adenosine triphosphate.
Create a number variable called free energy per adenosine triphosphate with initial value 50 kilojoules per mole in cellular conditions.
For each firing rate in a range, perform the following actions.
    Compute sodium ions entering per second as firing rate times sodium ions per spike.
    Compute adenosine triphosphate molecules per second as sodium ions per second divided by pump stoichiometry.
    Compute power in watts as adenosine triphosphate molecules per second divided by Avogadro's number times free energy per adenosine triphosphate.
    Record the firing rate and the power.
End the loop.
Report the power at one spike per second and at fifty spikes per second, and the ratio between them.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the linearity of the energy bill in firing rate is the single most useful fact a cognitive architect can take from this chapter.

'''The sodium bill. Charge per spike from the membrane capacitance
arithmetic of Chapter 2; pump stoichiometry three sodium per ATP; in-cell
free energy of ATP hydrolysis about 50 kJ/mol (see Chapter 18). Budget
shares from Attwell and Laughlin 2001 and Howarth and colleagues 2012.'''
from operator import mul

NA_PER_SPIKE, STOICH, DG, NA_AVO = 1.5e8, 3.0, 50000.0, 6.02214076e23
for rate in [1, 5, 10, 20, 50]:
    ions = mul(rate, NA_PER_SPIKE)
    atp = ions / STOICH
    watts = mul(atp / NA_AVO, DG)
    print("%3d Hz  ATP/s %.2e  power %.2e W per neuron" % (rate, atp, watts))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only ion on which both the concentration gradient and the voltage pull in the same direction, so that it is the only one whose every use is a withdrawal that must be repaid at a fixed price.


CHAPTER 14. THE POTASSIUM ION (The Resting Owner) (COG)

If you want to know why a neuron sits at minus 70 millivolts rather than at zero, the answer is potassium and almost nothing else.

The resting potential is not a set-point that some regulator defends; it is simply what happens when a membrane is much more permeable to potassium than to anything else, and potassium is much more concentrated inside than outside.

Resting names what it owns; Owner names the fact that this is the one ion whose equilibrium the cell actually sits near.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The potassium ion is a singly positively charged ion held at high concentration inside cells and low concentration outside.

What it does is set the resting potential, repolarise every action potential, terminate bursts, and, uniquely among the ions in this dossier, act as a genuine extracellular broadcast signal, because raising extracellular potassium depolarises every cell in the neighbourhood at once.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Intracellular potassium is about 130 to 155 millimolar and is the most abundant cation in the body's cells.

Extracellular potassium in the brain's interstitium is about 2.7 to 3.5 millimolar, which is notably lower than plasma potassium at 3.5 to 5.0 millimoles per litre, a difference actively maintained by the choroid plexus and the blood-brain barrier and one that is often overlooked.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

With internal potassium at 140 millimolar and external at 3 millimolar, the Nernst equation at 37 degrees Celsius gives an equilibrium potential of about minus 102 millivolts, and typical published values run from about minus 90 to minus 105 millivolts.

Because most neurons rest at minus 60 to minus 75 millivolts rather than at the potassium equilibrium potential, there is always a standing outward driving force on potassium of 15 to 40 millivolts, which means a resting cell is continuously leaking potassium and continuously pumping it back.

Potassium's diffusion coefficient in water is about 1.96 times 10 to the power minus 9 square metres per second, faster than sodium's because it carries a smaller hydration shell.

The extracellular space is small, roughly 15 to 20 percent of brain volume, and this is what makes extracellular potassium a usable signal: because the reservoir is small, modest efflux produces a large concentration change.

Activity raises extracellular potassium from about 3 millimolar toward a ceiling of roughly 10 to 12 millimolar, first characterised by Heinemann and Lux, 1977, and this ceiling is defended by glial uptake and spatial buffering; in spreading depolarisation the ceiling is breached and extracellular potassium reaches roughly 30 to 60 millimolar.

Glial spatial buffering, first proposed by Orkand, Nicholls and Kuffler in 1966, works because astrocytes are electrically coupled into a syncytium and express the inwardly rectifying channel Kir4.1, so potassium taken up at an active site can be released at a distant one, which is a layer-skipping housekeeping function that the corpus's Layer 6 volume catalogues in its own right.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ resting_dominant - The Held Baseline - potassium conductance dominant, membrane near minus 70 millivolts, extracellular potassium about 3 millimolar.

◦ repolarising - The Falling Phase - delayed rectifier and other voltage-gated potassium channels open, driving the membrane back down within a millisecond or two.

◦ afterhyperpolarised - The Enforced Pause - calcium-activated and sodium-activated potassium currents holding the membrane below rest for tens to hundreds of milliseconds, setting spike frequency adaptation.

◦ extracellular_accumulated - The Broadcast Signal - extracellular potassium raised to 5 to 12 millimolar by local activity, depolarising every cell nearby.

◦ ceiling_breached - The Runaway - extracellular potassium above about 12 millimolar with positive feedback, which is spreading depolarisation.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ resting_dominant: equilibrium potential about minus 90 to minus 105 millivolts; resting potential 10 to 40 millivolts positive to it because of a small sodium leak (well established).

◦ repolarising: delayed rectifier activation over about 1 to 5 milliseconds; single-channel conductances 2 to 250 picosiemens across the family (well established).

◦ afterhyperpolarised: medium afterhyperpolarisation decaying over about 50 to 200 milliseconds, slow afterhyperpolarisation over 1 to 5 seconds, the latter being a principal target of noradrenaline and acetylcholine (well established).

◦ extracellular_accumulated: each millimolar rise shifts the potassium equilibrium potential by roughly 7 to 9 millivolts at these low external concentrations, which is why small absolute changes matter so much (well established).

◦ ceiling_breached: extracellular potassium 30 to 60 millimolar, sustained depolarisation, complete loss of ionic gradients for minutes (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ resting_dominant to repolarising: depolarisation opening voltage-gated potassium channels; under a millisecond.

◦ repolarising to afterhyperpolarised: calcium entry during the spike activating calcium-dependent potassium channels; milliseconds, decaying over hundreds of milliseconds to seconds.

◦ resting_dominant to extracellular_accumulated: sustained local firing; hundreds of milliseconds to seconds, recovering over seconds.

◦ extracellular_accumulated to ceiling_breached: failure of glial buffering or of the pump, typically under metabolic stress; seconds.

◦ afterhyperpolarised to resting_dominant: neuromodulator action closing the slow afterhyperpolarisation current, thrown from above by Layer 10 arousal systems; seconds.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: extracellular potassium above about 12 millimolar.

◦ Warning condition: loss of Kir4.1 function or of astrocytic coupling, which lowers the ceiling's defence.

◦ Watchdog: astrocytic Kir4.1, the glial syncytium, the sodium-potassium pump, and the potassium-chloride cotransporter, which exports potassium and chloride together.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Potassium channel diversity is one of the largest gene families in the genome, with more than 70 human genes, and the developmental sequence of their expression is what converts a slow, broad immature spike into a fast, narrow mature one.

Astrocytic Kir4.1 expression and gap junction coupling mature postnatally, so the young brain's defence of the potassium ceiling is weaker, which is part of why the immature brain is more seizure-prone.

Reduced Kir4.1 function has been proposed as a mechanism in depression, on the basis of work in the lateral habenula in rodents, and the corpus records this as an interesting rodent finding with no established human validation rather than as a mechanism.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

The resting potential, which every construct in the corpus's Layer 6 volume takes as a starting condition, is this chapter's output.

The afterhyperpolarisation, which is the physical basis of spike-frequency adaptation and therefore of every claim in the corpus's upper volumes about neurons reporting change rather than level, is also this chapter's output.

And extracellular potassium is one of the corpus's cleanest examples of a broadcast rather than an addressed signal, which is exactly the economic logic the framework uses to explain its layer-skipping channels: potassium does not need an address because it has no particular recipient.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 adenosine triphosphate, through the pump that maintains the gradient.

◦ Layer 6 firing activity of the local population, which loads the extracellular space.

◦ Layer 6 astrocytic buffering capacity, which unloads it.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 6 resting membrane potential, about minus 60 to minus 75 millivolts.

◦ Layer 6 repolarisation and afterhyperpolarisation, setting maximum firing rate and adaptation.

◦ Layer 8 local excitability, as an unaddressed broadcast through extracellular accumulation.

• STATE.

◦ Extracellular potassium, observable with potassium-selective microelectrodes, about 3 millimolar at rest.

◦ Intracellular potassium, about 130 to 155 millimolar.

◦ Membrane potential, the direct read-out.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Intracellular potassium 130 to 155 millimolar; brain interstitial potassium 2.7 to 3.5 millimolar; plasma potassium 3.5 to 5.0 millimoles per litre.

◦ Potassium equilibrium potential about minus 90 to minus 105 millivolts.

◦ Activity ceiling for extracellular potassium about 10 to 12 millimolar; spreading depolarisation values 30 to 60 millimolar.

◦ Extracellular space fraction, about 15 to 20 percent of brain volume.

◦ Potassium diffusion coefficient in water, about 1.96 times 10 to the power minus 9 square metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Delayed rectifier activation, about 1 to 5 milliseconds.

◦ Medium afterhyperpolarisation, about 50 to 200 milliseconds; slow afterhyperpolarisation, 1 to 5 seconds.

◦ Extracellular potassium clearance after a burst, seconds.

◦ Spreading depolarisation recovery, 1 to 5 minutes if perfusion is adequate.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Failure of the potassium ceiling produces spreading depolarisation, which propagates at about 2 to 5 millimetres per minute and is now directly recorded in human brain injury as a marker of secondary damage.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Episodic ataxia type one arises from mutations in KCNA1, a voltage-gated potassium channel gene, and produces myokymia and attacks of ataxia.

Long QT syndrome types one and two arise from potassium channel mutations and are cardiac, but the associated deafness in Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome shows the same channels serving sensory function.

KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 mutations cause benign familial neonatal epilepsy and, in severe form, epileptic encephalopathy, and the drug retigabine was developed as an opener of exactly these channels.

Hyperkalaemia above about 6.5 millimoles per litre is a medical emergency principally because of cardiac arrest, and its neurological manifestations are comparatively mild, which is a reminder that the same ion has very different safety margins in different organs.

Spreading depolarisation, the breach of the potassium ceiling, is now recognised as a mechanism of injury expansion in traumatic brain injury, subarachnoid haemorrhage and stroke, and is also the accepted substrate of the migraine aura.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The two numbers a modeller most needs are the millisecond repolarisation and the seconds-long slow afterhyperpolarisation, because together they set both the maximum instantaneous firing rate and the sustainable average one.

The clinically important number is the 2 to 5 millimetres per minute propagation of spreading depolarisation, which is slow enough to watch and fast enough to matter.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show why small absolute changes in extracellular potassium have such large effects, which is the least intuitive fact in this chapter.
Create a number variable called internal potassium with initial value 140 millimolar.
Create a number variable called external potassium, to be varied from 2 to 12 millimolar.
Create a number variable called Nernst slope with initial value 61.54 millivolts per decade at 37 degrees Celsius.
For each external potassium value, perform the following actions.
    Compute the potassium equilibrium potential as the Nernst slope times the base-ten logarithm of external potassium divided by internal potassium.
    Compute the change from the value at 3 millimolar.
    Record the external concentration, the equilibrium potential, and the shift.
End the loop.
Report the shift in equilibrium potential per millimolar rise at the low end and at the high end, showing that the effect is strongly non-linear.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the non-linearity of the potassium equilibrium potential in external concentration explains, in one table, why the interstitial ceiling exists.

'''Why one millimolar of extracellular potassium matters so much.
Interstitial potassium about 2.7 to 3.5 mM at rest; activity ceiling
10 to 12 mM (Heinemann and Lux 1977); spreading depolarisation 30 to 60 mM.'''
import math
from operator import mul

K_IN, SLOPE = 140.0, 61.54
base = mul(SLOPE, math.log10(3.0 / K_IN))
prev = None
for k_out in [2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 30, 60]:
    ek = mul(SLOPE, math.log10(k_out / K_IN))
    step = "" if prev is None else " (+%.1f mV per mM step)" % ((ek - prev[1]) / (k_out - prev[0]))
    print("%5.1f mM   E_K %7.1f mV   shift %+6.1f mV%s" % (k_out, ek, ek - base, step))
    prev = (k_out, ek)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only ion whose equilibrium the cell actually sits near, and the only one that doubles as an unaddressed broadcast to every cell within diffusion distance.


CHAPTER 15. THE CALCIUM ION AS THE UNIVERSAL SECOND MESSENGER (The Ten-Thousandfold Gradient) (COG)

Calcium is kept ten thousand times more concentrated outside a cell than inside, which is by a wide margin the steepest gradient the nervous system maintains for any substance.

That steepness is what makes calcium the universal messenger: because the resting level is so low, a small absolute influx is an enormous relative change, and a signal that changes a hundredfold is trivially easy to detect against noise.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The calcium ion is a doubly positively charged ion held at about 50 to 100 nanomolar free in the resting cytosol against about 1.2 to 1.8 millimolar free outside.

What it does is trigger: transmitter release, muscle contraction, plasticity induction, gene transcription, and programmed cell death are all calcium-triggered, and this is why almost every plasticity rule in the corpus's upper volumes ultimately reads a calcium concentration.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Free calcium lives, briefly, in the cytosol; the great majority of cellular calcium is either bound to buffer proteins or stored in the endoplasmic reticulum, where free concentration is in the hundreds of micromolar.

The most important addresses in the nervous system are the presynaptic active zone, where calcium entering through channels triggers vesicle fusion within a few hundred microseconds, and the dendritic spine, where calcium entering through N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors is the plasticity signal.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

With external free calcium at 1.5 millimolar and internal at 100 nanomolar, the equilibrium potential computed with the divalent Nernst slope of about 30.8 millivolts per decade is roughly plus 128 millivolts, and published values commonly run from about plus 120 to plus 140 millivolts.

Calcium's crucial and often-missed property is that it does not behave as a well-mixed solute: because buffering is strong and diffusion is slow, calcium near an open channel exists as a steep local gradient called a nanodomain or microdomain, in which concentration falls from tens or hundreds of micromolar at the pore mouth to the resting level within tens to hundreds of nanometres.

The apparent diffusion coefficient of calcium in cytosol is therefore very low, commonly quoted at about 13 to 65 square micrometres per second against about 780 square micrometres per second in free water, and the reduction is caused almost entirely by binding to buffers rather than by physical obstruction.

The buffering ratio, meaning the number of calcium ions bound for each one left free, is typically about 20 to 200 depending on cell type, on the measurements of Neher and Augustine, 1992, in the Journal of Physiology, with calbindin, calretinin and parvalbumin as the principal named buffers.

The fast release sensor synaptotagmin-1 responds to local calcium with a Hill coefficient of about 4 to 5 and half-maximal release at roughly 10 to 25 micromolar, which means release probability varies as roughly the fourth power of local calcium and is therefore extremely sensitive to anything that changes channel opening.

Extrusion and uptake are handled by four mechanisms with different speeds and capacities: the plasma membrane calcium adenosine triphosphatase, which is high-affinity and low-capacity; the sodium-calcium exchanger, which moves three sodium in for one calcium out and is low-affinity and high-capacity; the sarcoplasmic and endoplasmic reticulum calcium adenosine triphosphatase, which refills the store; and the mitochondrial uniporter, which takes up calcium only when concentrations are high.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ resting_low - The Quiet Floor - 50 to 100 nanomolar free cytosolic calcium, maintained at continuous metabolic cost.

◦ nanodomain - The Local Spike - tens to hundreds of micromolar within tens of nanometres of an open channel, lasting under a millisecond.

◦ microdomain - The Local Pool - a few to tens of micromolar over a few hundred nanometres, lasting a few milliseconds.

◦ global_transient - The Cell-Wide Signal - a few hundred nanometres to a few micromolar across the whole cytosol, lasting hundreds of milliseconds to seconds.

◦ store_released - The Amplified Signal - calcium-induced calcium release from the endoplasmic reticulum through ryanodine or inositol trisphosphate receptors, converting a small trigger into a wave.

◦ pathological_sustained - The Death Signal - sustained elevation above about 1 micromolar, activating calpains, mitochondrial permeability transition and cell death.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ resting_low: 50 to 100 nanomolar; no downstream effector engaged (well established).

◦ nanodomain: 10 to 100 micromolar or more; engages only the fast, low-affinity sensors physically tethered nearby, which is how specificity is achieved without a private wire (well established).

◦ microdomain: 1 to 10 micromolar; engages calmodulin-dependent enzymes (well established).

◦ global_transient: 0.3 to 2 micromolar; engages transcriptional signalling and the slower kinases (well established).

◦ store_released: amplifies by a factor of a few to ten; the physiological significance in central neurons is real but its magnitude varies greatly between cell types (moderate confidence).

◦ pathological_sustained: above about 1 micromolar for minutes to hours; irreversible past a threshold that is not sharply defined (well established qualitatively, not well quantified).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ resting_low to nanodomain: a single voltage-gated calcium channel opens; the domain is established within microseconds and collapses within microseconds of closure.

◦ nanodomain to microdomain to global_transient: increasing channel recruitment and time; hundreds of microseconds to tens of milliseconds.

◦ global_transient to resting_low: buffering, extrusion and uptake; hundreds of milliseconds to a few seconds.

◦ Any mode to store_released: calcium or inositol trisphosphate reaching the store receptors; tens to hundreds of milliseconds.

◦ global_transient to pathological_sustained: extrusion failure from energy shortage or excessive influx; seconds to minutes.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: cytosolic calcium above 1 micromolar without recovery.

◦ Warning condition: mitochondrial calcium overload, which opens the permeability transition pore and commits the cell.

◦ Watchdog: the buffer proteins, the four extrusion and uptake systems, and the geometric fact that nanodomains collapse the instant the channel shuts.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Calcium signalling precedes the nervous system entirely, and spontaneous calcium transients pattern neural tube regionalisation, neuronal migration and neurite outgrowth before any synapse exists.

The buffer complement changes with development and is one of the defining markers of interneuron classes in the corpus's Layer 6 catalogue, where parvalbumin, calbindin and calretinin are used as identity labels precisely because they are expressed in a cell-type-specific way.

The tightness of coupling between calcium channels and release sensors also matures, moving from a loose microdomain arrangement to a tight nanodomain arrangement at many synapses, which sharpens transmission timing during development.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

This chapter is, with Chapter 7, the physical substrate of learning, because every plasticity rule the corpus states in its Layer 7 volume is ultimately a function of the amplitude and duration of a calcium signal.

The corpus's repeated claim that the same synapse can be potentiated or depressed depending on the pattern of activity reduces, at this layer, to the claim that a large brief calcium signal and a small sustained one engage different effectors, and the corpus notes honestly that while this calcium-amplitude hypothesis is widely used, the precise thresholds are model-dependent and have not been measured directly at a single synapse in vivo.

The nanodomain concept also colours the corpus's whole approach to signalling specificity: calcium shows that a diffusible messenger can be private, provided the receiver is bolted close enough to the source, and that principle recurs in Chapter 21.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 11 systemic calcium homeostasis, holding ionised plasma calcium at 1.1 to 1.3 millimoles per litre through the parathyroid and vitamin D axis.

◦ Layer 6 membrane potential, opening voltage-gated calcium channels.

◦ Layer 7 N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor activation, admitting the coincidence-gated calcium of Chapter 7.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 7 vesicle fusion, as a fourth-to-fifth-power function of local calcium.

◦ Layer 4 kinase and phosphatase activation, principally through calmodulin.

◦ Layer 4 transcriptional programme, through calcium-dependent transcription factors.

◦ Layer 6 cell death signal, when sustained.

• STATE.

◦ Free cytosolic calcium, observable with fluorescent indicators, 50 to 100 nanomolar at rest.

◦ Endoplasmic reticulum calcium load, observable with targeted low-affinity indicators, hundreds of micromolar.

◦ Buffering capacity, observable as the ratio of bound to free calcium during a controlled load.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Extracellular free calcium 1.2 to 1.8 millimolar; resting cytosolic 50 to 100 nanomolar; gradient about 10,000 to 20,000 fold.

◦ Calcium equilibrium potential about plus 120 to plus 140 millivolts.

◦ Buffering ratio about 20 to 200 depending on cell type.

◦ Apparent cytosolic diffusion coefficient about 13 to 65 square micrometres per second, against about 780 in free water.

◦ Release sensor Hill coefficient 4 to 5; half-maximal local calcium 10 to 25 micromolar.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Nanodomain establishment and collapse, microseconds.

◦ Vesicle fusion after calcium entry, about 60 to 200 microseconds at a fast synapse.

◦ Spine calcium transient decay, about 10 to 100 milliseconds.

◦ Global somatic calcium transient decay, hundreds of milliseconds to a few seconds.

◦ Store refilling, seconds to tens of seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Sustained elevation above about 1 micromolar activates calpains and the mitochondrial permeability transition and commits the cell to death, which is the final common pathway of excitotoxicity, and the corpus notes that the exact threshold and duration are not sharply established.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Excitotoxicity in stroke, traumatic brain injury and status epilepticus is calcium overload, and the failure of every N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist trial in acute stroke is one of the most instructive negative results in neurology, since the mechanism is not in doubt but the therapeutic window proved too narrow.

Malignant hyperthermia and central core disease arise from ryanodine receptor mutations, making them disorders of the internal store.

Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is an autoimmune attack on presynaptic calcium channels, and the resulting weakness that improves with sustained effort is a direct behavioural read-out of presynaptic calcium accumulation.

CACNA1A, CACNA1C and CACNA1S mutations produce the migraine, ataxia, psychiatric and periodic paralysis phenotypes already noted in Chapter 7.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The controlling span here is from microseconds at the nanodomain to seconds at the global transient, and the corpus's most useful observation is that these different timescales engage genuinely different effectors, so calcium is not one signal but a family of signals distinguished by duration and distance.

That is why a modeller cannot represent calcium as a single scalar and expect the plasticity rules to work.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show that transmitter release depends on the fourth power of local calcium, and therefore that small changes in channel opening produce large changes in synaptic strength.
Create a number variable called resting calcium with initial value 0.1 micromolar.
Create a number variable called local calcium, computed from the number of open channels.
Create a number variable called half maximal calcium with initial value 15 micromolar.
Create a number variable called cooperativity with initial value 4.5.
For each number of open channels in a range, perform the following actions.
    Compute local calcium as resting calcium plus a per-channel contribution times the number of open channels.
    Compute release probability as local calcium raised to the cooperativity power, divided by that quantity plus half maximal calcium raised to the same power.
    Record the number of open channels, the local calcium, and the release probability.
End the loop.
Report the factor by which release probability changes when the number of open channels doubles, and compare it with two.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the fourth-power law is the reason presynaptic modulation is powerful, and seeing a doubling of calcium produce a far larger change in release makes the point immediately.

'''Fourth-power calcium dependence of release. Hill coefficient about 4
to 5 and half-maximal local calcium about 10 to 25 micromolar for
synaptotagmin-1; buffering ratio 20 to 200 (Neher and Augustine 1992).'''
import math
from operator import mul

REST, KHALF, N, PER_CHANNEL = 0.1, 15.0, 4.5, 3.0
prev = None
for channels in [1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32]:
    ca = REST + mul(PER_CHANNEL, channels)
    num = math.pow(ca, N)
    p = num / (num + math.pow(KHALF, N))
    ratio = "" if prev is None else "   x%.2f for a doubling" % (p / prev)
    print("%3d channels  local Ca %6.1f uM  p_release %.4f%s" % (channels, ca, p, ratio))
    prev = p

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only substance in this dossier that is simultaneously the trigger for transmitter release, the signal for memory, and the executioner of the cell, distinguished only by how much of it arrives and for how long.


CHAPTER 16. THE CHLORIDE ION AND THE SHIFTING REVERSAL POTENTIAL (The Movable Sign) (COG)

Chapter 9 introduced chlorine as an element; this chapter treats the ion as a working variable of the mature and developing brain, because its most important property is that its reversal potential is not fixed.

Every other ion in this dossier has an equilibrium potential set by concentrations the cell defends within narrow limits; chloride's is set by a transporter whose expression the cell changes over development, over hours of activity, and over the course of disease.

Movable names the property that makes it interesting; Sign names what actually moves, since the direction of an inhibitory current is what is at stake.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The chloride ion is the current carrier of the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor and the glycine receptor, which together mediate essentially all fast inhibition in the human nervous system.

What it does that no other ion does is change its own sign of effect: the same receptor, opened at the same membrane potential, produces hyperpolarisation in one cell and depolarisation in another, purely because the two cells run different transporters.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Chloride lives at about 115 to 130 millimolar in cerebrospinal fluid and interstitium and at about 5 to 10 millimolar inside mature central neurons, rising to 20 to 40 millimolar in immature neurons and in some mature cell types.

Critically, it also lives in local pools rather than as a single cell-wide value, because small dendritic compartments load and unload chloride on their own timescale, so a single neuron can be running different chloride reversal potentials in different dendrites at the same moment.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

With 120 millimolar outside and 7 millimolar inside, the Nernst equation at 37 degrees Celsius gives a chloride reversal potential of about minus 76 millivolts, and mature values across the literature run from about minus 70 to minus 85 millivolts.

The gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor is also permeable to bicarbonate, whose reversal potential is about minus 10 millivolts, and bicarbonate carries roughly a fifth of the current, which pulls the effective reversal potential of the receptor several millivolts positive to the pure chloride value and matters greatly during intense activation.

That bicarbonate contribution is the reason that intense gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor activation can become frankly depolarising even in a mature neuron with normal chloride handling, which is an under-appreciated point and one the corpus considers well established.

KCC2 extrudes chloride using the potassium gradient and has essentially no thermodynamic margin, since the potassium and chloride gradients are close to balanced, which means that any rise in extracellular potassium immediately weakens chloride extrusion.

That coupling links this chapter directly to Chapter 14: during intense activity, extracellular potassium rises, chloride extrusion weakens, chloride accumulates, and inhibition fails, all as a single connected cascade rather than as three separate problems.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ hyperpolarising_mature - The Working Brake - reversal potential about minus 76 millivolts, below rest, current inward-negative and stabilising.

◦ shunting_isopotential - The Silent Veto - reversal potential within a few millivolts of the momentary membrane potential, so conductance dominates and current is negligible.

◦ depolarising_immature - The Developmental Accelerator - reversal potential about minus 45 millivolts, above rest.

◦ activity_loaded - The Fatigued Brake - reversal potential drifting positive within seconds of intense inhibitory input.

◦ pathologically_shifted - The Reversed Brake - a lasting positive shift from KCC2 downregulation, seen after nerve injury, in epileptic tissue and around tumours.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ hyperpolarising_mature: inhibitory postsynaptic potentials of about 1 to 5 millivolts at rest, with the conductance change mattering more than the voltage change (well established).

◦ shunting_isopotential: current near zero, input resistance falling by a factor of two or more, dividing concurrent excitation proportionally (well established).

◦ depolarising_immature: depolarising responses of 5 to 20 millivolts; whether these are net excitatory in the intact animal is disputed, as set out in Chapter 9 (contested).

◦ activity_loaded: reversal potential shifting positive by 5 to 15 millivolts during a second of high-frequency inhibitory input to a small compartment (well established).

◦ pathologically_shifted: lasting shifts of 10 to 20 millivolts positive, converting inhibition to shunting or excitation (well established in animal models and in resected human epileptic tissue).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ hyperpolarising_mature to activity_loaded: high-frequency inhibitory input into a small volume; hundreds of milliseconds to seconds.

◦ activity_loaded to hyperpolarising_mature: KCC2 extrusion after activity ceases; seconds.

◦ hyperpolarising_mature to pathologically_shifted: brain-derived neurotrophic factor signalling through TrkB downregulating KCC2, typically driven by microglial activation; hours to days.

◦ depolarising_immature to hyperpolarising_mature: developmental KCC2 upregulation; about two postnatal weeks in rodents, with human timing inferred rather than measured.

◦ Any mode to shunting_isopotential: the membrane potential coinciding with the reversal potential; continuously.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: a chloride reversal potential above the action potential threshold.

◦ Warning condition: rising extracellular potassium, which weakens KCC2 and therefore couples excitatory overload directly to inhibitory failure.

◦ Watchdog: KCC2 expression and surface stability, the small size of inhibitory conductances relative to the compartment, and the bicarbonate buffering system.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

The developmental account and its dispute were set out in full in Chapter 9 and are not repeated here; this chapter records only the operational consequence, which is that any model of a developing circuit must treat the chloride reversal potential as a state variable rather than a parameter.

The corpus also records that the human developmental timing of the KCC2 switch is the single most important unmeasured quantity in this pair of chapters, and that resolving it would immediately clarify whether the negative bumetanide trials failed because the mechanism is wrong or because the window had already closed.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

Inhibition is the corpus's principal mechanism of selection, competition and timing at Layers 8 and 9, and this chapter says that inhibition's sign and strength are adjustable in ways excitation's are not.

It also gives the corpus a mechanism for a phenomenon its clinical chapters describe repeatedly, namely that networks fail into seizure without any cell dying, since a transporter's expression level can convert a stable network into an unstable one and back.

For a cognitive architect the lesson is uncomfortable and useful: a design that assumes inhibition is a reliable negative weight is assuming something biology does not guarantee.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 potassium gradient, which powers KCC2 and therefore sets extrusion capacity.

◦ Layer 4 KCC2 and NKCC1 expression, surface stability and phosphorylation.

◦ Layer 7 gamma-aminobutyric acid and glycine receptor activation.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 6 inhibitory current and its sign.

◦ Layer 6 membrane conductance, as the shunt.

◦ Layer 8 stability margin, published as the effective strength of every inhibitory motif.

• STATE.

◦ Chloride reversal potential, observable by gramicidin perforated-patch recording, about minus 70 to minus 85 millivolts in mature neurons.

◦ Local intracellular chloride, observable with genetically encoded ratiometric chloride sensors.

◦ KCC2 surface expression, observable by immunostaining and by biotinylation.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Interstitial chloride about 115 to 130 millimolar; mature intracellular 5 to 10 millimolar; immature 20 to 40 millimolar.

◦ Mature reversal potential about minus 70 to minus 85 millivolts; immature about minus 40 to minus 50 millivolts.

◦ Bicarbonate reversal potential about minus 10 millivolts, carrying roughly 20 percent of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor current.

◦ Activity-induced positive shift, 5 to 15 millivolts within a second in a small compartment.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Chloride loading in a spine or thin dendrite, hundreds of milliseconds.

◦ KCC2 extrusion recovery, seconds.

◦ Activity-dependent KCC2 downregulation, hours to days.

◦ Developmental switch, about two postnatal weeks in rodents; human timing not directly measured.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ The reversal potential drifting positive faster than extrusion can restore it, which converts inhibition first to shunting and then to excitation, and which is the accepted mechanism of benzodiazepine failure in prolonged status epilepticus.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Status epilepticus becomes refractory to benzodiazepines within roughly 30 minutes in animal models and in clinical experience, through the combination of chloride loading described here and receptor internalisation, which is why current guidelines emphasise early treatment and early escalation to agents acting on other targets.

Neuropathic pain following nerve injury involves microglial release of brain-derived neurotrophic factor, TrkB signalling and KCC2 downregulation in the dorsal horn, converting inhibitory input into excitatory input, which is the mechanistic account of allodynia.

Peritumoral epilepsy in glioma is associated with altered chloride transporter expression in surrounding neurons, which is a striking instance of a tumour changing the sign of inhibition in tissue it has not invaded.

SLC12A5 mutations cause epilepsy of infancy with migrating focal seizures, which is the single-gene demonstration of the whole chapter.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The operationally important number is the seconds-long chloride extrusion time constant, because it means inhibition has a memory of its own recent use, which excitation does not.

The therapeutically important number is the roughly 30 minutes to benzodiazepine refractoriness in status epilepticus, which turns a physiological time constant into a treatment protocol.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show how the sign of inhibition follows the transporter rather than the receptor.
Create a number variable called external chloride with initial value 120 millimolar.
Create a text variable called dominant transporter, either KCC2 or NKCC1.
Create a number variable called internal chloride, set to 7 millimolar if the dominant transporter is KCC2 and to 30 millimolar if it is NKCC1.
Create a number variable called membrane potential with initial value minus 65 millivolts.
For each of the two transporter settings, perform the following actions.
    Compute the chloride reversal potential using the Nernst slope with a sign reversal for a negative ion.
    Compute the effective reversal potential by mixing four parts chloride with one part bicarbonate at minus 10 millivolts.
    Compute the driving force as the membrane potential minus the effective reversal potential.
    Report whether opening the receptor hyperpolarises, shunts, or depolarises the cell.
End the loop.
Report both results side by side to show that the receptor did not change.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the point that the receptor is identical in both cases is easiest to make by writing the receptor once and changing only the transporter.

'''The sign of inhibition follows the transporter, not the receptor.
Bicarbonate carries roughly 20 percent of GABA-A current with a reversal
potential near -10 mV, which pulls the effective reversal positive.'''
import math
from operator import mul

CL_OUT, VM, HCO3_REV, SLOPE = 120.0, -65.0, -10.0, 61.54
for name, cl_in in [("KCC2 dominant (mature)", 7.0), ("NKCC1 dominant (immature)", 30.0)]:
    e_cl = mul(-SLOPE, math.log10(CL_OUT / cl_in))
    e_eff = mul(0.8, e_cl) + mul(0.2, HCO3_REV)
    drive = VM - e_eff
    verdict = "hyperpolarises" if drive < -2 else ("depolarises" if drive > 2 else "shunts only")
    print("%-28s E_Cl %6.1f  E_eff %6.1f  drive %+6.1f  -> %s"
          % (name, e_cl, e_eff, drive, verdict))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only ion in this dossier whose sign of physiological effect is a setting rather than a fact, so that the same receptor is a brake, a divider, or an accelerator depending on a transporter the cell can change.


CHAPTER 17. THE PROTON AND pH (The Steepest Gradient) (COG)

The proton is the smallest ion, it is present at the lowest concentration of anything in this dossier, and it is maintained across the steepest gradients in the cell.

It is also the most under-rated signal in the corpus, because it loads every synaptic vesicle, gates a family of receptors, and forms the oldest closed loop in the nervous system, which is the control of breathing by carbon dioxide.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A proton is a hydrogen atom stripped of its electron, which in water is never actually free but travels as a charge defect through the hydrogen-bond network, hopping from molecule to molecule far faster than any other ion moves.

What it does in the nervous system is four things: it powers the loading of every neurotransmitter into every vesicle, it is the signal read by acid-sensing ion channels, it is the intermediate through which carbon dioxide is sensed, and it is the currency of the mitochondrial gradient described in Chapter 2.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Arterial blood is held at pH 7.35 to 7.45, cerebrospinal fluid at about 7.31 to 7.33, and the neuronal cytosol at about 7.0 to 7.2.

The most extreme address is the synaptic vesicle interior, held at roughly pH 5.2 to 5.7 by a proton-pumping adenosine triphosphatase, which is a proton concentration roughly one to two hundred times that of the cytosol.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

At pH 7.2 the free proton concentration is about 63 nanomolar, which is roughly a millionth of the sodium concentration and about the same as resting free calcium, and this is worth stating plainly because pH's logarithmic notation disguises how few protons there actually are.

The proton's mobility in water is anomalously high because it moves by the Grotthuss mechanism, hopping along hydrogen bonds rather than physically diffusing, which is why its diffusion coefficient is about 9.3 times 10 to the power minus 9 square metres per second, about five times that of sodium.

The vesicular proton gradient has two components, a chemical gradient of roughly 1.5 to 2 pH units and an electrical gradient, together constituting a proton motive force whose total is commonly quoted around 150 to 180 millivolts, and different transmitters draw on the two components in different proportions: the vesicular glutamate transporter uses mainly the electrical component, while the vesicular monoamine transporter exchanges two protons for each monoamine and uses mainly the chemical component.

That difference is not a detail: it means that anything altering vesicular pH changes monoamine loading much more than glutamate loading, which is the mechanistic basis of how amphetamine and reserpine act.

On release, the acidic vesicle contents transiently acidify the synaptic cleft by roughly 0.1 to 0.6 pH units for tens of milliseconds, and this transient is itself a signal at some synapses, notably in the retina where it mediates lateral feedback from horizontal cells to cones.

Acid-sensing ion channels open at half-maximal pH values of roughly 6.2 to 6.8 depending on subunit, and ASIC1a in the amygdala has been implicated in fear behaviour by Wemmie and colleagues, with carbon dioxide inhalation provoking panic in a manner consistent with acid sensing, though the corpus notes that the human evidence is suggestive rather than definitive.

Carbonic anhydrase, the enzyme that interconverts carbon dioxide and bicarbonate, has a turnover number of the order of 10 to the power 6 per second, making it one of the fastest enzymes known and effectively instantaneous on any physiological timescale.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ cytosolic_regulated - The Defended Interior - neuronal pH 7.0 to 7.2, held by sodium-proton exchangers and bicarbonate transporters.

◦ vesicular_acidic - The Loading Gradient - vesicle interior pH 5.2 to 5.7, maintained by the vacuolar proton adenosine triphosphatase.

◦ cleft_transient - The Released Acid - a 0.1 to 0.6 pH unit acidification of the cleft for tens of milliseconds after fusion.

◦ activity_acidified - The Working Tissue - extracellular pH falling by 0.1 to 0.3 units during intense activity as metabolic acid is produced.

◦ chemoreceptive - The Breathing Loop - central chemoreceptors reading cerebrospinal fluid pH as a proxy for arterial carbon dioxide.

◦ ischaemic_acidosis - The Failed Buffer - tissue pH falling to 6.0 to 6.5 in ischaemia, activating acid-sensing channels and contributing to injury.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ cytosolic_regulated: pH held within about 0.1 units by transporters with a steep dependence on internal pH (well established).

◦ vesicular_acidic: 1.5 to 2 pH units of chemical gradient; vesicular monoamine transporter exchanges two protons per monoamine, vesicular glutamate transporter uses mainly the membrane potential component (well established).

◦ cleft_transient: 0.1 to 0.6 pH units for tens of milliseconds; established at the ribbon synapses of the retina, less firmly established as a general signalling mechanism elsewhere (moderate confidence).

◦ activity_acidified: 0.1 to 0.3 units, recovering over seconds to tens of seconds (well established).

◦ chemoreceptive: the ventilatory response to carbon dioxide is roughly 2 to 3 litres per minute per millimetre of mercury of arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure in healthy adults, with substantial individual variation (well established, with wide normal range).

◦ ischaemic_acidosis: pH 6.0 to 6.5; acid-sensing channel activation contributes to injury and is a candidate therapeutic target (well established in animal models, not yet translated).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ cytosolic_regulated to activity_acidified: sustained firing and metabolic acid production; seconds.

◦ activity_acidified to cytosolic_regulated: washout by blood flow and buffering; tens of seconds.

◦ vesicular_acidic to cleft_transient: vesicle fusion; sub-millisecond release, tens of milliseconds of transient.

◦ Any mode to chemoreceptive activation: a rise in arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure crossing the blood-brain barrier as dissolved gas and acidifying cerebrospinal fluid; seconds to a minute, which is why the ventilatory response to carbon dioxide is fast but not instantaneous.

◦ activity_acidified to ischaemic_acidosis: blood flow failure; minutes.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: arterial pH outside 7.2 to 7.55, at which consciousness is measurably affected.

◦ Warning condition: a rising arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure with a falling respiratory rate, which is impending respiratory failure.

◦ Watchdog: the bicarbonate buffer system, carbonic anhydrase, the renal compensation that adjusts bicarbonate over days, and the central chemoreceptors of the retrotrapezoid nucleus.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

The central chemoreceptors of the retrotrapezoid nucleus depend on the transcription factor PHOX2B, and heterozygous PHOX2B mutations cause congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, in which affected individuals fail to increase ventilation in response to carbon dioxide and stop breathing adequately during sleep.

That disorder is the corpus's cleanest single-gene demonstration that a chemical set-point is built by a developmental programme, and it is also the clearest evidence that the carbon dioxide loop is genuinely a proton loop, since the receptor neurons respond to acidification.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

Every transmitter in Chapter 19 is loaded into its vesicle by this gradient, so the whole of the corpus's Layer 7 volume rests on a proton pump.

The carbon dioxide loop is, in the corpus's terms, the oldest closed control loop in the nervous system, older than vision and older than movement, and it is the template for every homeostatic loop the Layer 11 volume catalogues.

And the proton supplies an important negative lesson: because pH must be defended within a tenth of a unit, the brain cannot use pH as a large-dynamic-range signal, which is why proton signalling is confined to small, fast, local transients and to a single slow global loop.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 11 arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure, normally about 35 to 45 millimetres of mercury.

◦ Layer 3 metabolic acid production, which scales with activity.

◦ Layer 5 vacuolar proton adenosine triphosphatase activity, powered by adenosine triphosphate.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 5 vesicular transmitter loading, as the driving force for every vesicular transporter.

◦ Layer 7 cleft acidification transient, as a feedback signal at some synapses.

◦ Layer 10 ventilatory drive, through the central chemoreceptors.

◦ Layer 6 acid-sensing channel current, as a fast excitatory signal in acidic conditions.

• STATE.

◦ Arterial pH and carbon dioxide partial pressure, routinely measurable by blood gas analysis.

◦ Intracellular pH, observable with pH-sensitive fluorescent indicators, 7.0 to 7.2.

◦ Vesicular pH, observable with the pH-sensitive fluorescent protein pHluorin targeted to the vesicle lumen, which is the standard modern method for watching release directly.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Arterial pH 7.35 to 7.45; cerebrospinal fluid pH about 7.31 to 7.33; neuronal cytosol 7.0 to 7.2; vesicle lumen 5.2 to 5.7.

◦ Free proton concentration at pH 7.2, about 63 nanomolar.

◦ Total vesicular proton motive force, commonly quoted around 150 to 180 millivolts.

◦ Acid-sensing ion channel half-maximal activation pH, about 6.2 to 6.8 depending on subunit.

◦ Carbonic anhydrase turnover, of the order of 10 to the power 6 per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Proton hopping in water, sub-picosecond per hop.

◦ Cleft acidification transient, tens of milliseconds.

◦ Vesicle reacidification after endocytosis, about 3 to 5 seconds.

◦ Ventilatory response to a step change in carbon dioxide, seconds to about a minute.

◦ Renal compensation for a chronic acid-base disturbance, days.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Acid-base failure in either direction produces encephalopathy, and the specific failure of the chemoreceptive loop, as in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome or opioid overdose, produces apnoea, which is the most rapidly fatal failure mode in this entire dossier.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, from PHOX2B mutations, is failure of the carbon dioxide loop and requires lifelong assisted ventilation during sleep.

Opioid overdose kills by suppressing exactly this loop, and naloxone works by restoring it, which makes it the most directly life-saving intervention derived from any chapter in this dossier.

Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors including acetazolamide are used in idiopathic intracranial hypertension, in altitude sickness and as anticonvulsants, and topiramate and zonisamide have carbonic anhydrase inhibition among their actions.

Hepatic encephalopathy, diabetic ketoacidosis and respiratory failure all produce altered consciousness through acid-base and ammonia disturbance, and the corpus notes that pH is one of the few laboratory values that predicts conscious level directly.

Panic disorder's provocation by carbon dioxide inhalation is well replicated, and the acid-sensing channel account of it is plausible and incompletely proven; what would settle it is a selective human ASIC1a antagonist, which does not yet exist.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The chapter spans sub-picosecond proton hops to days of renal compensation, and the operationally important middle is the seconds-to-a-minute ventilatory response, which is the fastest whole-body homeostatic loop the corpus catalogues.

The other decisive number is the 3 to 5 seconds of vesicle reacidification, because it places a floor under how fast a synapse can recycle a vesicle and therefore contributes to synaptic depression at high rates.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make plain how few protons there actually are, which the logarithmic pH scale hides.
Create a number variable called pH value.
Create a number variable called Avogadro's number with initial value 6.02214076 times 10 to the power 23.
Create a number variable called vesicle volume with initial value the volume of a sphere of radius 20 nanometres.
For each pH value in a list covering blood, cytosol and vesicle interior, perform the following actions.
    Compute the proton concentration as ten raised to the power of minus pH value, in moles per litre.
    Convert that concentration to nanomolar.
    Compute the number of free protons in one synaptic vesicle at that concentration.
    Record the pH, the concentration, and the count.
End the loop.
Report the number of free protons inside a single synaptic vesicle, and comment that the gradient is maintained on a handful of particles.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the number of free protons inside a synaptic vesicle is genuinely startling and is the fastest way to understand why proton signalling must be local.

'''How few protons there are. Vesicle interior pH 5.2 to 5.7; cytosol
7.0 to 7.2; arterial blood 7.35 to 7.45. Vesicle radius about 20 nm.'''
import math
from operator import mul
from functools import reduce

NA = 6.02214076e23
r_m = 20e-9
volume_L = reduce(mul, [4.0 / 3.0, math.pi, r_m, r_m, r_m, 1000.0])
for label, ph in [("arterial blood", 7.40), ("neuronal cytosol", 7.10),
                  ("vesicle interior", 5.50)]:
    conc = math.pow(10.0, -ph)
    count = reduce(mul, [conc, volume_L, NA])
    print("%-18s pH %.2f   %8.1f nM   %6.3f free protons per vesicle volume"
          % (label, ph, mul(conc, 1e9), count))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only ion in this dossier that is never actually free, moves by hopping rather than travelling, is present at nanomolar concentration, and nonetheless loads every neurotransmitter vesicle in the brain and decides when you take your next breath.


CHAPTER 18. ADENOSINE TRIPHOSPHATE, THE ENERGY CURRENCY (The Denominated Bill) (COG)

Every energetic transaction in the nervous system is priced in one molecule, and the price is not the one printed in the textbook.

The standard free energy of hydrolysis quoted in every biochemistry course is a laboratory condition that no living cell is ever in, and the real number inside a neuron is roughly twice as large, which matters whenever anyone tries to compute how much a thought costs.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Adenosine triphosphate, abbreviated ATP, is a nucleotide carrying three phosphate groups in series, and the energy is released by hydrolysing the terminal one to give adenosine diphosphate and inorganic phosphate.

What it does is pay: for the sodium-potassium pump of Chapter 13, for the calcium pumps of Chapter 15, for the vesicular proton pump of Chapter 17, for every kinase of Chapter 5, and for the synthesis of everything.

It also does something the textbooks mention late: it is released into the extracellular space and acts as a transmitter in its own right on the P2X and P2Y receptor families, and its breakdown product adenosine is the accumulating signal of sleep pressure.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Intracellular ATP is roughly 1 to 10 millimolar, with neurons commonly cited around 2 to 4 millimolar, while adenosine diphosphate is much lower at roughly 10 to 50 micromolar and inorganic phosphate is roughly 1 to 5 millimolar.

It is made almost entirely in mitochondria under normal conditions and is not stored in any meaningful quantity, so the brain runs on continuous production with a buffer measured in seconds.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

The standard free energy of hydrolysis at pH 7 and one molar concentrations is about minus 30.5 kilojoules per mole, and this is the number in the textbooks.

The actual free energy available inside a living cell is about minus 50 to minus 60 kilojoules per mole, because the ratio of ATP to the product of adenosine diphosphate and phosphate is held enormously far from equilibrium, and it is this in-cell value that must be used in any energy calculation.

The corpus states this explicitly because using the standard value understates the cost of every process in the brain by a factor of about two, and that error propagates into every estimate of how many operations a brain performs per joule.

The synthase that makes it is driven by the proton gradient of Chapter 2, and the stoichiometry is set by the size of its rotating ring: the human enzyme has an eight-membered ring and makes three molecules per revolution, so it costs about 2.7 protons per molecule at the synthase, rising to roughly 3.7 to 4 protons per molecule delivered to the cytosol once the transport of the product out of the mitochondrion is included.

The brain is about 2 percent of body mass and consumes about 20 percent of the body's resting oxygen and energy, which is the most quoted number in the whole of neuroenergetics and is well established.

Attwell and Laughlin, 2001, apportioned grey matter signalling energy as roughly 47 percent to action potentials, 34 percent to postsynaptic glutamate receptor currents, 13 percent to the resting potential and 3 percent to glutamate recycling; Howarth, Gleeson and Attwell, 2012, revised this using measured sodium influx during action potentials, which is lower than the original theoretical estimate, so the action potential share falls and the synaptic share rises, and their treatment puts non-signalling housekeeping at around a quarter of total cortical energy use.

The corpus records both allocations and states that the direction of the revision is the useful part: the dominant cost of cognition is synaptic, not axonal.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ replete - The Paid Account - ATP near 2 to 4 millimolar, adenosine diphosphate low, the phosphorylation potential high, all pumps running.

◦ demand_matched - The Working Account - production raised to match activity by increases in blood flow and mitochondrial activity, with ATP concentration itself barely changing.

◦ glycolytic_bridging - The Overdraft - anaerobic glycolysis supplying ATP transiently at low yield with lactate as the product.

◦ depleted - The Called Account - ATP falling, pumps failing, gradients collapsing, which is the state of Chapter 13's collapsed mode.

◦ extracellular_signalling - The Spent Coin as Message - ATP released into the extracellular space acting on purinergic receptors.

◦ adenosine_accumulated - The Debt Signal - adenosine building through waking and acting on A1 and A2A receptors to promote sleep.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ replete: in-cell free energy about minus 50 to minus 60 kilojoules per mole (well established, and distinct from the standard minus 30.5).

◦ demand_matched: ATP concentration is a poor indicator of demand because it is buffered; oxygen consumption and blood flow are the observable variables (well established).

◦ glycolytic_bridging: 2 molecules of ATP per glucose against about 30 to 32 by full oxidation, so the overdraft is expensive in substrate (well established, with the exact aerobic yield depending on the disputed proton stoichiometries of Chapter 2).

◦ depleted: pump failure within seconds to a minute of complete supply failure; anoxic depolarisation at 1 to 3 minutes (well established).

◦ extracellular_signalling: P2X receptors are fast ionotropic channels and P2Y receptors are slower G-protein-coupled receptors; P2X7 requires high concentrations and is principally a damage signal on microglia (well established).

◦ adenosine_accumulated: basal forebrain extracellular adenosine rises through prolonged waking and falls in sleep, reported by Porkka-Heiskanen and colleagues, 1997, in Science; the corpus grades adenosine as a genuine contributor to sleep pressure but not as the sole homeostat, since sleep pressure persists in the face of manipulations that should abolish it if adenosine were the whole story (moderate confidence).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ replete to demand_matched: neural activity raising demand, met by neurovascular coupling; 1 to 6 seconds, which is the haemodynamic response of Chapter 22.

◦ demand_matched to glycolytic_bridging: demand exceeding oxygen delivery; seconds.

◦ Any mode to depleted: circulatory arrest or severe hypoglycaemia; seconds to minutes.

◦ replete to extracellular_signalling: vesicular co-release, or release through channels, or leakage from damaged cells; milliseconds to seconds.

◦ extracellular_signalling to adenosine_accumulated: sequential hydrolysis by the ectonucleotidases CD39 and CD73; seconds to minutes, and over a waking day this becomes the sleep pressure signal.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: a rising adenosine monophosphate to ATP ratio, which is what the cellular energy sensor AMP-activated protein kinase reads.

◦ Warning condition: lactate rising in tissue or in the cerebrospinal fluid.

◦ Watchdog: AMP-activated protein kinase, creatine phosphate as a small fast buffer, neurovascular coupling, and adenosine itself, which both dilates vessels and suppresses activity, making it an elegant negative feedback on demand.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

The developing brain's energy use per unit mass peaks in mid-childhood, with positron emission tomography studies showing glucose metabolism substantially above adult levels between roughly age four and ten, a finding usually attributed to the cost of synaptic overproduction before pruning.

Mitochondrial biogenesis and positioning at synapses is an activity-dependent developmental process, catalogued in the Layer 4 and 5 dossier as the mitochondrial provisioning system.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

This chapter supplies the corpus's single most important design constraint: everything the brain does, it does within a fixed power budget of roughly 20 watts for the whole organ, and every construct in the upper volumes is competing for that.

It also supplies the corpus's cleanest example of a substrate molecule becoming a signal, since ATP and adenosine are the same chemical lineage acting as currency, transmitter and homeostatic signal, which is an economy that no engineered system would design but that biology arrives at repeatedly.

And through adenosine it reaches Layer 11 directly, since sleep pressure, one of the corpus's principal global state variables, is in part the accumulated residue of having spent energy.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 oxygen and glucose, delivered continuously as set out in Chapter 22.

◦ Layer 2 iron and copper, as the electron carriers of the chain that makes it.

◦ Layer 6 neural activity, as the demand signal.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 free energy, at about minus 50 to minus 60 kilojoules per mole in cellular conditions.

◦ Layer 7 purinergic transmission, through P2X and P2Y receptors.

◦ Layer 11 sleep pressure, through adenosine acting on A1 and A2A receptors.

◦ Layer 10 vasodilation, through adenosine acting on vascular receptors.

• STATE.

◦ Intracellular ATP, about 2 to 4 millimolar in neurons, observable with genetically encoded ATP sensors.

◦ Phosphocreatine to ATP ratio, observable non-invasively by phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy.

◦ Extracellular adenosine, observable by microdialysis and by biosensor, rising through prolonged waking.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Standard free energy of hydrolysis about minus 30.5 kilojoules per mole; in-cell value about minus 50 to minus 60 kilojoules per mole.

◦ Intracellular ATP 1 to 10 millimolar, neurons about 2 to 4 millimolar; adenosine diphosphate 10 to 50 micromolar; inorganic phosphate 1 to 5 millimolar.

◦ Protons per ATP at the synthase, about 2.7; per ATP delivered to the cytosol, about 3.7 to 4.

◦ Brain share of resting body energy use, about 20 percent, on about 2 percent of body mass; whole-brain power roughly 20 watts.

◦ Energy budget allocation, per Attwell and Laughlin 2001 and revised by Howarth and colleagues 2012, with the revision moving the largest share from action potentials to synaptic processes.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ ATP turnover in an active neuron, of the order of seconds for the whole pool.

◦ Phosphocreatine buffer, sufficient for seconds.

◦ Neurovascular response to raised demand, 1 to 6 seconds.

◦ Adenosine accumulation through waking, hours; caffeine's plasma half-life, about 5 hours, which is why an afternoon coffee affects night-time sleep.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Supply failure produces pump failure within a minute and irreversible injury within minutes, and because there is no meaningful store, the failure is immediate rather than gradual, which is the defining feature of the brain among organs.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

The mitochondrial encephalomyopathies of Chapter 2 are the inherited failures of production, and they present neurologically first because the brain has the least tolerance.

Hypoglycaemia below roughly 2.8 millimoles per litre produces confusion and below about 1.5 millimoles per litre produces seizures and coma, and it is the most common preventable metabolic cause of neurological emergency.

Caffeine, the most widely consumed psychoactive substance in the world, works by antagonising adenosine A1 and A2A receptors, which makes this chapter the pharmacological basis of most of humanity's daily arousal management.

Adenosine is used clinically to terminate supraventricular tachycardia, and the profound transient sense of doom patients report is a striking demonstration of a metabolic intermediate acting as a signal.

Purinergic P2X7 receptor signalling on microglia is a well-supported component of neuroinflammation and a target of continuing drug development.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The chapter's decisive number is that the brain's energy buffer is measured in seconds, which is why every other timescale in this chapter, from the 1 to 6 second haemodynamic response to the minutes-long ischaemic window, is organised around resupply rather than storage.

The slowest number is the hours-long accumulation of adenosine through waking, and the contrast between a currency with a seconds-long buffer and a debt signal with an hours-long accumulation is the whole architecture of this chapter.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the real free energy available from the energy currency inside a cell, rather than the textbook standard value.
Create a number variable called standard free energy with initial value minus 30.5 kilojoules per mole.
Create a number variable called gas constant with initial value 8.314 joules per mole per kelvin.
Create a number variable called temperature with initial value 310.15 kelvin.
Create a number variable called adenosine triphosphate concentration with initial value 3 millimolar.
Create a number variable called adenosine diphosphate concentration with initial value 30 micromolar.
Create a number variable called phosphate concentration with initial value 3 millimolar.
Compute the mass action ratio as adenosine diphosphate concentration times phosphate concentration divided by adenosine triphosphate concentration, all expressed in molar units.
Compute the actual free energy as standard free energy plus gas constant times temperature times the natural logarithm of the mass action ratio.
Report the standard value, the actual value, and the ratio between them.
Repeat the calculation for a depleted cell with adenosine diphosphate raised tenfold, and report how much the available energy falls.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the gap between the textbook value and the real one is the most consequential single correction in this chapter, and it is four lines of arithmetic.

'''Real versus standard free energy of ATP hydrolysis. Standard value
-30.5 kJ/mol at 1 M; in-cell values -50 to -60 kJ/mol because the
mass action ratio is held far from equilibrium.'''
import math
from operator import mul

DG0, R, T = -30500.0, 8.314, 310.15
def dg(atp, adp, pi):
    q = mul(adp, pi) / atp
    return (DG0 + mul(mul(R, T), math.log(q))) / 1000.0

print("standard (1 M all species):", DG0 / 1000.0, "kJ/mol")
print("resting neuron            :", round(dg(3e-3, 30e-6, 3e-3), 1), "kJ/mol")
print("energy-stressed neuron    :", round(dg(2e-3, 300e-6, 5e-3), 1), "kJ/mol")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only molecule in this dossier that is simultaneously the unit of account for every process above it, a fast transmitter in its own right, and, through its breakdown product, the accumulating record of how long you have been awake.


CHAPTER 19. THE SMALL-MOLECULE NEUROTRANSMITTERS, AS MOLECULES (The Messages Considered as Chemistry) (COG)

The corpus's upper volumes treat glutamate, gamma-aminobutyric acid, acetylcholine and the monoamines as signals with meanings.

This chapter treats them as what they physically are: small organic molecules with masses, synthetic routes, dietary precursors, packaging arrangements and disposal enzymes, none of which the meaning depends on but all of which constrain it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are the classical small-molecule transmitters, and the corpus groups them here strictly by chemistry rather than by function.

Glutamate and aspartate are amino acids used directly; gamma-aminobutyric acid and glycine are amino acids or their derivatives used as inhibitory transmitters; acetylcholine is an ester of choline; and dopamine, noradrenaline, adrenaline, serotonin and histamine are the monoamines, made by decarboxylating an amino acid.

What they do, considered as chemistry, is be concentrated into a vesicle against a gradient, released into a gap, bound briefly, and then either destroyed or recaptured, all within a few tens of milliseconds.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Glutamate is the most abundant amino acid in the brain, at roughly 10 to 12 micromoles per gram of tissue, and it is present in every cell because it is a metabolic intermediate as well as a transmitter, which is the single most important complication in this chapter.

The monoamines are made in small, anatomically discrete nuclei catalogued in the corpus's Layer 9 volume, and are distributed by extremely widely branching axons, so a few tens of thousands of cells modulate the whole forebrain.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

The molecular masses are small and worth stating, because they set diffusion rates: glutamate 147.13, gamma-aminobutyric acid 103.12, glycine 75.07, acetylcholine 146.21, dopamine 153.18, noradrenaline 169.18, serotonin 176.21 and histamine 111.15 grams per mole.

Vesicular concentrations are high and imprecisely known: glutamate in a small clear vesicle is commonly quoted at roughly 60 to 250 millimolar and acetylcholine at roughly 100 to 300 millimolar, giving on the order of 4000 to 10,000 molecules per vesicle, and the corpus notes that these figures derive from indirect estimates and that the range reflects real uncertainty rather than sloppiness.

On release, cleft glutamate reaches roughly 1 to 3 millimolar for well under a millisecond before diffusion and transport clear it, which is why fast receptors must be low-affinity and physically close.

The ambient extracellular glutamate concentration is a place where the corpus must record a large and unresolved disagreement: microdialysis measurements give values of roughly 2 to 25 micromolar, while electrophysiological estimates based on receptor occupancy give values around 25 to 100 nanomolar, a discrepancy of two to three orders of magnitude.

The corpus does not average these and states the reason for the disagreement: microdialysis samples a volume that includes damaged tissue and does not distinguish the synaptic from the non-synaptic pool, while receptor-based estimates are model-dependent; what would settle it is a genuinely non-invasive, fast, spatially resolved glutamate sensor, and the recent generation of genetically encoded glutamate sensors is the most promising route.

Synthesis is where the elements of Part Two reappear: glutamate decarboxylase, which makes gamma-aminobutyric acid, requires pyridoxal phosphate derived from vitamin B6; tyrosine hydroxylase requires iron and tetrahydrobiopterin; tryptophan hydroxylase requires the same cofactor; dopamine beta-hydroxylase requires copper and ascorbate; and choline acetyltransferase requires acetyl coenzyme A from metabolism.

Disposal is fast and enzymatic or transport-based: acetylcholinesterase is among the fastest enzymes known, with a turnover number of the order of 10 to the power 4 per second, so acetylcholine is destroyed in the cleft, while glutamate, gamma-aminobutyric acid and the monoamines are recaptured by sodium-coupled transporters and only then metabolised by monoamine oxidase or catechol-O-methyltransferase.

The glutamate-glutamine cycle deserves separate statement: astrocytes take up released glutamate, convert it to the inert glutamine using glutamine synthetase, and return glutamine to neurons, which is how the brain uses its principal metabolic intermediate as a signal without the two roles interfering.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ cytosolic_precursor - The Raw Material - transmitter present in the cytosol as a metabolic species, not yet a signal.

◦ vesicle_loaded - The Packaged Message - concentrated into a vesicle by a proton-driven transporter, at 60 to 300 millimolar.

◦ cleft_released - The Delivered Message - 1 to 3 millimolar for well under a millisecond.

◦ spillover_ambient - The Overheard Message - transmitter escaping the cleft to reach extrasynaptic and neighbouring receptors.

◦ recaptured - The Recycled Message - taken back by a sodium-coupled transporter for reloading.

◦ degraded - The Destroyed Message - hydrolysed or oxidised, requiring resynthesis.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ cytosolic_precursor: glutamate at roughly 5 to 10 millimolar in the neuronal cytosol, which is why cytosolic leak would be catastrophic and why loading must be against a gradient (well established).

◦ vesicle_loaded: vesicular glutamate transporter uses mainly the electrical component of the proton motive force, vesicular monoamine transporter exchanges two protons per monoamine (well established); the absolute vesicular concentration is quoted as a range because estimates differ.

◦ cleft_released: peak 1 to 3 millimolar, cleared within about 1 millisecond by diffusion and astrocytic transport (well established).

◦ spillover_ambient: reaches high-affinity extrasynaptic N-methyl-D-aspartate and metabotropic receptors; the ambient concentration is contested across two to three orders of magnitude (low confidence on the value, high confidence on the phenomenon).

◦ recaptured: transporter turnover is slow, of the order of 10 to 100 per second, so clearance is achieved by having very many transporters rather than fast ones (well established).

◦ degraded: acetylcholinesterase turnover of the order of 10 to the power 4 per second; monoamine oxidase far slower (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ cytosolic_precursor to vesicle_loaded: proton-driven vesicular transport; seconds to tens of seconds to fill a vesicle.

◦ vesicle_loaded to cleft_released: calcium-triggered fusion; under a millisecond after calcium arrival.

◦ cleft_released to recaptured: transporter binding; under a millisecond for the initial buffering, milliseconds for full clearance.

◦ cleft_released to spillover_ambient: saturation or failure of clearance, or high-frequency activity; milliseconds.

◦ recaptured to cytosolic_precursor: released from the transporter; immediately, in the glial case followed by conversion to glutamine over seconds.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: sustained extracellular glutamate sufficient to activate extrasynaptic N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, which is the excitotoxic condition.

◦ Warning condition: failure or reversal of astrocytic glutamate transport, which happens when the sodium gradient of Chapter 13 collapses.

◦ Watchdog: astrocytic EAAT1 and EAAT2, which together account for the great majority of brain glutamate uptake, the glutamine cycle, and the enzymatic destruction of acetylcholine.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Transmitter phenotype is specified developmentally and is generally stable, but the corpus notes the documented phenomenon of activity-dependent transmitter respecification in some populations, which is a genuine exception to the assumption that a cell's transmitter is fixed.

The monoamine systems develop early and innervate the cortex before most cortical connectivity is mature, which is why prenatal exposure to agents acting on them, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and nicotine, is studied so intensively; the corpus records that the human evidence on developmental outcomes remains confounded and inconclusive.

Dietary precursor availability is a genuine but limited lever: tryptophan depletion reliably lowers brain serotonin synthesis and transiently lowers mood in vulnerable individuals, which is well replicated, whereas the claim that ordinary dietary supplementation with tyrosine or choline meaningfully raises transmitter levels or improves cognition in healthy adults is weakly supported and the corpus does not endorse it.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

The whole of the corpus's Layer 7 volume is organised by messenger system, so this chapter is the chemical index to that volume.

Its most important upward contribution is a warning: the same molecule means different things at different receptors, so nothing about a transmitter's chemistry determines its meaning, and the corpus's insistence that the receptor decides the message is a statement that Layer 3 underdetermines Layer 7.

Its second contribution is the reason the brain's principal excitatory signal is a metabolic intermediate: glutamate was available in quantity, and biology used what was to hand, at the cost of needing an elaborate glial cycle to keep the two roles apart.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 12 dietary precursors, tyrosine, tryptophan, choline and vitamin B6.

◦ Layer 2 iron and copper, as hydroxylase cofactors.

◦ Layer 3 vesicular proton gradient, as the loading energy.

◦ Layer 6 action potential, as the release trigger.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 7 cleft transmitter concentration, 1 to 3 millimolar peak for glutamate.

◦ Layer 7 ambient extrasynaptic concentration, contested between nanomolar and micromolar.

◦ Layer 6 astrocytic glutamine supply, as the return leg of the cycle.

• STATE.

◦ Vesicular filling state, observable with pH-sensitive fluorescent proteins and with false transmitter analogues.

◦ Extracellular transmitter concentration, observable by microdialysis, by fast-scan cyclic voltammetry for the catecholamines, and increasingly by genetically encoded fluorescent sensors.

◦ Tissue transmitter content, observable by magnetic resonance spectroscopy for glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Molecular masses: glutamate 147.13, gamma-aminobutyric acid 103.12, glycine 75.07, acetylcholine 146.21, dopamine 153.18, noradrenaline 169.18, serotonin 176.21, histamine 111.15 grams per mole.

◦ Vesicular concentration roughly 60 to 250 millimolar for glutamate, giving roughly 4000 to 10,000 molecules per vesicle.

◦ Cleft peak glutamate 1 to 3 millimolar, cleared within about 1 millisecond.

◦ Ambient extracellular glutamate: about 2 to 25 micromolar by microdialysis against about 25 to 100 nanomolar by receptor-occupancy methods; the corpus records both and averages neither.

◦ Brain glutamate content about 10 to 12 micromoles per gram.

◦ Acetylcholinesterase turnover of the order of 10 to the power 4 per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Vesicle fusion to peak cleft concentration, under 0.1 milliseconds.

◦ Cleft clearance, about 1 millisecond for glutamate.

◦ Acetylcholine hydrolysis in the cleft, under 1 millisecond.

◦ Monoamine reuptake and clearance, tens to hundreds of milliseconds, and much longer in the extrasynaptic volume.

◦ Vesicle refilling, seconds to tens of seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Clearance failure produces spillover, receptor desensitisation and, for glutamate, excitotoxicity; synthesis failure produces the transmitter-specific deficiency syndromes; and irreversible inhibition of acetylcholinesterase, as by organophosphates, produces a cholinergic crisis that is rapidly fatal.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy, from ALDH7A1 mutations impairing the availability of the cofactor of glutamate decarboxylase, is a neonatal epilepsy that stops within minutes of intravenous vitamin B6, and is the most dramatic transmitter-synthesis diagnosis in medicine.

Dopa-responsive dystonia, from GTP cyclohydrolase deficiency impairing tetrahydrobiopterin supply, produces a dystonia that is fully corrected by small doses of levodopa and is otherwise mistaken for cerebral palsy.

Parkinson disease is the loss of one small nucleus's supply of one of these molecules, and its treatment by precursor loading with levodopa is the corpus's clearest demonstration that a Layer 3 shortage can be corrected chemically even when the Layer 6 cells are gone.

Organophosphate and nerve agent poisoning is acetylcholinesterase inhibition, treated with atropine and with oxime reactivators, and it demonstrates the necessity of the fast disposal step.

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, the first effective antidepressants, act on the disposal enzyme, and their interaction with dietary tyramine, the so-called cheese effect, is a direct consequence of the chemistry in this chapter.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The chapter's controlling asymmetry is that release is sub-millisecond and refilling takes seconds, a factor of about ten thousand, which is the ultimate physical basis of synaptic depression at high firing rates.

Its second controlling number is the roughly 1 millisecond clearance of glutamate, which is what makes fast synaptic transmission private rather than broadcast.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show that a synapse's sustainable firing rate is set by vesicle refilling rather than by anything about the receptor.
Create a number variable called readily releasable pool with initial value 10 vesicles.
Create a number variable called refill time constant with initial value 5 seconds.
Create a number variable called release probability with initial value 0.3.
Create a number variable called firing rate, to be varied.
For each firing rate in a range, perform the following actions.
    Set the available pool to the readily releasable pool.
    For each second of simulated time, perform the following actions.
        For each spike in that second, release the available pool times release probability and subtract it.
        Refill the pool toward its maximum with the refill time constant.
    End the inner loop.
    Record the steady-state release per spike as a fraction of the first spike's release.
End the loop.
Report the firing rate at which steady-state release has fallen to half of the initial release.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because synaptic depression is usually presented as a property of the synapse and is better understood as an inevitable consequence of a slow refill step.

'''Sustainable synaptic throughput is set by vesicle refilling.
Readily releasable pool of order 10 vesicles; refilling seconds; release
probability 0.1 to 0.9 depending on synapse type.'''
from operator import mul

MAXPOOL, TAU, P, DT = 10.0, 5.0, 0.3, 0.001
for rate in [1, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100]:
    pool, first, last = MAXPOOL, None, 0.0
    interval = int(1.0 / mul(rate, DT))
    for step in range(5000):
        if step % interval == 0:
            released = mul(pool, P)
            pool -= released
            if first is None:
                first = released
            last = released
        pool += mul(DT / TAU, MAXPOOL - pool)
    print("%4d Hz   steady-state release %.2f of first spike" % (rate, last / first))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only chapter in this dossier whose subject the corpus's own upper volumes treat as meanings, and which insists that considered as chemistry they are nothing of the kind - the message is in the receptor, and the molecule is only a token.


CHAPTER 20. THE GASOTRANSMITTERS (The Signals With No Address) (COG)

Three signalling molecules in the human nervous system have no vesicle, no receptor on the outer face of the membrane, and no reuptake mechanism.

They are gases, they pass straight through membranes, and they act on whatever is close enough, which means their addressing is purely geometric: the recipient is whoever is nearby when the signal is made.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Nitric oxide, carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulphide are small gaseous molecules made on demand by enzymes and destroyed by chemistry rather than by transport.

What nitric oxide does is bind the haem group of soluble guanylyl cyclase and switch it on, raising cyclic guanosine monophosphate, and it is also the corpus's canonical retrograde transmitter, made postsynaptically and acting presynaptically, which is to say it travels backwards across a synapse.

The corpus grades the three very differently, and says so at the outset: nitric oxide is well established as a signalling molecule, carbon monoxide is plausible and much less well supported, and hydrogen sulphide has undergone a major and instructive downward revision of its measured concentrations.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Nitric oxide is made by neuronal nitric oxide synthase in a subset of interneurons and in the postsynaptic density of many excitatory synapses, by endothelial nitric oxide synthase in blood vessels, and by inducible nitric oxide synthase in activated glia.

Carbon monoxide is made by haem oxygenase, of which the constitutive form HO-2 is expressed in neurons, and hydrogen sulphide is made by cystathionine beta-synthase in astrocytes, cystathionine gamma-lyase and the enzyme 3-mercaptopyruvate sulphurtransferase.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

Nitric oxide's diffusion coefficient is about 3.3 times 10 to the power minus 9 square metres per second, similar to water's, and because it crosses membranes freely its diffusion is not slowed by cell boundaries.

Its half-life in tissue is genuinely contested: values from a few milliseconds to several seconds appear in the literature depending on the assumed rate of scavenging by haemoglobin and by other reactants, and the consequent estimates of its effective diffusion radius range from a few micrometres to the frequently quoted 100 to 300 micrometres.

The corpus records this disagreement explicitly, notes that the larger figures come from earlier work with lower assumed scavenging rates, and states that the modern tendency is toward shorter half-lives and smaller radii, but that this is not settled; what would settle it is a direct, calibrated, spatially resolved measurement of nitric oxide concentration in intact tissue, which remains technically out of reach.

Soluble guanylyl cyclase is exquisitely sensitive, with half-maximal activation at roughly 1 to 10 nanomolar nitric oxide, which is one of the highest-affinity signalling interactions in the nervous system and is why very small amounts matter.

Physiological nitric oxide concentrations are correspondingly low and hard to measure, with estimates for basal levels in the low nanomolar range rising perhaps to tens of nanomolar on stimulation, and the corpus flags that these values carry substantial measurement uncertainty.

Carbon monoxide binds haemoglobin roughly 200 to 250 times more avidly than oxygen, which is why it is a poison, and it also activates soluble guanylyl cyclase but with a potency two to three orders of magnitude below nitric oxide, which is the principal reason the corpus grades its transmitter role as weakly supported.

Hydrogen sulphide is the corpus's chosen example of a quantitative correction that a reader should know about: early studies reported brain concentrations of roughly 50 to 160 micromolar, and modern methods that avoid liberating sulphide from bound pools during the measurement give values in the nanomolar range, with one careful mouse study reporting about 14 nanomolar.

That is a downward revision of roughly four orders of magnitude, it invalidates the concentrations used in a large fraction of the earlier experimental literature, and the corpus states it plainly because a reader relying on older reviews would be badly misled; the modern view is that hydrogen sulphide acts largely by persulfidation, meaning the covalent modification of protein cysteine residues, rather than as a freely diffusing gas at micromolar concentration.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ synthesised_on_demand - The Made Signal - produced by an activated enzyme, since none of the three is stored.

◦ volume_diffusing - The Broadcast - spreading isotropically through tissue, ignoring membranes and cell boundaries.

◦ retrograde_acting - The Backwards Message - nitric oxide made postsynaptically and acting on the presynaptic terminal.

◦ scavenged - The Ended Signal - reacted with haemoglobin, with superoxide, or with a thiol.

◦ persulfidating - The Covalent Signal - hydrogen sulphide modifying protein cysteines, which is now considered its principal mode.

◦ pathological_nitrosative - The Damaging Signal - nitric oxide reacting with superoxide to form peroxynitrite, which is directly toxic.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ synthesised_on_demand: neuronal nitric oxide synthase is calcium-calmodulin dependent and physically tethered to the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor by PSD-95, so its activation is coincident with the plasticity signal of Chapter 15 (well established).

◦ volume_diffusing: effective radius contested between a few micrometres and 100 to 300 micrometres (low confidence, and the corpus records both).

◦ retrograde_acting: implicated in some forms of long-term potentiation, with the evidence stronger in some preparations than others (moderate confidence; the corpus notes that retrograde nitric oxide signalling is widely cited and less firmly established than its citation frequency implies).

◦ scavenged: half-life contested from milliseconds to seconds (low confidence).

◦ persulfidating: now regarded as the principal mechanism of hydrogen sulphide action (moderate to good confidence, and a recent consensus rather than an old one).

◦ pathological_nitrosative: peroxynitrite formation is diffusion-limited and irreversible (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ Resting to synthesised_on_demand: calcium entry activating nitric oxide synthase; milliseconds after the calcium signal.

◦ synthesised_on_demand to volume_diffusing: immediately, since there is no packaging step.

◦ volume_diffusing to scavenged: reaction with haemoglobin or superoxide; milliseconds to seconds, and this is the contested number.

◦ volume_diffusing to pathological_nitrosative: coincidence with superoxide, which rises in inflammation and ischaemia; immediate once both are present.

◦ synthesised_on_demand to persulfidating: for hydrogen sulphide, essentially immediate and local.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: nitric oxide and superoxide present together, which converts a signal into a toxin.

◦ Warning condition: inducible nitric oxide synthase expression in activated glia, which produces far higher and sustained concentrations than the neuronal enzyme.

◦ Watchdog: haemoglobin as the principal sink, superoxide dismutase as the competitor for superoxide, and the tight physical tethering of neuronal nitric oxide synthase, which limits where it is made.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Nitric oxide signalling is involved in activity-dependent refinement of developing connections, and neuronal nitric oxide synthase expressing interneurons are among the earliest-generated cortical cells, appearing in the subplate.

Carbon monoxide's constitutive source, haem oxygenase two, is expressed throughout development, but the corpus records no established developmental role for it that would satisfy this dossier's selection rule, and the entry is retained principally because the corpus judges it more useful to explain why a fashionable claim is weakly supported than to omit it.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

The gasotransmitters are the corpus's cleanest example of the framework's economic logic about addressing: a message that needs an address is relayed layer by layer through synapses, and a message that is a broadcast refuses to pay for the relay.

Nitric oxide is also the principal mediator of neurovascular coupling's fast component, which means it is the link between the neural activity of Chapter 22 and the blood flow that functional imaging measures, and any claim about what an imaging signal means passes through this chapter.

And the hydrogen sulphide correction supplies a methodological lesson the corpus wishes recorded: a large experimental literature can be built on a concentration that turns out to be wrong by four orders of magnitude, and the discipline that catches this is measurement, not consensus.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 calcium, activating neuronal nitric oxide synthase through calmodulin.

◦ Layer 3 arginine and oxygen, as the substrates of nitric oxide synthesis.

◦ Layer 3 cysteine and homocysteine, as the substrates of hydrogen sulphide synthesis.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 4 soluble guanylyl cyclase activation and the resulting cyclic guanosine monophosphate rise.

◦ Layer 7 presynaptic modulation, as the retrograde signal.

◦ Layer 10 vasodilation, as the fast component of neurovascular coupling.

◦ Layer 4 protein persulfidation, for hydrogen sulphide.

• STATE.

◦ Nitric oxide concentration, observable with electrochemical microsensors, low nanomolar basally with substantial measurement uncertainty.

◦ Cyclic guanosine monophosphate level, observable with genetically encoded sensors, as the downstream read-out.

◦ Protein persulfidation level, observable by modified biotin-switch assays.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Nitric oxide diffusion coefficient about 3.3 times 10 to the power minus 9 square metres per second.

◦ Soluble guanylyl cyclase half-maximal activation, about 1 to 10 nanomolar nitric oxide.

◦ Carbon monoxide affinity for haemoglobin, roughly 200 to 250 times that of oxygen.

◦ Brain hydrogen sulphide, about 14 nanomolar by modern measurement, against 50 to 160 micromolar in older reports; the corpus treats the modern value as correct and records the older figures as a superseded measurement rather than a disagreement.

◦ Nitric oxide half-life and effective radius: contested, milliseconds to seconds and a few micrometres to 100 to 300 micrometres respectively.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Nitric oxide synthesis after calcium entry, milliseconds.

◦ Nitric oxide half-life in tissue, contested between milliseconds and seconds.

◦ Cyclic guanosine monophosphate rise and fall, hundreds of milliseconds to seconds.

◦ Neurovascular dilation onset, about 1 second.

◦ Persulfidation persistence, minutes to hours, which makes hydrogen sulphide a much slower signal than its gaseous character suggests.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Excess nitric oxide in the presence of superoxide forms peroxynitrite and causes nitrosative damage; deficient endothelial nitric oxide impairs cerebral blood flow regulation; and carbon monoxide at toxic doses blocks both oxygen carriage and complex four simultaneously.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Carbon monoxide poisoning produces a characteristic delayed leukoencephalopathy days to weeks after apparent recovery, which is one of the few neurological injuries with a well-documented latent interval.

Nitric oxide's role in migraine is well established pharmacologically, since nitroglycerin reliably provokes migraine in susceptible people and is used as an experimental model of it.

Endothelial nitric oxide deficiency contributes to cerebral small vessel disease and to the impaired vasodilator reserve seen in vascular cognitive impairment.

Nitrosative stress through peroxynitrite is implicated in the injury of stroke, of multiple sclerosis lesions and of several neurodegenerative diseases, though the corpus notes that antioxidant trials targeting it have consistently failed in humans.

Hydrogen sulphide is a mitochondrial complex four inhibitor at toxic concentrations, which is why it is a lethal industrial gas, and the contrast between its toxicity at high concentration and its nanomolar physiological level is the sharpest illustration of the correction described above.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The whole chapter turns on an uncertain number: if nitric oxide's half-life is milliseconds, it is a synapse-scale signal, and if it is seconds, it is a volume signal reaching hundreds of cells, and these are qualitatively different architectures.

The corpus therefore refuses to state a single value and instead records that the architectural question depends on a measurement nobody has yet made cleanly in intact tissue.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show how completely the architecture of a diffusible signal depends on its half-life, which is the contested quantity.
Create a number variable called diffusion coefficient with initial value 3.3 times 10 to the power minus 9 square metres per second.
Create a number variable called half-life, to be varied from one millisecond to one second.
Create a number variable called cell diameter with initial value 20 micrometres.
For each half-life value, perform the following actions.
    Compute the characteristic diffusion distance as the square root of six times the diffusion coefficient times the half-life.
    Convert that distance to micrometres.
    Compute the number of cells reached as the volume of a sphere of that radius divided by the volume occupied by one cell.
    Record the half-life, the distance, and the number of cells.
End the loop.
Report the number of cells reached at the shortest and longest half-lives, and comment that the two answers describe different architectures.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the disagreement about nitric oxide's half-life is usually presented as a technical detail and is in fact a disagreement about whether the signal is private or public.

'''Nitric oxide: the architecture depends entirely on the contested
half-life. Diffusion coefficient about 3.3e-9 m2/s; half-life reported
from milliseconds to seconds; effective radius correspondingly from a
few micrometres to the often-quoted 100 to 300 micrometres.'''
import math
from operator import mul
from functools import reduce

D, CELL_UM = 3.3e-9, 20.0
cell_vol = reduce(mul, [4.0 / 3.0, math.pi, CELL_UM / 2, CELL_UM / 2, CELL_UM / 2])
for half_life in [0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0]:
    r_m = math.sqrt(reduce(mul, [6.0, D, half_life]))
    r_um = mul(r_m, 1e6)
    sphere = reduce(mul, [4.0 / 3.0, math.pi, r_um, r_um, r_um])
    print("half-life %6.3f s   radius %7.1f um   cells reached ~ %d"
          % (half_life, r_um, int(sphere / cell_vol)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only signals in this dossier with no vesicle, no surface receptor and no reuptake, whose recipient list is decided by geometry alone, and the only entry whose headline concentration the field had to revise downward by four orders of magnitude.


CHAPTER 21. CYCLIC ADENOSINE MONOPHOSPHATE AND THE SECOND-MESSENGER CASCADE (The Amplifier That Is Not Free) (COG)

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate was the first second messenger discovered and is still the template for the whole idea: a receptor on the outside of the cell produces a small diffusible molecule on the inside, and that molecule does the work.

The classical picture, in which one bound receptor produces an enormous cloud of freely diffusing messenger, has been substantially revised in the last decade, and this chapter records the revision because the corpus's slow-modulation chapters depend on getting it right.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate, abbreviated cyclic AMP, is a small nucleotide made from adenosine triphosphate by the enzyme adenylyl cyclase and destroyed by enzymes called phosphodiesterases.

What it does is activate protein kinase A, which phosphorylates a long list of targets, and also act directly on cyclic-nucleotide-gated channels and on exchange proteins, so it is both a kinase trigger and a direct channel ligand.

In the corpus's terms it is the canonical slow, gain-setting signalling path: the route by which dopamine, noradrenaline, serotonin and a great many peptides change how a neuron responds to everything else, over seconds to minutes rather than milliseconds.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cyclic AMP is made at the plasma membrane, where the cyclases are, and it acts throughout the cytoplasm and into the nucleus, where protein kinase A phosphorylates the transcription factor catalogued in the Layer 4 and 5 dossier as the CREB gate.

Its most consequential addresses in the corpus are the striatal medium spiny neurons, where dopamine's opposite actions through the D1 and D2 receptors are exactly opposite actions on this molecule, and the presynaptic terminals where a lasting rise in release probability is maintained by this pathway.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

Basal cytosolic cyclic AMP is roughly 0.1 to 1 micromolar and rises perhaps tenfold on strong stimulation, which is a modest dynamic range compared with calcium's hundredfold.

Protein kinase A is activated with a dissociation constant for cyclic AMP of roughly 100 to 300 nanomolar and with positive cooperativity, so the enzyme's response is steeper than the messenger's concentration change, which is where much of the effective gain lies.

The classical amplification arithmetic runs as follows: one bound receptor activates on the order of tens of G proteins, each activated cyclase makes on the order of a thousand molecules of cyclic AMP per second, and each protein kinase A molecule phosphorylates many substrates, and multiplying these gives the very large amplification factors sometimes quoted.

The corpus records that figures such as a hundred-million-fold amplification are the product of multiplying best-case values at each step and are not defensible as a measured quantity; the honest statement is that the cascade provides substantial amplification of the order of thousands to millions, that each step's true gain varies with cell type and stimulus, and that no single number is warranted.

The larger revision concerns diffusion: the classical picture assumed cyclic AMP diffuses freely with a coefficient of several hundred square micrometres per second, but recent work, including Bock and colleagues, 2020, in Cell, and Anton and colleagues, 2022, in Cell, indicates that cyclic AMP is largely buffered by binding to protein kinase A regulatory subunits and to other binding proteins, so that free cyclic AMP is much lower and far less mobile than assumed and signalling is organised into nanodomains.

The corpus states that this revision is important and should be treated as the current best understanding, and notes that it makes the cyclic AMP system architecturally similar to the calcium system of Chapter 15: a diffusible messenger made specific by binding the receiver close to the source.

Phosphodiesterases are what make the domains possible, since they destroy the messenger locally and thereby set the domain's size, and the brain-enriched isoforms PDE4 and PDE10A are the principal ones, PDE10A being highly concentrated in the striatum and a target of considerable drug development effort that has so far not produced an approved antipsychotic.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ basal - The Idle Cascade - cyclic AMP 0.1 to 1 micromolar, protein kinase A mostly inactive.

◦ gs_stimulated - The Raised Gain - a Gs-coupled receptor such as the dopamine D1 or the beta-adrenergic receptor activating cyclase.

◦ gi_suppressed - The Lowered Gain - a Gi-coupled receptor such as the dopamine D2 or the adenosine A1 receptor inhibiting cyclase.

◦ nanodomain_local - The Private Cascade - cyclic AMP confined near its source by buffering and by local phosphodiesterase, acting only on anchored targets.

◦ nuclear_translocated - The Genomic Cascade - the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A entering the nucleus and phosphorylating the transcription factor, converting a signalling event into gene expression.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ basal: protein kinase A occupancy low; dissociation constant 100 to 300 nanomolar with a Hill coefficient of roughly 1.6 to 2 (well established).

◦ gs_stimulated: cyclic AMP rising several-fold to about tenfold within seconds (well established).

◦ gi_suppressed: cyclic AMP falling toward or below basal, and in the striatum this is the physical form of the D1 and D2 opposition the corpus's Layer 9 volume describes (well established).

◦ nanodomain_local: free cyclic AMP much lower and less mobile than classically assumed; this is a recent revision and the corpus grades it as good and improving evidence rather than as long-settled (moderate to good confidence).

◦ nuclear_translocated: minutes; couples to the transcriptional machinery of the Layer 4 and 5 dossier (well established).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ basal to gs_stimulated: agonist binding a Gs-coupled receptor; cyclic AMP rises within about 1 to 10 seconds.

◦ gs_stimulated to basal: phosphodiesterase activity and receptor desensitisation; seconds to tens of seconds.

◦ basal to gi_suppressed: agonist binding a Gi-coupled receptor; seconds.

◦ gs_stimulated to nuclear_translocated: sustained elevation sufficient to release and translocate the catalytic subunit; minutes.

◦ Any mode to nanodomain_local: this is the default rather than an exception under the revised picture, and the corpus flags that older models treating cyclic AMP as well-mixed should be regarded as superseded.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: sustained maximal cyclic AMP, which desensitises receptors and downregulates the pathway.

◦ Warning condition: chronic drug exposure producing pathway upregulation, which is the classical cellular model of opioid tolerance and withdrawal.

◦ Watchdog: the phosphodiesterases, receptor phosphorylation and arrestin recruitment, and the anchoring proteins that keep the kinase where it belongs.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Cyclic AMP signalling guides axon growth cones, and the ratio of cyclic AMP to cyclic guanosine monophosphate determines whether a growth cone is attracted to or repelled by the same guidance cue, which is one of the most elegant results in developmental neuroscience.

Declining cyclic AMP levels in maturing neurons are part of why regeneration fails in the adult central nervous system, and raising them experimentally partially restores growth, which is a genuine and reproducible finding that has nonetheless not translated into a therapy.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

This is the corpus's canonical slow modulatory path, and every statement in the upper volumes about a neuromodulator changing a neuron's gain, its adaptation, or its willingness to learn is, at this layer, a statement about this cascade or its close relatives.

The nanodomain revision colours the corpus's whole treatment of modulation, because it means a neuromodulator does not bathe a cell in a uniform signal but produces a patterned, local pattern of phosphorylation determined by which anchoring proteins are present where.

That is a considerably more powerful computational primitive than the classical picture allowed, and the corpus records it as an upgrade rather than a correction.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 7 G-protein-coupled receptor activation, from dopamine, noradrenaline, serotonin, adenosine, opioids and many peptides.

◦ Layer 3 adenosine triphosphate, as the substrate.

◦ Layer 3 calcium, which stimulates some cyclase isoforms and inhibits others.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 4 protein kinase A activity and the resulting phosphorylation pattern.

◦ Layer 6 excitability changes, through phosphorylation of channels.

◦ Layer 7 presynaptic release probability, through the presynaptic arm of the pathway.

◦ Layer 4 transcriptional programme, through the CREB gate of the Layer 4 and 5 dossier.

• STATE.

◦ Cyclic AMP concentration, observable with genetically encoded fluorescence resonance energy transfer sensors, basally 0.1 to 1 micromolar.

◦ Protein kinase A activity, observable with kinase activity reporters.

◦ Phosphorylation state of DARPP-32 in striatal neurons, the classical integrator read-out of this pathway.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Basal cyclic AMP 0.1 to 1 micromolar, rising up to about tenfold on stimulation.

◦ Protein kinase A dissociation constant for cyclic AMP, about 100 to 300 nanomolar, Hill coefficient about 1.6 to 2.

◦ Adenylyl cyclase isoforms, ten in humans, with AC1 and AC8 calcium-stimulated and AC5 and AC6 calcium-inhibited.

◦ Cascade amplification: substantial, of the order of thousands to millions, with the corpus recording that the frequently quoted hundred-million-fold figure is a multiplication of best cases and is not a measured value.

◦ Cyclic AMP diffusion: classically several hundred square micrometres per second, but effective mobility is now understood to be far lower because of buffering.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Cyclic AMP rise after receptor activation, about 1 to 10 seconds.

◦ Cyclic AMP decay by phosphodiesterase, seconds to tens of seconds.

◦ Protein kinase A substrate phosphorylation, seconds.

◦ Nuclear translocation and transcriptional response, minutes to tens of minutes.

◦ Pathway upregulation in chronic drug exposure, days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Sustained maximal activation desensitises and downregulates the pathway, which is the cellular basis of tolerance; and loss of local phosphodiesterase control collapses the nanodomain organisation, which turns a specific signal into an indiscriminate one.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1A, from mutations in GNAS encoding the stimulatory G protein, produces hormone resistance together with characteristic developmental features and is the archetype of a disease of this cascade.

McCune-Albright syndrome arises from activating mosaic mutations in the same gene, showing that both directions of failure are pathogenic.

Opioid tolerance, dependence and withdrawal are classically modelled as upregulation of this pathway in locus coeruleus neurons, and the resulting rebound overactivity on withdrawal is the mechanistic account of the withdrawal syndrome.

PDE10A mutations cause childhood-onset chorea, and PDE10A inhibitors were extensively developed as candidate antipsychotics on the strength of the striatal biology described above, without success to date, which the corpus records as an honest negative.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, from mutations in CREB-binding protein, is the developmental disorder at the far downstream end of this pathway and is catalogued in the Layer 4 and 5 dossier's chromatin chapters.

TIME CONSTANTS:

The chapter's characteristic timescale is seconds to minutes, which is precisely the gap between the millisecond transmission of Chapter 19 and the hours-long persistence machinery of the Layer 4 and 5 dossier.

That intermediate timescale is the reason this cascade is where neuromodulation lives, since a modulator must outlast the events it modulates without outlasting the situation that called for it.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the cascade's amplification honestly, by multiplying step gains and then reporting how uncertain the product is.
Create a number variable called receptors bound with initial value one.
Create a number variable called G proteins per receptor, with a plausible range from ten to one hundred.
Create a number variable called cyclic AMP molecules per cyclase per second, with a plausible range from one hundred to one thousand.
Create a number variable called seconds of activity with initial value ten.
Create a number variable called substrates per kinase, with a plausible range from ten to one hundred.
For the low end of every range, compute the product and record it as the minimum amplification.
For the high end of every range, compute the product and record it as the maximum amplification.
Report both, and report the ratio between them as the honest uncertainty of the estimate.
State explicitly that quoting only the maximum would be indefensible.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the honest way to present a multiplied estimate is to propagate the ranges rather than to quote the product of best cases.

'''Cascade amplification, propagated honestly. Each step gain is a range,
not a value, so the product is a range spanning orders of magnitude.
Quoting only the top of that range is where the frequently cited
hundred-million-fold figure comes from.'''
from operator import mul
from functools import reduce

steps = {
    "G proteins per receptor":        (10, 100),
    "cAMP per cyclase per second":    (100, 1000),
    "seconds of activity":            (5, 20),
    "substrates per kinase":          (10, 100),
}
low = reduce(mul, [v[0] for v in steps.values()])
high = reduce(mul, [v[1] for v in steps.values()])
for name, rng in steps.items():
    print("%-32s %6d to %6d" % (name, rng[0], rng[1]))
print("amplification: %.1e to %.1e, a spread of %.0f-fold"
      % (low, high, high / low))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The first second messenger ever discovered, still the template for every one since, and the entry in this dossier whose textbook description has changed most in the last decade - from a freely diffusing cloud to a buffered, local, nanodomain-organised signal.


CHAPTER 22. OXYGEN AND GLUCOSE, THE DELIVERED SUBSTRATES (The Two Commodities With No Warehouse) (COG)

The brain stores essentially nothing of what it needs most.

It holds no meaningful oxygen reserve and only a trivial glycogen store, so both commodities must be delivered continuously by blood, and the consequence is that the brain is the only organ in which a few minutes of interrupted supply produces permanent loss.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Oxygen is the terminal electron acceptor of the respiratory chain of Chapter 2, and glucose is the substrate whose oxidation supplies the electrons.

What they do together is make the energy currency of Chapter 18, and what makes them a chapter in their own right is not the chemistry but the logistics: they must arrive, continuously, at every cubic millimetre, and the machinery for arranging that is itself a major part of the brain's design.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Both live in the blood and in the interstitial space, never in storage.

Brain glycogen exists but only in astrocytes and only at roughly 3 to 12 micromoles per gram, which is a supply measured in minutes at most, and its principal role is thought to be local buffering rather than reserve.

The delivery apparatus is the cerebral vasculature, with capillary density high enough that no neuron is more than about 15 to 20 micrometres from a capillary.

PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES:

Global cerebral blood flow in a healthy adult is about 50 to 57 millilitres per 100 grams per minute, made up of roughly 80 in grey matter and roughly 20 in white matter.

The cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen is about 3.0 to 3.5 millilitres of oxygen per 100 grams per minute, equivalently about 150 to 160 micromoles per 100 grams per minute, and for glucose about 25 to 31 micromoles per 100 grams per minute.

The oxygen extraction fraction, the proportion of delivered oxygen actually consumed, is about 0.3 to 0.4 at rest, and the fact that it is well below one is what gives the brain a reserve against modest flow reduction, and the fact that it can rise toward 0.8 in severe stenosis is what allows compensation before infarction.

The brain consumes roughly 110 to 120 grams of glucose per day, about 20 to 25 percent of the body's total, on about 2 percent of body mass.

The ischaemic thresholds are among the most clinically important numbers in medicine: electrical activity fails at a cerebral blood flow of roughly 20 to 22 millilitres per 100 grams per minute, and membrane integrity fails at roughly 8 to 10, and the tissue between those two values is the ischaemic penumbra defined by Astrup, Siesjö and Symon in 1981, which is functionally silent but still alive and is the target of every acute stroke treatment.

Consciousness is lost within roughly 5 to 10 seconds of complete circulatory arrest and irreversible injury begins within roughly 4 to 8 minutes, which is the arithmetic behind every resuscitation protocol.

Ketone bodies are the one genuine alternative fuel, and in prolonged starvation they can supply a substantial fraction of the brain's energy, with figures around 60 percent commonly quoted, but they cannot replace glucose entirely because some brain metabolism requires it.

The astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle hypothesis, proposed by Pellerin and Magistretti in 1994, holds that astrocytes take up glucose, glycolyse it, and supply lactate to neurons as their preferred fuel during activity, and it has been vigorously disputed by Dienel and others who argue that neurons take up glucose directly and that the lactate flux runs the other way under many conditions.

The corpus records this as genuinely unresolved, notes that both camps agree lactate moves between compartments and disagree about the direction and magnitude under physiological conditions, and states that what would settle it is a compartment-specific, real-time measurement of metabolic flux in the intact behaving brain, which current methods approach but do not yet achieve.

Neurovascular coupling is the mechanism by which local activity raises local blood flow, and the resulting change in the ratio of oxygenated to deoxygenated haemoglobin is what functional magnetic resonance imaging detects: the haemodynamic response begins about 1 to 2 seconds after activity, peaks at about 4 to 6 seconds, and returns with an undershoot lasting 10 to 30 seconds.

The corpus states the honest limit of that measurement plainly: the blood-oxygen-level-dependent signal is a measure of blood oxygenation, not of neural firing, and the work of Logothetis and colleagues, notably in Nature in 2001 and in the 2008 review, showed it correlates better with local field potentials, meaning synaptic and dendritic activity, than with the spiking output of the region.

That distinction matters throughout the corpus's Layer 9 and Layer 10 volumes, because a region that lights up may be receiving rather than sending.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ resting_supplied - The Idling Engine - flow about 50 millilitres per 100 grams per minute, extraction fraction 0.3 to 0.4, everything comfortable.

◦ activated_hyperaemic - The Boosted Supply - local flow rising by 20 to 60 percent within seconds of activity, with oxygen consumption rising less, which is why the blood becomes more oxygenated and the imaging signal is positive.

◦ autoregulating - The Defended Supply - flow held roughly constant across a mean arterial pressure range of about 60 to 150 millimetres of mercury.

◦ oligaemic_penumbra - The Silenced Tissue - flow 10 to 22 millilitres per 100 grams per minute, electrically silent but structurally alive and salvageable.

◦ infarcting - The Lost Tissue - flow below about 8 to 10, membrane failure, death within minutes to hours.

◦ ketotic - The Alternative Fuel - prolonged fasting or ketogenic diet supplying a substantial fraction of energy as ketone bodies.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ resting_supplied: cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen about 3.0 to 3.5 millilitres per 100 grams per minute (well established).

◦ activated_hyperaemic: flow rises proportionally more than oxygen consumption, which is the physiological basis of the imaging signal; the reason for this mismatch is still debated (well established as a phenomenon, mechanism partly open).

◦ autoregulating: flow constant across roughly 60 to 150 millimetres of mercury mean arterial pressure, with the range shifted upward in chronic hypertension (well established).

◦ oligaemic_penumbra: electrical failure at 20 to 22, membrane failure at 8 to 10 millilitres per 100 grams per minute (well established, from Astrup, Siesjö and Symon 1981).

◦ infarcting: irreversible within minutes at the lowest flows and over hours in the penumbra, which is why the treatment window exists at all (well established).

◦ ketotic: ketone bodies supplying a substantial fraction, with about 60 percent commonly quoted in prolonged starvation (well established, with the exact ceiling varying between studies).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ resting_supplied to activated_hyperaemic: local neural activity, mediated by nitric oxide, by astrocytic signalling and by potassium; onset 1 to 2 seconds, peak 4 to 6 seconds.

◦ activated_hyperaemic to resting_supplied: return with a post-stimulus undershoot; 10 to 30 seconds.

◦ resting_supplied to autoregulating: a change in perfusion pressure; seconds.

◦ autoregulating to oligaemic_penumbra: perfusion pressure or vessel patency falling beyond the autoregulatory range; seconds to minutes.

◦ oligaemic_penumbra to infarcting: continued hypoperfusion; minutes to hours, and this transition is the entire target of acute stroke medicine.

◦ resting_supplied to ketotic: fasting beyond roughly two to three days, or a sustained ketogenic diet; days.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: cerebral blood flow below about 20 millilitres per 100 grams per minute.

◦ Warning condition: a rising oxygen extraction fraction, which indicates that autoregulation has exhausted its reserve.

◦ Watchdog: cerebral autoregulation, collateral circulation through the circle of Willis and leptomeningeal vessels, and the extraction reserve itself.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Cerebral blood flow and glucose metabolism per unit mass rise steeply through infancy, exceed adult values through childhood, and settle to adult values in adolescence, which parallels the synaptic overproduction and pruning sequence of the corpus's developmental chapters.

The neonatal brain has a substantially greater tolerance of hypoxia than the adult brain, partly through greater use of ketones and lactate, which is why therapeutic hypothermia for neonatal encephalopathy has a longer effective window than any adult equivalent.

The blood-brain barrier and the neurovascular unit assemble during fetal life and continue maturing postnatally, and their integrity is a precondition for every number in this chapter.

HOW IT COLOURS THE LAYERS ABOVE:

This chapter supplies the corpus's hardest external constraint: a fixed, continuously delivered power budget with no buffer, which is why the brain's architecture is dominated by sparse coding, by energy-efficient signalling, and by the aggressive management of spike rates that the upper volumes describe.

It also supplies the corpus's principal observational instrument and its principal caveat, since almost everything known about the living human brain's regional function comes from measuring blood flow or blood oxygenation, and those measure supply rather than computation.

And it supplies the clinical urgency that runs through the corpus's disease chapters, because the whole of acute neurology is organised around the few minutes this chapter allows.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Layer 11 cardiac output and mean arterial pressure, normally 60 to 150 millimetres of mercury within the autoregulatory range.

◦ Layer 11 arterial oxygen saturation and blood glucose, normally above 95 percent and 4 to 7 millimoles per litre respectively.

◦ Layer 6 local neural activity, as the demand signal for neurovascular coupling.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Layer 3 oxygen and glucose delivery to tissue.

◦ Layer 5 substrate for the respiratory chain and therefore for the energy currency of Chapter 18.

◦ Layer 9 imaging signal, as the blood-oxygen-level-dependent contrast that functional imaging measures.

• STATE.

◦ Cerebral blood flow, observable by arterial spin labelling, by positron emission tomography and by perfusion computed tomography, about 50 to 57 millilitres per 100 grams per minute globally.

◦ Oxygen extraction fraction, observable by oxygen-15 positron emission tomography, 0.3 to 0.4 at rest.

◦ Cerebral metabolic rate for glucose, observable by fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography, 25 to 31 micromoles per 100 grams per minute.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Cerebral blood flow about 50 to 57 millilitres per 100 grams per minute globally, about 80 in grey matter and 20 in white.

◦ Cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen about 3.0 to 3.5 millilitres per 100 grams per minute; for glucose 25 to 31 micromoles per 100 grams per minute.

◦ Oxygen extraction fraction 0.3 to 0.4 at rest, rising toward 0.8 in compensated stenosis.

◦ Ischaemic thresholds: electrical failure at 20 to 22, membrane failure at 8 to 10 millilitres per 100 grams per minute.

◦ Brain glycogen about 3 to 12 micromoles per gram, astrocytic, a supply measured in minutes.

◦ Brain glucose consumption 110 to 120 grams per day, about 20 to 25 percent of the body's total.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Loss of consciousness after complete circulatory arrest, about 5 to 10 seconds.

◦ Anoxic depolarisation, 1 to 3 minutes.

◦ Onset of irreversible injury, about 4 to 8 minutes at complete arrest, extending to hours in the penumbra.

◦ Haemodynamic response function: onset 1 to 2 seconds, peak 4 to 6 seconds, undershoot 10 to 30 seconds.

◦ Autoregulatory adjustment to a pressure change, seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Delivery failure, whether from vessel occlusion, from systemic hypotension, from hypoxaemia or from hypoglycaemia, produces functional failure within seconds and structural failure within minutes, and because there is no store the failure has no gradual phase.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Ischaemic stroke is the archetype and the whole of its acute treatment, whether by thrombolysis or by thrombectomy, is an attempt to restore flow to the penumbra before it converts to infarct.

Cardiac arrest produces global hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy whose severity is set almost entirely by the time to restoration of circulation, and targeted temperature management is the one intervention with evidence of benefit.

Hypoglycaemia is functionally indistinguishable from ischaemia at the bedside and is corrected in seconds by intravenous glucose, which makes it the most rewarding diagnosis in emergency neurology.

Carbon monoxide poisoning, described in Chapter 20, is a delivery failure at the level of the carrier rather than of the vessel.

The ketogenic diet is an established treatment for drug-resistant epilepsy, particularly in children and in glucose transporter type one deficiency syndrome, where it directly substitutes the missing fuel and is the definitive treatment.

TIME CONSTANTS:

Every number in this chapter that matters clinically lies between 5 seconds and 8 minutes, and that narrow band is the reason neurology is the most time-pressured of the medical specialties.

Every number that matters to a researcher lies between 1 and 30 seconds, because that is the haemodynamic response, and the mismatch between the millisecond timescale of neural events and the seconds timescale of the measurement is the fundamental limitation of functional imaging.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute how long a brain region survives at a given blood flow, so that the ischaemic penumbra becomes a calculation rather than a picture.
Create a number variable called cerebral blood flow in millilitres per 100 grams per minute.
Create a number variable called electrical failure threshold with initial value 21.
Create a number variable called membrane failure threshold with initial value 9.
Create a number variable called baseline flow with initial value 50.
For each candidate blood flow, perform the following actions.
    If the flow is above the electrical failure threshold, report the tissue as functioning.
    Otherwise, if the flow is above the membrane failure threshold, report the tissue as penumbral, and estimate the survival time as inversely related to how far below the electrical threshold it has fallen.
    Otherwise, report the tissue as core infarct with a survival time of minutes.
    Record the flow, the state, and the estimated survival time.
End the loop.
Report the range of flows over which the tissue is salvageable and the time available at each.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the ischaemic penumbra is usually shown as a coloured picture and is far more useful as a table of flows against times.

'''The ischaemic penumbra as arithmetic. Thresholds from Astrup, Siesjo
and Symon 1981: electrical failure at 20 to 22 and membrane failure at
8 to 10 mL per 100 g per minute. Survival times are illustrative of the
published inverse relationship, not measured constants.'''
from operator import mul

ELECTRICAL, MEMBRANE = 21.0, 9.0
for cbf in [50, 35, 22, 18, 14, 10, 8, 5]:
    if cbf > ELECTRICAL:
        state, minutes = "functioning", None
    elif cbf > MEMBRANE:
        state = "penumbra (salvageable)"
        minutes = mul(60.0, (cbf - MEMBRANE) / (ELECTRICAL - MEMBRANE)) + 20.0
    else:
        state, minutes = "core infarct", 5.0
    t = "indefinite" if minutes is None else "%.0f min" % minutes
    print("CBF %4.0f mL/100g/min   %-24s survival %s" % (cbf, state, t))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only entry in this dossier that the brain cannot store at all, whose interruption is measured in seconds, and whose delivery apparatus is also, by accident, the only instrument through which the living human brain has ever been widely observed.


SOURCES FOR PART THREE

All sources listed were consulted by web search on 12 August 2026.

• Iliff, Wang, Liao, Plogg, Peng, Gundersen, Benveniste, Vates, Deane, Goldman, Nagelhus and Nedergaard, 2012, A paravascular pathway facilitates cerebrospinal fluid flow through the brain parenchyma and the clearance of interstitial solutes, Science Translational Medicine, for the glymphatic proposal; together with the critiques of Smith and Verkman and subsequent negative reports, recorded by the corpus as an active and unresolved dispute rather than as established physiology.

• Attwell and Laughlin, 2001, An energy budget for signaling in the grey matter of the brain, Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, volume 21, giving roughly 47 percent to action potentials, 34 percent to postsynaptic glutamate receptors, 13 percent to resting potentials and 3 percent to glutamate recycling.

• Howarth, Gleeson and Attwell, 2012, Updated energy budgets for neural computation in the neocortex and cerebellum, Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, volume 32; and Howarth, Peppiatt-Wildman and Attwell, 2012, Synaptic energy use and supply, Neuron, volume 75, revising the action potential share downward on measured sodium influx and putting housekeeping at roughly a quarter of cortical energy use.

• Heinemann and Lux, 1977, Ceiling of stimulus induced rises in extracellular potassium concentration in the cerebral cortex of cat, Brain Research, for the potassium ceiling.

• Orkand, Nicholls and Kuffler, 1966, Effect of nerve impulses on the membrane potential of glial cells in the central nervous system of amphibia, Journal of Neurophysiology, for glial spatial buffering.

• Neher and Augustine, 1992, Calcium gradients and buffers in bovine chromaffin cells, Journal of Physiology, for calcium buffering ratios and microdomain reasoning.

• Rivera and colleagues, 1999, Nature, and Kirmse and colleagues, 2015, Nature Communications, as the two sides of the chloride developmental switch dispute, together with the negative NEMO trial of bumetanide in neonatal seizures and the 2021 discontinuation of the bumetanide autism programme.

• Wemmie and colleagues on acid-sensing ion channel 1a in fear and in carbon dioxide-evoked behaviour, recorded by the corpus as suggestive rather than definitive in humans.

• Porkka-Heiskanen, Strecker, Thakkar, Bjørkum, Greene and McCarley, 1997, Adenosine: a mediator of the sleep-inducing effects of prolonged wakefulness, Science, volume 276, for basal forebrain adenosine accumulation, recorded with the corpus's caveat that adenosine is a contributor to and not the whole of sleep homeostasis.

• Pellerin and Magistretti, 1994, Glutamate uptake into astrocytes stimulates aerobic glycolysis, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, for the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle; and the sustained critique of it by Dienel, recorded as unresolved.

• Astrup, Siesjö and Symon, 1981, Thresholds in cerebral ischemia: the ischemic penumbra, Stroke, volume 12, for the flow thresholds of electrical and membrane failure.

• Logothetis, Pauls, Augath, Trinath and Oeltermann, 2001, Neurophysiological investigation of the basis of the fMRI signal, Nature, volume 412; and Logothetis, 2008, What we can do and what we cannot do with fMRI, Nature, volume 453, for the finding that the blood-oxygen-level-dependent signal tracks local field potentials better than spiking output, and for the honest statement of the method's limits.

• Bock and colleagues, 2020, Optical mapping of cAMP signaling at the nanometer scale, Cell; and Anton and colleagues, 2022, Receptor-associated independent cAMP nanodomains mediate spatiotemporal specificity of GPCR signaling, Cell, for the revision of cyclic adenosine monophosphate from a freely diffusing messenger to a buffered, nanodomain-organised one.

• Modern measurements of tissue hydrogen sulphide in the nanomolar range, superseding the older reports of 50 to 160 micromolar; the corpus records this as a correction rather than a controversy and notes that it invalidates the concentrations used in much of the earlier experimental literature.

• Standard clinical reference values for cerebral blood flow, cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen and glucose, oxygen extraction fraction, plasma and cerebrospinal fluid electrolytes, and arterial blood gases, taken from current physiology and neurocritical care references.


THE COGNITIVE SCOREBOARD

Twenty-one of the twenty-two entries carry the (COG) tag, and the single (NON-COG) entry is the organic six, which builds everything and signals nothing.

That ratio is not a boast about physics; it is a consequence of the selection rule, since entries were admitted precisely because something above them depends on them.

A full catalogue of Layers 1, 2 and 3 would invert that ratio completely, and would be a textbook of physics and chemistry with a footnote about brains, which is exactly the document this dossier refused to write.

The dossier's lesson for a cognitive architect is narrow and useful: the substrate layers contribute exactly four things to the design, and they are a noise floor that cannot be lowered, a set of gradients that must be paid for continuously, a messenger whose dynamic range is four orders of magnitude, and a delivery constraint measured in seconds.

Everything else about physics and chemistry, for the purposes of this corpus, is genuinely abstracted away, which is the whole point of having layers.

A second lesson, addressed to the reader rather than to the architect, is about honesty at this depth.

This dossier records more open disputes and more explicit refusals than any other document in the corpus, and it does so deliberately: the ambient extracellular glutamate concentration is contested across three orders of magnitude, the nitric oxide diffusion radius across two, the vesicular zinc concentration across two, the node of Ranvier channel density across one, and the developmental chloride switch is disputed in its very existence in the intact animal.

Three claims that circulate widely are graded here as not supported by the evidence offered for them, namely microtubule quantum computation as a substrate of consciousness, inelastic electron tunnelling as the mechanism of olfaction, and any single quoted figure for the amplification of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate cascade.

One published measurement, the brain concentration of hydrogen sulphide, is recorded as having been corrected downward by roughly four orders of magnitude, which should be read as a caution about every number in this document that has not yet been re-measured by a better method.

The corpus's position, stated once and applied throughout, is that a dossier at this depth earns its authority by naming what it does not know, and that a plausible number in an empty slot is worse than an admitted gap, because a gap invites measurement and a plausible number ends the enquiry.


END OF MANUSCRIPT

This manuscript is the companion to LAYER_01_02_03_SUBSTRATE_OUTLINE.txt in this directory, and the two agree chapter for chapter in number and in title.

It was written by the konnectome build on 12 August 2026 under the owner's explicit authority of that date, its quantitative content was checked against the published literature by web search on that date, and it does not outrank the corpus's own original documents.
