THIS DOCUMENT IS AN INCOMPLETE DRAFT AND MUST NOT BE READ AS A SOURCE.

STOP HERE IF YOU ARE LOADING STATE OR DESIGNING A SLICE.

Writing was still in progress when this checkpoint was committed. Three of the four intended systems are written and are finished, researched and literature-checked. The fourth is not.

WHAT IS PRESENT: system 45, the cerebrovascular system; system 46, the clearance system; and system 47, the neuroimmune system. Each carries the parent manuscript's own aspect-header set, a mode register, and a machine-parsable SYSTEMS INTERFACE block with real searched time constants.

UPDATED AT A LATER CHECKPOINT: ALL FOUR SYSTEMS ARE NOW WRITTEN. System 45, the cerebrovascular system; 46, the clearance system; 47, the neuroimmune system; and 48, the nociceptive system, which discharges the promise the corpus made and did not keep - the Layer 10 somatosensory entry states that pain's affective branch is "given its own address", and until now no such address existed among the forty-four.

WHAT IS STILL ABSENT IS THE CHAIN AUDIT. This document's own front matter promises a closing part listing, for each of the four systems, exactly which Layer 6 cells, Layer 7 junctions and Layer 8 motifs it is assembled from, cited by their existing chapter numbers. That part is not written.

THAT ABSENCE MATTERS MORE THAN ITS LENGTH SUGGESTS, which is why the banner stays for it alone. The chain audit is the document's own proof that it ASSEMBLED parts the corpus already contains rather than inventing four new systems. Without it, a reader has the assembler's word and no way to check it, and this corpus's whole discipline is that a claim a reader cannot check is a claim that has not been made properly. A document that promises that proof in its front matter and does not deliver it is in worse standing than one that never promised it.

WHY THIS BANNER EXISTS RATHER THAN THE FILE BEING WITHHELD. A partial document in this directory is the most dangerous object this project can produce: it carries a provenance block announcing that it closes a gap, it is written in the corpus's own confident voice, and a later session skimming it would take it for a finished source. The three systems below are good and are worth keeping; the file as a whole does not yet do what its own front matter says it does.

THE BANNER COMES OFF WHEN CHAPTER 48 AND THE CHAIN AUDIT ARE WRITTEN, and not before. That is checkable by grep rather than by judgement.

================================================================================

LAYER 10, THE NEURAL AND NEUROENDOCRINE SYSTEMS LAYER: ADDENDUM, SYSTEMS 45 TO 48

The Four Housekeeping Systems the Catalogue Assembled But Never Named

An additive companion to LAYER_10_SYSTEMS_MANUSCRIPT and LAYER_10_SYSTEMS_OUTLINE, in the Certified_Neuroscientist corpus of D. R. Dison, Founder, Artificial Intelligence University (AIU).

Date of compilation: August 12, 2026.


PROVENANCE AND STANDING

This addendum was added to the neuroscience corpus on 12 August 2026 by the konnectome build, acting under the owner's explicit authority of that same date to add new files to this directory.

It is THIS BUILD'S WRITING living in the corpus's own directory, and it does not outrank the corpus's own documents in any respect whatsoever.

It is ADDITIVE: it alters nothing that the forty-four existing system chapters say, it edits no existing file, and it removes nothing.

Where this addendum and the original LAYER_10_SYSTEMS_MANUSCRIPT disagree on any point of fact, framing, tag, or numbering, THE ORIGINAL LEADS and this document is to be read as the junior party.

The quantitative content of this addendum was checked by web search on 12 August 2026, and the corpus outranks anything found that way; where a searched figure and a corpus figure conflict, the corpus figure stands and the searched figure is offered only as a dated external note.

This addendum fills the gap recorded in the konnectome gap analysis of 12 August 2026, which established by direct search of the outline that the words glymphatic, immune, nociceptive, and vascular appear nowhere among the forty-four entries, and that the forty-four partition exactly as seven sensory, five motor, eight memory and cognitive, ten networks, six neuromodulatory, seven hormonal, and one cross-system, with no housekeeping part at all.

The sharpest form of the gap is a promise the corpus made to itself and did not keep, and it is quoted here so that the reason for this document sits on the document's own face.

The outline entry for the somatosensory system reads: "The dorsal-column and spinothalamic chains to thalamus and somatosensory cortex - touch, proprioception, temperature, and pain in parallel labelled lines, with pain's affective branch given its own address."

The manuscript's Chapter 3 repeats the claim in its own voice: "pain's emotional sting has an address of its own."

No such address exists among the forty-four: there is no chapter, no entry, and no number to which the affective branch of pain is assigned, and Chapter 48 of this addendum is written to discharge that promise.

The other three are the same failure in a quieter register: every part of them is already catalogued lower in the corpus and only the ASSEMBLY is absent.

Layer 6 catalogues the entire vascular, barrier, meningeal, and border-immune cell roster at chapters 41 through 50; Layer 8 catalogues the neurovascular coupling unit at motif 71 and the microglial pruning loop at motif 70; Layer 11 names glymphatic clearance at full flow in state 7 and the sickness behaviour protocol as state 20.

The corpus therefore already owns every brick of these four buildings, and this addendum claims no discovery, only construction.

A closing part, THE CHAIN AUDIT, lists for each of the four exactly which Layer 6 cells, Layer 7 junctions, and Layer 8 motifs it is assembled from, by their existing chapter numbers in this corpus, so that the claim to have assembled rather than invented can be checked line by line.


HOW TO READ THIS ADDENDUM

The four chapters run the systems manuscript's own aspect headers, in the manuscript's own order, and nothing has been added to that header set except the mode register.

Each chapter carries an additional MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS block in the shape of LAYER_10_MODES_MANUSCRIPT: a mode register of formally named modes with plain-English coinages, an admission rule, per-mode transfer functions with rates, thresholds, and honest confidence notes, and a transition table naming trigger and timescale for each move.

Two of the four carry the corpus's cognitive tag: the neuroimmune system, because it sculpts circuits and sets motivational state, and the nociceptive system, because unpleasantness is a psychological product and not a sensor reading.

Two do not: the cerebrovascular system and the clearance system are the corpus's purest utilities, and they are tagged (NON-COG) without apology.

All four are nonetheless given ENGLISH READABLE CODE and a runnable CODE SAMPLE, because a utility whose control law cannot be written down has not been specified.

Where the 2025 and 2026 literature is genuinely in dispute, this addendum reports the dispute and gives both figures with their sources rather than averaging them, and where no authoritative value could be found it says so and says what would settle it.


PART EIGHT. THE HOUSEKEEPING SYSTEMS

A housekeeping system is a chain of Layer 9 structures and Layer 6 cells that no thought is ever about and without which no thought occurs.

The corpus's own dictum survives the move: these are not places but ordered sequences of places, and the ordering matters as much here as it does in vision.

The four of this part are the supply line, the drain, the garrison, and the alarm.

They are placed last not because they matter least but because they were assembled last, and the corpus's numbering is chronological in exactly this way.


CHAPTER 45. THE CEREBROVASCULAR SYSTEM (The arterio-capillary-venous supply chain) (The Two-Watt Supply Line) (NON-COG)

Stand up too fast and the room greys at its edges for a second, then steadies, and in that second you have watched an entire control system work.

The brain has no fuel store worth the name and no tolerance for interruption, so it is fed continuously by a plumbing network that must deliver against gravity, posture, and blood pressure that changes with every heartbeat.

The system that does this is not merely pipework: it is a distributed servo that lets active tissue call for its own blood, and a chemical fence that decides which molecules in that blood are allowed to arrive.

Two-Watt names the load, the roughly twenty watts of a whole human at rest of which the brain claims a fifth on two per cent of the body's mass.

Supply Line names the trade, continuous delivery of oxygen and glucose under a hard no-interruption constraint, with a gate on the delivery.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT ACCOMPLISHES:

The cerebrovascular system is the chain from the great neck arteries through the circle of Willis and the pial surface network into penetrating arterioles, capillary beds, and out through venules, cortical veins, and the dural sinuses to the internal jugular veins.

Threaded through that chain are three control functions: autoregulation, which holds flow steady against changing pressure; neurovascular coupling, which raises flow locally where work is being done; and the blood-brain barrier, which makes the capillary wall a selective gate rather than a sieve.

What it accomplishes is a delivery guarantee: an organ that consumes about twenty per cent of the body's oxygen and twenty to twenty-five per cent of its glucose on about two per cent of its mass never has to negotiate for either, and never sees most of what circulates in the blood.

It carries the (NON-COG) tag as the corpus's most consequential utility, a system whose failure is a stroke and whose slow degradation is a large part of what the ageing brain suffers.

THE CHAIN OF STATIONS (THE LAYER 9 ROSTER):

• The extracranial supply, the paired internal carotid arteries and vertebral arteries, delivering the whole cerebral flow through four pipes.

• The circle of Willis at the base of the brain, the redundancy ring that lets one blocked feeder be covered by another, complete in only a minority of people, which is a fact of clinical consequence rather than a textbook simplification.

• The pial surface network on the brain's surface, a two-dimensional mesh of anastomosing arteries that spreads pressure before it enters the tissue.

• The penetrating arterioles diving into cortex, the system's chokepoints and the least redundant segment of the whole chain.

• The capillary bed proper, where exchange happens and where the barrier is tightest, and where the pericyte sits on the outside of the tube.

• The venous side, ascending venules to cortical veins to the dural venous sinuses to the internal jugular veins, a low-pressure return that is also the neighbour of the meningeal lymphatics of Chapter 46.

• The neurovascular unit itself, not a place on the chain but a repeating micro-assembly along it: endothelial cell, pericyte or smooth muscle cell, astrocyte end-foot, perivascular macrophage, and the neurons and interneurons that signal to them.

THE PATHWAYS AND INTERFACES:

The arterial pathway carries oxygenated blood at systemic pressure, and its interface with the brain is mechanical, a graded fall in pressure across successive branchings that protects the capillary bed from arterial pulsation.

The coupling pathway runs the other way and is chemical and electrical: active neurons and astrocytes release nitric oxide, prostaglandins, and potassium, and endothelial cells conduct a hyperpolarising signal upstream along the vessel wall so that the feeding arteriole dilates even though it is millimetres from the active tissue.

The barrier interface is molecular: continuous tight junctions between endothelial cells, extremely low rates of vesicular transport across the cell, and a battery of efflux pumps that eject what does get in, so that entry is by specific transporter or not at all.

The autonomic interface reaches the larger vessels through sympathetic fibres from the superior cervical ganglion and parasympathetic and sensory fibres from the sphenopalatine and trigeminal ganglia, and it sets the working range within which the local controls operate.

THE TRANSFORMATION ALONG THE CHAIN:

At the neck arteries the representation is a bulk flow with a systemic pressure waveform, roughly 700 to 750 millilitres per minute for the whole brain, and no local information at all.

At the circle of Willis and the pial mesh the pressure waveform is smoothed and redistributed, and the representation becomes a regional supply map, still without knowledge of what any region is doing.

At the penetrating arteriole the representation acquires demand: local dilation states now encode which cortical column is working, and the vessel has become a readout of computation rather than a mere pipe.

At the capillary the representation becomes a two-part product, a delivery of oxygen and glucose to the tissue and an admission decision on every solute in the plasma, and this is the only station where the two are made together.

On the venous side the representation is a waste stream and a temperature record, and it is here that the deoxyhaemoglobin left behind by the arterial surplus becomes the signal that functional magnetic resonance imaging reads, so the system's own control action is the instrument of most human brain mapping.

The 2026 Cell atlas by Wang and colleagues adds a station-level fact the corpus should hold: the cells of this chain are not one population repeated but stereotyped micro-communities, termed vascular cell ensembles, of endothelial, mural, fibroblast, and perivascular macrophage subtypes that vary systematically along the arteriovenous axis, so segment-specific functions such as coupling, barrier transport, and immune surveillance have segment-specific cellular hardware.

THE MOTIFS IT RUNS (THE LAYER 8 INVENTORY):

The capillary and arteriole run motif 71, the neurovascular coupling unit, the Layer 8 catalogue's own entry for this system's signature assembly.

Autoregulation runs motif 60, the closed-loop negative feedback motif, with pressure as the disturbance and vessel calibre as the actuator.

The conducted upstream dilation runs the catalogue's feedforward chain, motif 3, along the endothelial layer, and the astrocyte end-foot contribution runs on motif 68, the astrocyte syncytium, which is what allows a signal collected across many synapses to arrive at one vessel as a single demand.

TEMPORAL SIGNATURE:

Autoregulation acts within about five to fifteen seconds of a step change in pressure and is largely complete within a minute, which is why the grey-out on standing lasts as long as it does and no longer.

Neurovascular coupling is fast at its beginning and slow at its end: dilation begins within a few hundred milliseconds of activity, and Hillman and colleagues report parenchymal changes preceding pial arteriolar dilation by a few hundred milliseconds with dilation over a millimetre away seen within about 400 milliseconds of stimulus onset, while the blood-oxygen-level-dependent signal that follows peaks about four to six seconds later.

The no-interruption constraint is brutal and sets the system's real time constant: consciousness fails within about ten seconds of arrest of cerebral flow, and irreversible injury begins within minutes.

CAPACITY AND LIMITS:

Global cerebral blood flow in the healthy adult is about 50 millilitres per 100 grams of tissue per minute, higher in grey matter and lower in white.

The exchange surface is enormous for the volume it serves: the total length of brain microvessels is estimated at about 600 to 700 kilometres and the total endothelial surface at about 20 square metres, so no neuron is more than a few tens of micrometres from a capillary.

The classical autoregulatory plateau is quoted as a mean arterial pressure of about 60 to 160 millimetres of mercury, and here the sources disagree and the disagreement matters: Brady and colleagues in the British Journal of Anaesthesia 2024 argue that the true plateau in individuals is considerably narrower and more variable than the textbook range, while the 60 to 160 figure remains standard in clinical reference sources, and this addendum reports both rather than splitting them.

Functional hyperaemia raises local flow by roughly a third to a half over baseline in a strongly driven region, and the system cannot deliver more than that on demand, which is one reason cognitive effort is metabolically bounded.

MODULATION AND GATING:

Carbon dioxide is the system's most powerful modulator by a wide margin, dilating cerebral vessels steeply, which is why breath-holding raises cerebral flow and hyperventilation lowers it enough to cause dizziness within seconds.

Oxygen acts in the opposite direction and much more weakly until it falls low, at which point flow rises sharply.

The barrier is itself gated: inflammation, high circulating cytokines, and seizure all loosen tight junctions transiently, and the corpus should read barrier permeability as a state variable rather than a constant.

Neuromodulatory broadcast reaches the vessels directly, with noradrenergic and cholinergic fibres from the systems of Chapters 32 and 34 innervating cerebral arterioles, so arousal state alters supply as well as demand.

PLASTICITY AND LEARNING:

The vascular network remodels with sustained demand: angiogenesis follows chronic increases in regional activity and follows exercise and hypoxia over weeks.

Collateral vessels enlarge over months after a slowly progressive arterial narrowing, which is why a carotid occluded slowly can be silent while the same occlusion produced suddenly is a stroke.

The barrier's transporter complement is inducible rather than fixed, and chronic exposure to a substrate can upregulate the pump that excludes it, a fact of direct consequence for central nervous system drug tolerance.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

The brain is vascularised by sprouting angiogenesis from a perineural plexus, and barrier properties are induced in those sprouts by signals from the neural tissue itself rather than being intrinsic to the endothelium.

Pericyte coverage of brain capillaries is the highest in the body and is required for barrier integrity during development, not merely for its maintenance.

The neurovascular unit matures over the first years of life alongside the circuits it serves, and coupling in the newborn is measurably different from the adult form, which is why functional imaging in infants cannot be read with adult assumptions.

EVOLUTIONARY PROVENANCE:

A barrier between blood and nervous tissue is very old and is found in invertebrates, though built there of glia rather than endothelium, so the function is ancient and the hardware is not.

The vertebrate endothelial barrier and the circle of Willis are standard mammalian equipment, while the human elaboration is quantitative: a brain that costs a fifth of the body's oxygen budget forces a supply system of unusual density and unusual regulatory precision.

THE ENDOCRINE COUPLING:

Angiotensin and vasopressin act on cerebral vessels and on the circumventricular organs where the barrier is deliberately absent, so systemic fluid balance reaches the brain's plumbing directly.

Oestrogen is vasodilatory and supports endothelial nitric oxide production, and the fall in oestrogen at menopause is one candidate contributor to the change in cerebrovascular reactivity across that transition, a coupling of moderate confidence rather than settled fact.

Cortisol from the axis of Chapter 37 raises blood pressure and, sustained, stiffens vessels, which is one of the routes by which the corpus's stress axis reaches the corpus's supply line.

STATES AND THE LAYER 11 SCHEDULE:

Awake and task-engaged, coupling is at its most active and regional flow tracks the working network minute by minute.

In slow-wave sleep, state 7, global cerebral blood flow falls while large slow oscillations in blood volume appear, and these are precisely the oscillations that Chapter 46 will argue drive the clearance system, so the two housekeeping systems share a schedule.

In rapid-eye-movement sleep, state 8, cerebral flow rises to waking levels or above in many regions, a striking dissociation from the body's quiescence.

Under acute stress, state 18, systemic pressure rises and autoregulation absorbs it, and the failure of that absorption is the mechanism of hypertensive encephalopathy.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Ischaemic stroke is the failure of delivery at a named station and produces a deficit that is readable straight off the chain, which is why vascular anatomy predicts neurology so well.

Cerebral small vessel disease is the slow failure of the penetrating arterioles and is a major contributor to vascular cognitive impairment and to the white matter changes seen on imaging in later life.

Blood-brain barrier breakdown is now argued to be an early event in Alzheimer's disease rather than a late consequence, and the 2026 Cell atlas by Wang and colleagues maps genetic risk for small vessel disease and stroke onto specific vascular cell ensembles, which is the strongest current statement that these are cell-type-specific rather than generic vascular diseases.

Migraine involves this system through cortical spreading depolarisation and trigeminovascular activation, subarachnoid haemorrhage is its arterial catastrophe, and cerebral amyloid angiopathy is the deposition of amyloid in the vessel wall itself.

HOW IT COLOURS THE ORGANISM:

This is the system that makes thinking expensive, and every limit on sustained cognitive effort is in the end a limit on delivery.

It is also the reason that what happens to the heart and the arteries happens to the mind, which is the single most actionable fact in the whole corpus.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Systemic arterial pressure, arterial carbon dioxide and oxygen tension, and cardiac output from the body.

◦ Local metabolic and signalling demand from active neurons, interneurons, and astrocyte end-feet at every capillary in the brain.

◦ Autonomic and neuromodulatory tone from the systems of Chapters 12, 32, and 34.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Delivered oxygen and glucose to every station of every other system in this catalogue, which makes this the only system on which all forty-seven others subscribe.

◦ A selectively filtered chemical environment, the interstitial composition every neuron computes in.

◦ A regional blood volume and oxygenation signal that is the substrate of functional imaging, and a venous outflow that Chapter 46 partly reclaims.

• STATE.

◦ Current calibre of every arteriole, current perfusion map, current barrier permeability, current position within the autoregulatory plateau.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Global cerebral blood flow about 50 millilitres per 100 grams per minute; brain claiming about 20 per cent of body oxygen and 20 to 25 per cent of glucose on about 2 per cent of body mass; microvessel length about 600 to 700 kilometres; endothelial surface about 20 square metres.

◦ Autoregulatory plateau quoted at mean arterial pressure about 60 to 160 millimetres of mercury in standard clinical sources, with Brady and colleagues 2024 arguing the individual plateau is substantially narrower; the disagreement is reported, not resolved.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Autoregulation to a pressure step, about 5 to 15 seconds, largely complete within a minute.

◦ Neurovascular coupling onset within a few hundred milliseconds, remote dilation within about 400 milliseconds of stimulus onset, haemodynamic peak about 4 to 6 seconds.

◦ Tolerance of arrest: loss of consciousness within about 10 seconds, irreversible injury within minutes.

◦ Angiogenic remodelling to sustained demand, weeks; collateral enlargement, months.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Occlusion at a named station, producing the stroke syndrome of that station; small vessel disease at the penetrating arterioles; barrier breakdown admitting plasma proteins; loss of coupling, which decouples imaging from activity and precedes cognitive decline; haemorrhage as the failure of containment rather than of delivery.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

The cerebrovascular system is a supply servo whose modes are set by which of three controllers currently has authority: pressure, chemistry, or local demand.

Its mode machinery is unusual in the catalogue in that the highest-authority controller is chemical rather than neural, and carbon dioxide can override the other two.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ autoregulated_baseline - The Steady Hand - flow held near 50 millilitres per 100 grams per minute against changing perfusion pressure, the default posture.

◦ functional_hyperaemia - The Local Surge - regional dilation serving an active population, superimposed on the baseline rather than replacing it.

◦ chemoreactive_override - The Carbon Dioxide Veto - global dilation or constriction driven by arterial carbon dioxide, which outranks both of the above.

◦ ischaemic_maximal_dilation - The Last Reserve - vessels dilated to their ceiling with oxygen extraction rising to compensate, the pre-infarct posture.

◦ barrier_permissive - The Open Gate - transient loosening of tight junctions under inflammation, seizure, or osmotic challenge.

• THE ADMISSION RULE.

◦ A mode is admitted only if perfusion pressure lies within the autoregulatory plateau, except ischaemic_maximal_dilation, which is admitted precisely when it does not, and barrier_permissive, which is admitted by a chemical signal independent of pressure.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ autoregulated_baseline: vessel calibre varies inversely with perfusion pressure so that flow is approximately constant across the plateau, restoring flow within about 5 to 15 seconds of a pressure step (high confidence on the behaviour, low to moderate confidence on the individual plateau width, which Brady and colleagues 2024 contest).

◦ functional_hyperaemia: local flow rises by roughly a third to a half above baseline in a strongly driven region, onset within a few hundred milliseconds, peak at about 4 to 6 seconds, returning to baseline over about 10 to 20 seconds (high confidence on the time course, moderate confidence on the amplitude, which is region- and task-dependent).

◦ chemoreactive_override: cerebral blood flow rises steeply with arterial carbon dioxide and falls with hypocapnia within seconds, an effect strong enough to produce syncope from voluntary hyperventilation (high confidence on direction and speed; the exact per-millimetre-of-mercury slope varies enough across methods that this addendum declines to state a single number, and a within-subject comparison of transcranial Doppler against arterial spin labelling under controlled end-tidal carbon dioxide would settle it).

◦ ischaemic_maximal_dilation: dilation is at its ceiling, so flow now follows pressure passively and the tissue defends itself by raising oxygen extraction fraction instead, a compensation with a hard limit beyond which infarction follows within minutes (high confidence).

◦ barrier_permissive: tight junction proteins redistribute and transcytosis rises, admitting plasma proteins over minutes to hours and resolving over hours to days (moderate confidence on the time course in humans).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ autoregulated_baseline to functional_hyperaemia: local neuronal and astrocytic activity above threshold, within a few hundred milliseconds, and the two modes coexist rather than exclude.

◦ Any mode to chemoreactive_override: a change in arterial carbon dioxide, within seconds, and this transition wins over the others.

◦ autoregulated_baseline to ischaemic_maximal_dilation: perfusion pressure falling below the lower limit of the plateau, or a proximal occlusion, within seconds.

◦ ischaemic_maximal_dilation to infarction: extraction reserve exhausted, minutes, and this transition is one-way.

◦ Any mode to barrier_permissive: circulating cytokines, seizure activity, or osmotic challenge, over minutes.

◦ Waking modes to the sleep supply schedule: thrown from above by the Layer 11 state machine, over minutes at sleep onset, with slow-wave sleep lowering global flow and imposing large slow blood volume oscillations, and rapid-eye-movement sleep restoring or exceeding waking flow.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: the healthy boundary lies between underdelivery, which appears as ischaemia, and overdelivery, which appears as hyperperfusion injury and oedema; it is patrolled by myogenic tone in the vessel wall as the fast watchdog and by endothelial nitric oxide and pericyte tone as the slow ones, and the loss of the coupling watchdog is an early, measurable sign in both small vessel disease and Alzheimer's disease.

THE ENGINEERING NOTE:

As an engineering pack this system is the cerebral_supply_system, a three-controller cascade in which pressure_regulator, chemoreactive_regulator, and demand_regulator write to one actuator, arteriolar_calibre, with a separate admission_gate module implementing the barrier.

The engineering analogue is a data centre's power and cooling plant with a per-rack demand signal and a plant-wide chiller override, and the biological differences are two: the demand signal is conducted upstream along the delivery pipe itself rather than over a separate control network, and the plant has no reserve capacity and no restart.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to set vessel calibre from three competing controllers and report the delivered flow.

Create a number variable called perfusion pressure containing the current mean arterial pressure in millimetres of mercury.

Create a number variable called carbon dioxide containing the current arterial carbon dioxide tension.

Create a number variable called local demand containing the current metabolic demand of this region, as a fraction of its baseline.

Create a number variable called plateau low with value 60 and a number variable called plateau high with value 160.

If perfusion pressure is below plateau low, set the mode to ischaemic maximal dilation and set the delivered flow to the baseline flow scaled by the ratio of perfusion pressure to plateau low.

Otherwise, set the mode to autoregulated baseline and set the delivered flow to the baseline flow.

If carbon dioxide differs from its set point, multiply the delivered flow by the chemoreactive factor and set the mode to chemoreactive override.

If local demand is above one, add the functional hyperaemia surplus to the delivered flow and record that functional hyperaemia is running.

If the delivered flow is below the tissue's minimum, raise the oxygen extraction fraction toward its ceiling and start the injury timer.

Publish the delivered flow, the mode, and the extraction fraction to every subscribing system.

The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because three controllers writing to one actuator is most honestly shown as three sequential assignments to one variable, in priority order.

import math

BASELINE_FLOW = 50.0        # ml per 100 g per min, healthy adult average
PLATEAU_LOW = 60.0          # mmHg, classical lower limit; see the dispute note
PLATEAU_HIGH = 160.0        # mmHg, classical upper limit
CO2_SETPOINT = 40.0         # mmHg arterial carbon dioxide
MIN_VIABLE_FLOW = 20.0      # ml per 100 g per min, extraction reserve called below this

def supply(pressure, co2, demand):
    """Three controllers, one actuator, priority order: demand, pressure, chemistry."""
    mode = "autoregulated_baseline"
    flow = BASELINE_FLOW
    if pressure < PLATEAU_LOW:
        mode = "ischaemic_maximal_dilation"
        flow = math.prod([BASELINE_FLOW, pressure / PLATEAU_LOW])
    elif pressure > PLATEAU_HIGH:
        mode = "hyperperfusion_risk"
        flow = math.prod([BASELINE_FLOW, pressure / PLATEAU_HIGH])
    if abs(co2 - CO2_SETPOINT) > 1.0:
        mode = "chemoreactive_override"
        flow = math.prod([flow, co2 / CO2_SETPOINT])
    if demand > 1.0:
        flow = flow + math.prod([BASELINE_FLOW, demand - 1.0, 0.4])
    extraction = 0.35 if flow >= MIN_VIABLE_FLOW else min(0.9, 0.35 / (flow / MIN_VIABLE_FLOW))
    return mode, round(flow, 1), round(extraction, 2)

for case in [(90, 40, 1.0), (90, 40, 1.5), (90, 55, 1.0), (45, 40, 1.0)]:
    m, f, e = supply(case[0], case[1], case[2])
    print(f"MAP {case[0]:>3} CO2 {case[1]:>3} demand {case[2]}: {m:<26} flow {f:<6} extraction {e}")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only system in the catalogue on which every other system subscribes without exception, and the only one whose control action, the surplus blood it sends to working tissue, is the signal by which humans read the rest of the brain.


CHAPTER 46. THE CLEARANCE SYSTEM (The cerebrospinal-glymphatic-lymphatic drain) (The Night Shift Drain) (NON-COG)

Every other organ has lymphatic vessels running between its cells to carry away what the blood cannot take, and the brain has none.

For a century that absence was reported as a curiosity, and the question of how an organ with the body's highest metabolic rate disposes of its own protein waste was left politely open.

The answer that has assembled since 2012 is that the brain solved the problem differently, using cerebrospinal fluid as its lymph, the spaces around its own blood vessels as its lymphatic channels, and sleep as its scheduled maintenance window.

Night Shift names the schedule, because the strongest claim in this field is that the work is done when the brain is not otherwise occupied.

Drain names the trade, the removal of protein waste, excess fluid, and antigen from a compartment that has no conventional drainage of its own.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT ACCOMPLISHES:

The clearance system is the chain from cerebrospinal fluid production at the choroid plexus, through the ventricles and the subarachnoid space, into the perivascular spaces around penetrating arteries, across the brain's interstitium, out along perivenous routes, and thence to the dural meningeal lymphatic vessels and the deep cervical lymph nodes, with a parallel classical exit through the arachnoid granulations into the venous sinuses.

What it accomplishes is threefold and is best read as one efferent axis rather than three separate findings: it removes soluble waste including amyloid beta and tau, it regulates the volume and composition of the fluid the brain sits in, and it delivers brain-derived antigen to peripheral lymph nodes, which is how the immune system of Chapter 47 knows anything about the brain at all.

It carries the (NON-COG) tag because it computes nothing, and it is nonetheless the system whose failure is most frequently proposed as an upstream cause of the diseases the corpus most cares about.

This is the most changed of the four systems in this addendum and the one whose central mechanism is genuinely contested, so this chapter reports the dispute rather than settling it, and marks clearly which parts are secure.

THE CHAIN OF STATIONS (THE LAYER 9 ROSTER):

• The choroid plexus in the four ventricles, the secretory station, producing roughly 80 per cent of cerebrospinal fluid.

• The ventricular system and its ependymal lining, whose motile cilia set the direction of ventricular flow.

• The subarachnoid space and basal cisterns, the reservoir, from which fluid enters the brain.

• The periarterial spaces around penetrating arteries, the inflow channel of the glymphatic route, bounded by the astrocyte end-feet of the glia limitans.

• The interstitium proper, the extracellular space between neurons and glia, whose volume fraction is the single most important variable in this entire chapter.

• The perivenous spaces, the proposed outflow channel.

• The dural meningeal lymphatic vessels running beside the dural venous sinuses and along the middle meningeal artery, and the basal meningeal lymphatics near the petrosal and sigmoid sinuses, which recent work reports as larger-calibre and more richly branched than the dorsal ones.

• The arachnoid granulations into the venous sinuses, the classical exit, and the arachnoid cuff exit sites at the points where bridging veins cross into the dura, identified as a principal fluid and molecule exchange point between the brain's compartment and the dura.

• The deep cervical lymph nodes in the neck, the terminal station, and the point at which the brain's drainage becomes an immunological event.

THE PATHWAYS AND INTERFACES:

The secretory interface at the choroid plexus is an epithelium, not an endothelium: its capillaries are deliberately fenestrated and leaky, and the barrier is moved outward to the epithelial tight junctions, which is why this is called the blood-cerebrospinal-fluid barrier and not the blood-brain barrier.

The glymphatic interface is the astrocyte end-foot, and its aquaporin-4 water channels are the mechanism on which the whole hypothesis originally rested and on which the dispute now turns.

The lymphatic interface is a conventional one, a lymphatic endothelium with the usual valves and the usual dependence on vascular endothelial growth factor C signalling, which is what makes the meningeal lymphatics tractable to the standard tools of lymphatic biology.

The immune interface is the deep cervical lymph node, where brain-derived antigen meets naive lymphocytes, and this is the corpus's cleanest example of a layer-skipping channel: a molecule released by a neuron can become a systemic immune event without any neural signalling at all.

THE TRANSFORMATION ALONG THE CHAIN:

At the choroid plexus the representation is a manufactured fluid, actively secreted rather than filtered, and its composition differs systematically from plasma in ways the plexus chooses.

In the ventricles and cisterns it is a reservoir with a bulk flow and a pulsation imposed on it by the arterial waveform, the respiratory cycle, and, in sleep, by the large slow blood volume oscillations that Chapter 45 hands over.

In the perivascular spaces it becomes a directed influx, and here the representation acquires the property that makes the system work: fluid entering along arteries and leaving along veins converts a diffusive problem into a convective one, which for a large protein is the difference between hours and days.

In the interstitium it becomes a solvent carrying dissolved waste, and the crucial variable is the interstitial volume fraction, which Xie and colleagues, Science 2013, reported as increasing by about 60 per cent in natural sleep and anaesthesia relative to waking, with a corresponding increase in convective exchange and in the rate of amyloid beta clearance.

At the meningeal lymphatics the representation changes category entirely: what was waste becomes antigen, and the cargo now has a destination in the immune system rather than merely an exit.

THE DISPUTE, STATED PLAINLY:

The existence of perivascular fluid movement, of meningeal lymphatic vessels, and of drainage to the deep cervical lymph nodes is not seriously disputed; these are reproducible anatomical and tracer findings across many laboratories.

What is disputed is the mechanism and the sleep dependence, and the dispute is live as of 2026.

Against the standard account, Miao and colleagues in Nature Neuroscience 2024, from Nick Franks and William Wisden's laboratory, reported using a different measurement approach that brain clearance is markedly reduced, not increased, during sleep and anaesthesia, which directly contradicts the Xie 2013 result.

Maiken Nedergaard, whose laboratory produced the original glymphatic account, rejected that paper in unusually blunt public terms, called it poorly controlled, met the authors in December 2024 to argue the point, and wrote to the editors of Nature Neuroscience arguing it should not have been published; Nature's news coverage of April 2025 documents the exchange and the fact that it remains unresolved.

A second and older strand of the dispute concerns aquaporin-4: some laboratories find that deleting it does not significantly affect solute transport, concluding that perivascular transport is diffusion rather than convection, while others find that impairing it does reduce cerebrospinal-to-interstitial fluid exchange, and this addendum reports the split rather than choosing.

A third and largely methodological strand holds that injecting tracer into the cisterna magna artificially raises intracranial pressure and so partly manufactures the influx it measures, a critique that applies to a large fraction of the supporting literature.

This addendum therefore records the following as its honest position: the anatomy is secure, the direction of drainage is secure, the sleep dependence of clearance is not well established, and the question would be settled by a method that measures clearance of an endogenous solute in an unperturbed brain across the sleep-wake cycle without an injected tracer and without opening the skull, which is exactly what several 2025 and 2026 groups are attempting and none has yet delivered convincingly.

THE MOTIFS IT RUNS (THE LAYER 8 INVENTORY):

The end-foot sheet that bounds the perivascular space runs motif 68, the astrocyte syncytium, which is what makes the glia limitans a continuous hydraulic boundary rather than a collection of separate cells.

The slow oscillation that is proposed to pump the system in slow-wave sleep is not a motif of this system at all but is borrowed from motif 63, the coupled circadian oscillator network, and from the cortical slow oscillation of Layer 11 state 7, and the corpus should note that this system has no pump of its own.

The choroid plexus runs a straightforward secretory epithelium rather than a neural motif, which is a fair statement of why the Layer 8 catalogue has no entry for it.

TEMPORAL SIGNATURE:

Cerebrospinal fluid is produced at about 0.35 millilitres per minute, roughly 500 millilitres per day, against a standing volume of about 125 to 150 millilitres, so the whole pool is replaced about three to four times per day.

That turnover figure is the securest number in this chapter and it sets the system's slowest useful time constant at about six to eight hours.

Glymphatic influx measured by tracer appears over tens of minutes to hours, and the reported sleep-associated change in interstitial volume of about 60 per cent, Xie and colleagues 2013, appears over minutes at the transition into slow-wave sleep.

Drainage to the deep cervical lymph nodes is detectable within tens of minutes of a cisternal tracer injection, though this figure inherits the injection critique above.

CAPACITY AND LIMITS:

Production is remarkably inflexible: cerebrospinal fluid secretion changes only modestly with intracranial pressure over the normal range, which is why raised pressure is dangerous rather than self-correcting.

The interstitial volume fraction is about 14 to 20 per cent of tissue volume in the waking brain by most estimates, and this is the parameter through which sleep is proposed to act.

The system's throughput for large proteins is the real limit, and this is where the field's interest lies, because amyloid beta and tau are exactly the cargo that diffusion handles worst and convection handles well.

MODULATION AND GATING:

Body posture matters measurably, with lateral posture reported as more favourable to glymphatic transport than prone in rodent work, a finding of moderate confidence and uncertain human relevance.

Noradrenaline is the proposed master gate: the standard account holds that falling noradrenergic tone at sleep onset permits the interstitial space to expand, which makes the locus coeruleus system of Chapter 32 the controller of this system, an elegant claim that inherits all the uncertainty of the sleep dispute above.

Arterial pulsatility, respiration, and the slow blood volume oscillations of slow-wave sleep are the proposed motive forces, and the corpus should note honestly that no single one of them has been shown sufficient.

Alcohol, anaesthetic agents, and ageing all alter measured transport, and the direction for anaesthesia is precisely what the 2024 dispute is about.

PLASTICITY AND LEARNING:

This system does not learn, and saying so is worth a line, because it is one of the very few entries in the whole catalogue of which that is true.

It does remodel: meningeal lymphatic vessels can be expanded by vascular endothelial growth factor C treatment and regress with age, and that plasticity is structural rather than informational.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Meningeal lymphatic vessels develop postnatally in the mouse, sprouting from vessels near the skull base and extending along the sinuses, which is late by the standards of most systems in this catalogue.

The choroid plexus is among the earliest differentiated structures of the brain and secretes signalling molecules into the developing ventricles, so this system is a developmental instructor long before it is a drain.

Perivascular spaces and end-foot polarisation mature with the vasculature they wrap, so this system's assembly is downstream of Chapter 45's.

EVOLUTIONARY PROVENANCE:

Perivascular drainage routes are found across vertebrates, and dural lymphatics have now been reported in fish, birds, and mammals, so the design is old and its recent rediscovery in mammals is a fact about the history of anatomy rather than about the history of animals.

The absence of parenchymal lymphatics is the constraint that forced the design, and it is best read as the price of the barrier: an organ that excludes immune cells cannot host lymphatic vessels between its cells, and must move its drainage to its borders.

THE ENDOCRINE COUPLING:

Vasopressin and atrial natriuretic peptide both act on the choroid plexus and modulate cerebrospinal fluid production, tying this system to whole-body fluid balance.

Melatonin is secreted into the cerebrospinal fluid directly by the pineal gland at concentrations well above plasma, so the fluid of this system is also a broadcast medium for the axis of Chapter 41.

Cortisol and the axis of Chapter 37 alter barrier and plexus function, and chronic stress is reported to impair glymphatic transport, a coupling of low to moderate confidence.

STATES AND THE LAYER 11 SCHEDULE:

The corpus's Layer 11 volume already names glymphatic clearance at full flow in state 7, slow-wave sleep, and this chapter's duty is to say that the corpus's own claim there is the majority position and is contested, not to contradict it.

In waking states this system runs at its lowest reported throughput on the standard account, and the Franks laboratory's 2024 result inverts exactly this claim.

In rapid-eye-movement sleep, state 8, the picture is unclear and no reliable figure could be found; a within-animal comparison across all three states with a single method would settle it.

In sickness behaviour, state 20, and in acute stress, state 18, transport is reported as impaired, which closes a loop with Chapter 47.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Hydrocephalus is this system's classical failure, an imbalance of production against drainage, and normal pressure hydrocephalus is its subtle late-life form with the gait, cognition, and continence triad.

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension is the failure of outflow without ventricular enlargement.

Alzheimer's disease is the field's central target, on the hypothesis that impaired clearance permits amyloid and tau accumulation, and the honest statement is that the association is robust and the causal direction is not established.

Enlarged perivascular spaces on imaging are a recognised marker of small vessel disease and thereby a shared failure mode with Chapter 45, traumatic brain injury impairs transport measurably, and ageing reduces meningeal lymphatic drainage in rodents with restoration improving cognition, a result whose human translation is not yet available.

HOW IT COLOURS THE ORGANISM:

This is the strongest single reason the corpus can give for why sleep is not optional, and it is the reason a great deal of the public now believes sleep washes the brain, a belief that runs ahead of the evidence in exactly the way this chapter has tried to mark.

It is also the channel through which the brain, an organ built to be invisible to the immune system, chooses what to show it.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Arterial pulsation, respiratory pressure swings, and the slow blood volume oscillations of slow-wave sleep from the system of Chapter 45.

◦ Noradrenergic tone from the system of Chapter 32, proposed as the master gate on interstitial volume.

◦ Systemic fluid balance signals, vasopressin and atrial natriuretic peptide, at the choroid plexus.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A cleared interstitium and a regulated interstitial composition to every other system in the catalogue.

◦ Brain-derived antigen to the deep cervical lymph nodes, which is this system's output to Chapter 47 and the corpus's cleanest layer-skipping channel.

◦ Melatonin and other signals distributed by bulk cerebrospinal fluid flow, a broadcast medium shared with Chapter 41.

• STATE.

◦ Current interstitial volume fraction, current perivascular influx rate, current cerebrospinal fluid volume and pressure, current meningeal lymphatic patency.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Cerebrospinal fluid production about 0.35 millilitres per minute, about 500 millilitres per day; standing volume about 125 to 150 millilitres; choroid plexus responsible for about 80 per cent of production.

◦ Interstitial volume fraction about 14 to 20 per cent waking, reported to rise by about 60 per cent in sleep and anaesthesia (Xie and colleagues, Science 2013), a figure whose sleep dependence is disputed and is not treated here as established.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Whole cerebrospinal fluid pool replaced 3 to 4 times per day, about 6 to 8 hours per turnover, the securest constant in this chapter.

◦ Interstitial volume change at the waking-to-slow-wave-sleep transition, minutes.

◦ Tracer influx into perivascular spaces, tens of minutes to hours; arrival at deep cervical lymph nodes, tens of minutes.

◦ Meningeal lymphatic structural remodelling, weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Obstruction of ventricular outflow, producing hydrocephalus; failure of arachnoid granulation or lymphatic outflow, producing raised pressure; loss of end-foot polarisation, proposed to degrade perivascular exchange; age-related meningeal lymphatic regression; and the proposed common late failure in which impaired clearance permits protein accumulation, which is a hypothesis and is labelled as one.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

The clearance system is a drain whose modes are set almost entirely from outside it, by the Layer 11 state machine and by noradrenergic tone, and it is the most mode-poor entry in this addendum, exactly as the corpus's design lesson predicts of a pure utility.

Its mode register is stated here with an unusual warning: the boundary between its two principal modes is the very thing the 2024 to 2026 literature disputes, so the register below is the majority account and is marked as such.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ waking_low_flow - The Day Trickle - production and bulk flow continue while perivascular convection runs at its reported minimum and the interstitial space is at its narrowest.

◦ slow_wave_high_flow - The Night Flush - the majority account's working mode, interstitial space expanded and convective exchange at maximum under low noradrenergic tone.

◦ pressure_defended - The Pressure Guard - outflow resistance and production adjusted against a rising intracranial pressure, a defensive posture with very little authority.

◦ immune_efferent - The Dispatch - antigen-loaded fluid moving to the deep cervical lymph nodes, which runs continuously rather than exclusively and can be raised sharply by inflammation.

• THE ADMISSION RULE.

◦ slow_wave_high_flow is admitted only when noradrenergic tone from the locus coeruleus is low and the Layer 11 state machine is in state 7, and the corpus should note that this rule is a statement of the majority account, not an independently verified gate.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ waking_low_flow: production continues at about 0.35 millilitres per minute, interstitial volume fraction at its waking value of roughly 14 to 20 per cent, convective clearance of large solutes reported as low (high confidence on production, low confidence on the clearance claim given the Franks laboratory result).

◦ slow_wave_high_flow: interstitial volume fraction reported to rise by about 60 per cent with a corresponding rise in amyloid beta clearance rate, onset over minutes (Xie and colleagues, Science 2013; contested by Miao and colleagues, Nature Neuroscience 2024, who report the opposite direction; low confidence, dispute unresolved).

◦ pressure_defended: production falls only modestly as intracranial pressure rises, so this mode has poor authority and decompensates abruptly rather than gracefully (high confidence, and clinically important).

◦ immune_efferent: antigen arrival at deep cervical lymph nodes within tens of minutes of release, increased by inflammation and by meningeal lymphatic expansion (moderate confidence in rodent work, low confidence on human rates, which are not well established; a human contrast-based lymphatic imaging study across sleep and waking would settle it).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ waking_low_flow to slow_wave_high_flow: falling noradrenergic tone at the descent into slow-wave sleep, over minutes; this is the transition the field disputes and it is named here as disputed.

◦ slow_wave_high_flow to waking_low_flow: arousal and the noradrenergic surge, within seconds to a minute, and the speed of this direction is better established than the speed of the other.

◦ Any mode to pressure_defended: rising intracranial pressure from mass, haemorrhage, or outflow obstruction, over minutes to hours.

◦ Any mode toward raised immune_efferent throughput: peripheral or central inflammation, over hours, handing directly to Chapter 47.

◦ Any mode toward chronically reduced throughput: ageing, over years, with meningeal lymphatic regression the best-characterised component.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: the healthy boundary lies between underclearance, which shows as protein accumulation and enlarged perivascular spaces, and overdrainage, which shows as low-pressure headache and subdural collection; the watchdogs are the pressure-volume relation of the craniospinal compartment as the fast one and the structural patency of the meningeal lymphatics as the slow one, and the corpus should record that this system has no error signal of its own and cannot detect its own failure.

THE ENGINEERING NOTE:

As an engineering pack this system is the cns_clearance_system, a single_pass_flush pipeline with a producer module choroid_secretion, a transport module perivascular_convection whose gain is set by an external variable interstitial_volume_fraction, and two sinks, lymphatic_export and venous_export, the first of which also publishes to the immune bus.

The engineering analogue is a coolant loop with a filter stage and a scheduled maintenance window, and the biological differences are three: the pump is borrowed from another subsystem, the maintenance window is scheduled by a global state machine rather than by the loop itself, and the filter's output is forwarded to a security system as evidence.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to clear solute from the interstitium at a rate set by an externally supplied volume fraction, and to forward a sample of what was cleared to the immune system.

Create a number variable called solute load containing the current interstitial concentration of the waste protein.

Create a number variable called volume fraction containing the current interstitial volume fraction, supplied by the state machine.

Create a number variable called production rate with value 0.35 millilitres per minute.

Create a number variable called diffusive clearance, computed from the solute load and the diffusion constant alone.

Create a number variable called convective clearance, computed from the solute load, the perivascular influx, and the volume fraction.

Set the total clearance to the sum of diffusive clearance and convective clearance.

Subtract the total clearance from the solute load and set the solute load to the result.

Take a fixed fraction of the cleared solute and add it to the antigen parcel.

Publish the antigen parcel to the deep cervical lymph nodes, and publish the remaining solute load and the current cerebrospinal fluid pressure to the rest of the organism.

Record in the log that the convective term is the disputed one.

The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole dispute reduces to whether one coefficient is larger asleep or awake, and a single parameter shown twice makes that visible in a way prose does not.

import math

PRODUCTION_ML_PER_MIN = 0.35     # about 500 ml per day, secure figure
CSF_POOL_ML = 140.0              # standing volume, 125 to 150 ml
DIFFUSION_K = 0.02               # per hour, large protein, slow by construction
ANTIGEN_FRACTION = 0.01          # fraction of cleared solute forwarded as antigen

def clear(load, volume_fraction, convective_gain, hours):
    """One compartment, two clearance terms. convective_gain is the disputed one."""
    convective_k = math.prod([convective_gain, volume_fraction])
    total_k = DIFFUSION_K + convective_k
    remaining = math.prod([load, math.exp(-math.prod([total_k, hours]))])
    cleared = load - remaining
    return round(remaining, 3), round(math.prod([cleared, ANTIGEN_FRACTION]), 4)

turnover_hours = round(CSF_POOL_ML / math.prod([PRODUCTION_ML_PER_MIN, 60.0]), 1)
print(f"CSF pool turnover: {turnover_hours} hours, about {round(24/turnover_hours,1)} times per day")

waking = clear(1.0, 0.16, 0.30, 8.0)
sleep_majority = clear(1.0, 0.26, 0.30, 8.0)     # Xie 2013: space expanded about 60 per cent
sleep_contested = clear(1.0, 0.16, 0.12, 8.0)    # Miao 2024: clearance reduced in sleep

print(f"8 h waking            : remaining {waking[0]}, antigen {waking[1]}")
print(f"8 h sleep, majority   : remaining {sleep_majority[0]}, antigen {sleep_majority[1]}")
print(f"8 h sleep, contested  : remaining {sleep_contested[0]}, antigen {sleep_contested[1]}")
print("The corpus records both. It does not average them.")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only system in the catalogue with no pump of its own, no error signal of its own, and no ability to detect its own failure, which borrows its motive force from the vasculature and its schedule from sleep, and whose waste stream doubles as the brain's only report to the immune system.


CHAPTER 47. THE NEUROIMMUNE SYSTEM (The microglial-border-vagal dialogue) (The Standing Garrison) (COG)

Take an infection to bed and notice what happens to your mind: you cannot be bothered, you do not want company, food is uninteresting, and you sleep.

That is not the infection damaging you, and it is not weakness, and it is not, in the first instance, a symptom at all.

It is a coordinated, reversible, centrally organised protocol, run by the brain on information supplied by the immune system, that reallocates the whole organism away from foraging and social competition and toward fever and repair.

Standing Garrison names the architecture, a permanent immune presence at the borders of a tissue that admits no army into its interior.

Dialogue names the trade, because the traffic is bidirectional in a way the corpus's other body-brain axes are not: the immune system tells the brain what is happening, and the brain tells the immune system how much of it to do.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT ACCOMPLISHES:

The neuroimmune system is the distributed network comprising the parenchymal microglia, the border-associated macrophages of the meninges, perivascular spaces, and choroid plexus, the meningeal lymphocyte and mast cell populations, the humoral and neural channels by which peripheral inflammation is signalled inward, and the vagal and sympathetic channels by which the brain signals back out.

What it accomplishes is four things at once: surveillance and defence of a tissue that cannot regenerate, developmental and ongoing sculpting of circuits by synaptic pruning, the reading of peripheral immune state into a central motivational state, and the reflex regulation of that peripheral immune state from the brainstem.

It carries the (COG) tag on two independent grounds, either of which would suffice: microglia set which synapses survive, and therefore participate in learning and in the construction of every circuit in this corpus; and the sickness state they help install is a motivational reconfiguration, which is a cognitive object and not a lesion.

The corpus's Layer 6 volume already flags the frontier claim that meningeal T cells modulate mood and social behaviour from outside the parenchyma, and this chapter takes that flag seriously without treating it as settled.

THE CHAIN OF STATIONS (THE LAYER 9 ROSTER):

• The peripheral immune compartment, the source: macrophages, dendritic cells, and lymphocytes producing interleukin-1 beta, interleukin-6, and tumour necrosis factor at a site of infection or injury.

• The vagal afferent, the fast inward channel, whose paraganglia and terminals carry cytokine receptors and report inflammation to the brainstem within minutes, without any molecule crossing into the brain.

• The circumventricular organs, the humoral inward channel, brain regions where the barrier is deliberately absent so that circulating signals can be read directly.

• The cerebral endothelium and the choroid plexus, the transducing stations, which convert a blood-borne cytokine signal into a brain-side prostaglandin signal without admitting the cytokine itself.

• The nucleus of the solitary tract and the parabrachial nucleus in the brainstem, the integrating stations shared with the interoceptive system of Chapter 7.

• The hypothalamus, the effector station for fever, appetite suppression, and the recruitment of the axis of Chapter 37.

• The parenchymal microglia, the resident station, everywhere in the brain at once and never more than a few tens of micrometres from any synapse.

• The border compartments, the meninges, perivascular spaces, and choroid plexus stroma, holding the border-associated macrophages and the meningeal lymphocyte populations.

• The deep cervical lymph nodes, the outward antigen station, received from Chapter 46 and returning primed lymphocytes to the meninges.

• The efferent vagus and the coeliac ganglion and splenic nerve, the outward control channel of the inflammatory reflex.

THE PATHWAYS AND INTERFACES:

The neural afferent pathway is the vagus, and its interface is a receptor on a sensory terminal rather than a barrier crossing, which is why it is fast: inflammation in the abdomen is reported to the brainstem in minutes.

The humoral afferent pathway is the bloodstream, and its interface is either a leaky circumventricular organ or a transducing endothelial cell, which is why it is slower and more global.

The border interface is the corpus's own Layer 7 entry 52, the neuro-immune junction, and it is here that the trade happens: border-associated macrophages sit in the perivascular spaces of Chapter 46 and the vascular ensembles of Chapter 45, so all three of this addendum's utility systems physically overlap at one address.

The efferent interface is the inflammatory reflex, a genuine reflex arc in the corpus's sense, with the vagal afferent as its sensory limb, the brainstem as its integrator, and the efferent vagus to the coeliac ganglion to the splenic nerve to acetylcholine-producing T cells to the alpha-7 nicotinic receptor on the macrophage as its motor limb.

THE TRANSFORMATION ALONG THE CHAIN:

At the periphery the representation is a molecular one, cytokine concentrations at a site, carrying no address and no priority.

At the vagal afferent it becomes a firing rate on a labelled line, which gives it speed and a rough visceral address but discards the identity of the pathogen.

At the endothelium and circumventricular organs it becomes a prostaglandin gradient inside the brain, which is the crucial redescription: an immune fact has become a neurochemical one without any immune molecule crossing the barrier.

At the hypothalamus and brainstem it becomes a set of set-point changes, a raised thermal set point, a lowered appetite set point, a raised sleep pressure, and a recruitment signal to the stress axis.

At the level of behaviour it becomes a motivational state, and this is the transformation that earns the tag: what began as a cytokine concentration is now a reordering of what the organism wants, which Dantzer's formulation names a highly organised central motivational state rather than a debility.

At the microglia the transformation runs on a different axis entirely, from a molecular tag on a synapse, complement deposition, to the physical removal of that synapse, which is the conversion of an immune mechanism into a structural memory operation.

THE MOTIFS IT RUNS (THE LAYER 8 INVENTORY):

The synaptic sculpting arm runs motif 70, the microglial pruning loop, the Layer 8 catalogue's own entry for this system's signature operation.

The inflammatory reflex runs motif 48, the vago-vagal loop, with an immune rather than a visceral-mechanical variable as its controlled quantity, and it is the corpus's clearest example of one motif serving two systems with different cargo.

The fever and sickness installation runs motif 60, the closed-loop negative feedback motif, around a deliberately displaced set point, and the recruitment of cortisol adds motif 67, the ultradian feedback oscillator of the stress axis, as a brake.

The border stations run motif 71's neighbourhood rather than a motif of their own, and this chapter records honestly that the Layer 8 catalogue has no entry for a border surveillance module, which is a real and nameable gap for a future build.

TEMPORAL SIGNATURE:

The vagal channel is the fast one and reports peripheral inflammation to the brainstem within minutes.

The humoral channel is slower, and sickness behaviour after a peripheral endotoxin challenge peaks at about two to six hours and then gradually wanes, a figure that comes from Dantzer's rodent literature and is reproduced in human endotoxin studies.

The inflammatory reflex acts fast and holds long: Tracey's laboratory reports that vagus nerve stimulation lasting between 0.1 and 60 seconds significantly reduces systemic tumour necrosis factor release in experimental endotoxaemia, and that the suppression is sustained for more than 24 hours, which is a remarkable ratio of stimulus to effect duration.

Microglial process motility is on a wholly different scale, with fine processes surveying their territory continuously and contacting a given synapse for minutes at a time, so that the whole parenchymal volume is sampled over a period of hours.

CAPACITY AND LIMITS:

Microglia constitute roughly 5 to 10 per cent of brain cells depending on region and counting method, and the corpus's Layer 6 volume should be treated as the authority on that figure over anything quoted here.

Each microglial cell owns a non-overlapping territory, so the population tiles the brain exactly once, which is an unusual architectural constraint and means surveillance capacity is fixed by cell number.

The system's real limit is directional: it can install the sickness state quickly and it resolves it slowly, and a state that fails to resolve is the proposed substrate of inflammation-associated depression and of the fatigue that outlasts infections.

MODULATION AND GATING:

Cortisol from the axis of Chapter 37 is the system's principal brake, and the loop is closed: inflammation recruits cortisol, cortisol suppresses inflammation, and the failure of that suppression by glucocorticoid resistance is a recognised pathological mode.

The vagal efferent is the fast brake and is the target of the clinical bioelectronic medicine programme, which is the most direct engineering exploitation of any system in this catalogue.

Noradrenaline and the sympathetic innervation of lymphoid organs act in the opposite direction on some measures and the same direction on others, and the honest statement is that sympathetic modulation of immunity is well established in existence and poorly established in sign.

Sleep loss raises inflammatory markers and inflammation raises sleep pressure, so this system and the Layer 11 state machine modulate each other rather than one governing the other.

PLASTICITY AND LEARNING:

Microglia carry an experience record: a prior inflammatory challenge leaves them primed, so that a second challenge produces an exaggerated response, a phenomenon of trained immunity that is a genuine memory held in a non-neuronal cell.

The adaptive arm learns in the conventional immunological sense, with meningeal lymphocyte populations shaped by the antigen forwarded from Chapter 46.

The synaptic pruning function is itself the substrate of a great deal of the plasticity described elsewhere in this corpus, so this system is both a learner and a mechanism of learning, which no other entry in the catalogue can claim.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Microglia and the border-associated macrophages are yolk-sac derived and colonise the brain very early, before most neurons are born, and they are maintained thereafter by local self-renewal rather than by replacement from blood, which is why they are long-lived enough to hold a record.

Complement-dependent microglial pruning is a required step in the refinement of sensory maps, and its failure in animal models leaves excess synapses and disordered connectivity.

Meningeal lymphatics arrive postnatally, as Chapter 46 records, so the efferent limb of this system matures later than the resident one.

Maternal immune activation during gestation measurably alters offspring brain development and behaviour in animal models and is epidemiologically associated with neurodevelopmental conditions in humans, and this is the developmental claim of this chapter with the greatest consequence and the greatest need for care.

EVOLUTIONARY PROVENANCE:

Sickness behaviour is found across vertebrates and in invertebrates, and its conservation is the strongest argument that it is an adaptive protocol and not a failure, because a purely damaging consequence of infection would not be conserved with this fidelity.

Microglia are ancient, present in essentially all vertebrates, and the immune-privilege architecture of a barrier plus a border garrison is a general vertebrate solution.

The elaboration in mammals is on the sculpting side rather than the defensive one, and the corpus should read microglial pruning as a repurposing of a phagocytic mechanism for a developmental job.

THE ENDOCRINE COUPLING:

The coupling to the axis of Chapter 37 is the tightest in this addendum and runs both ways, with interleukin-1 beta and interleukin-6 among the most potent known activators of the axis, and cortisol among the most potent suppressors of them.

Leptin, insulin, and the metabolic signals of Chapters 42 and 43 modulate immune function directly, which is the mechanistic core of the association between obesity and low-grade inflammation.

Oestrogen and testosterone shift immune set points in opposite directions, and the marked female preponderance of autoimmune disease is the population-level expression of that coupling.

Vagal tone and the gut-brain axis of Chapter 43 share the same nerve, so this system and that one are not merely coupled but partly identical in their hardware.

STATES AND THE LAYER 11 SCHEDULE:

The corpus already carries this system's most important state as Layer 11 state 20, the sickness behaviour state, described there as the infection protocol, and this chapter's contribution is to name the system that installs it.

In slow-wave sleep, state 7, microglial surveillance continues and inflammatory signalling is suppressed relative to waking, and the interaction with Chapter 46's clearance schedule is a live research question rather than a settled fact.

Under acute stress, state 18, there is a rapid mobilisation of immune cells and a transient pro-inflammatory shift, and under sustained stress, state 19, the picture inverts toward glucocorticoid resistance and low-grade chronic inflammation, which is one of the corpus's better examples of a state whose short and long forms have opposite signs.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Multiple sclerosis is the autoimmune failure of this system's tolerance, and its treatment is the most successful immunological intervention in neurology.

Neuroinflammation is now argued to be a driver rather than a bystander in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, with microglial genetic risk variants among the strongest identified in Alzheimer's disease, which is a strong argument for causal involvement and not proof of it.

Inflammation-associated depression is the pathological persistence of the sickness state, and the observation that interferon therapy induces depression at high rates is among the cleanest human evidence for a cytokine cause of a mood disorder.

Autoimmune encephalitis, sepsis-associated encephalopathy, and post-infectious fatigue states are the acute forms, and this chapter records that the mechanistic account of persistent post-infectious fatigue is not well established, and that a longitudinal study pairing cerebrospinal fluid and blood immune profiling with objective function across recovery and non-recovery would settle a great deal of it.

HOW IT COLOURS THE ORGANISM:

This is the system that makes being unwell feel like a change of personality rather than a change of body, and understanding that it is a protocol rather than a failure changes what a person owes themselves when ill.

It is also the system that quietly decides which of the synapses this corpus spends five volumes describing are permitted to remain.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Peripheral cytokines, interleukin-1 beta, interleukin-6, and tumour necrosis factor, read humorally at the circumventricular organs and the endothelium.

◦ Vagal afferent traffic reporting peripheral inflammation within minutes, shared hardware with Chapters 7 and 43.

◦ Brain-derived antigen arriving at the deep cervical lymph nodes from Chapter 46.

◦ Neuronal activity and complement tagging at individual synapses, the local input to the pruning arm.

◦ Cortisol from Chapter 37 and noradrenaline from Chapter 32 as descending modulators.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ The sickness behaviour state to the Layer 11 state machine, as state 20.

◦ Set-point changes to the hypothalamus: thermal, appetitive, and sleep pressure.

◦ Efferent vagal and splenic nerve commands suppressing peripheral cytokine production.

◦ Synaptic removal decisions to every circuit in the corpus, which is this system's only structural output and its most consequential one.

◦ Barrier permeability modulation to Chapter 45.

• STATE.

◦ Current microglial functional state across the parenchyma, current border garrison composition, current central prostaglandin tone, current peripheral cytokine load, current priming history.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Microglia roughly 5 to 10 per cent of brain cells, tiling the parenchyma in non-overlapping territories; the corpus's Layer 6 figure governs.

◦ Alpha-7 nicotinic receptor on the macrophage as the terminal effector of the inflammatory reflex, established by the failure of vagal stimulation to suppress tumour necrosis factor in alpha-7-deficient animals.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Vagal afferent report of peripheral inflammation, minutes.

◦ Sickness behaviour after peripheral endotoxin, peak at about 2 to 6 hours, waning over the following day (Dantzer and colleagues).

◦ Inflammatory reflex: vagal stimulation of 0.1 to 60 seconds duration, with tumour necrosis factor suppression sustained for more than 24 hours (Tracey laboratory).

◦ Microglial contact with an individual synapse, minutes; full parenchymal survey, hours.

◦ Microglial priming, persisting for weeks to months after a challenge.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of tolerance, giving autoimmune demyelination and encephalitis; failure of resolution, giving chronic low-grade neuroinflammation and inflammation-associated depression; excessive pruning, proposed in schizophrenia; insufficient pruning, proposed in some neurodevelopmental conditions; glucocorticoid resistance, breaking the brake; and priming, in which a proportionate first response guarantees a disproportionate second.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

The neuroimmune system is the mode-richest entry in this addendum, which the corpus's design lesson predicts of a system carrying a cognitive tag, and its modes are genuine functional postures rather than degrees of one variable.

Its mode machinery is set from three directions at once: local synaptic signals set the pruning arm, peripheral cytokine load sets the defensive arm, and descending cortisol and vagal tone set the brake.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ surveillant_homeostatic - The Patrol - ramified microglia sampling their territories continuously, border macrophages sampling the fluid, no inflammatory output.

◦ synaptic_sculpting - The Editor - complement-guided identification and physical removal of tagged synapses, running heavily in development and at a lower rate lifelong.

◦ sickness_protocol - The Bed Rest Order - the installed central motivational state, fever, anorexia, social withdrawal, raised sleep pressure, and analgesia-then-hyperalgesia, and the corpus's Layer 11 state 20.

◦ reflex_suppressed - The Brake On - efferent vagal and splenic cholinergic signalling actively holding peripheral cytokine production down.

◦ primed_reactive - The Hair Trigger - a microglial posture carrying the record of a previous challenge, responding disproportionately to the next one.

◦ chronic_unresolved - The Stuck Alarm - the pathological mode, low-grade inflammatory output that neither escalates nor resolves.

• THE ADMISSION RULE.

◦ sickness_protocol is admitted only when the central prostaglandin signal exceeds threshold and the cortisol brake has not yet engaged, which is why the state has a characteristic delay after infection and a characteristic self-limitation; chronic_unresolved is admitted precisely when that brake has failed.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ surveillant_homeostatic: processes extend and retract continuously, a given synapse contacted for minutes, whole territory sampled over hours, no cytokine output above baseline (high confidence).

◦ synaptic_sculpting: complement-tagged synapses are engulfed, with the rate set by the ratio of tagging to protective signalling, heavily active in the developmental critical periods of the corpus's Layer 6 and Layer 9 volumes (high confidence on the mechanism in rodents, moderate confidence on the human rate, which is not directly measurable and would be settled only by a marker visible in living human tissue).

◦ sickness_protocol: thermal set point raised, food intake and social approach suppressed, sleep pressure raised, onset over 1 to 2 hours, peak at 2 to 6 hours after a peripheral endotoxin challenge, resolution over 12 to 48 hours (high confidence in rodents and in human endotoxin studies).

◦ reflex_suppressed: efferent vagal stimulation for as little as 0.1 seconds and as much as 60 seconds reduces systemic tumour necrosis factor, with suppression sustained beyond 24 hours, acting through the alpha-7 nicotinic receptor on the macrophage (high confidence on the pathway, moderate confidence on the dose-response in humans).

◦ primed_reactive: a second challenge produces an exaggerated cytokine and behavioural response, persisting for weeks to months after the first (moderate confidence, largely rodent).

◦ chronic_unresolved: sustained low-grade cytokine output with blunted cortisol suppression, persisting indefinitely, and its human mechanistic account is not well established (low confidence, and the corpus should not pretend otherwise).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ surveillant_homeostatic to sickness_protocol: peripheral cytokine load crossing threshold, reported by the vagal channel within minutes and by the humoral channel over 1 to 2 hours, with the behavioural state installed over hours.

◦ sickness_protocol to reflex_suppressed: brainstem integration of the afferent signal engaging the efferent vagus, within seconds to minutes of the afferent report, and this transition runs concurrently with the state it limits rather than after it.

◦ sickness_protocol to surveillant_homeostatic: cortisol brake plus resolution of the peripheral challenge, over 12 to 48 hours.

◦ sickness_protocol to chronic_unresolved: failure of the cortisol brake, glucocorticoid resistance, or a persisting stimulus, over weeks; this is the pathological transition and it is slow, which is why it is missed.

◦ Any mode to primed_reactive: completion of a first inflammatory episode, leaving a record that persists for weeks to months.

◦ surveillant_homeostatic to synaptic_sculpting: local complement tagging of a weak synapse, over minutes to hours, and this transition is local rather than global, so the two modes coexist across the brain at any instant.

◦ Sustained stress, Layer 11 state 19, biases the whole register toward chronic_unresolved over weeks, and sleep loss does the same over days.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: the healthy boundary lies between under-response, which appears as uncontrolled infection and, on the sculpting arm, as excess synapses, and over-response, which appears as autoimmunity and, on the sculpting arm, as synapse loss; it is patrolled by the cortisol brake and the vagal reflex as the fast watchdogs and by regulatory lymphocyte populations as the slow one, and the diagnostic signature of failure is not the amplitude of the response but its refusal to resolve.

THE ENGINEERING NOTE:

As an engineering pack this system is the neuroimmune_system, an unusual pack in that it exposes two entirely different services from one set of modules: a defence_and_state service with an afferent_transducer, a state_installer, and an efferent_reflex_suppressor, and a structural_editor service with a tagging input and a synapse_removal output.

The engineering analogue is a security subsystem that also holds the authority to delete code from the running application, and the biological differences are that both services are implemented by the same long-lived agents, that those agents keep a private history that changes their future gain, and that the deletion authority has no separate audit trail.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to read a peripheral inflammatory load, install or resolve the sickness state, and apply the efferent brake.

Create a number variable called peripheral cytokines containing the current inflammatory load.

Create a number variable called central prostaglandin containing the brain-side signal, initially zero.

Create a number variable called cortisol containing the current output of the stress axis.

Create a number variable called vagal brake with initial value zero.

If peripheral cytokines are above the vagal detection threshold, set vagal brake to the reflex gain and record that the afferent report arrived within minutes.

Set central prostaglandin to the peripheral cytokines transduced across the endothelium, reduced by the vagal brake and by cortisol.

If central prostaglandin is above the sickness threshold, install the sickness protocol: raise the thermal set point, lower the appetite set point, raise the sleep pressure, and lower the social approach weight.

If the sickness protocol has been installed for longer than the resolution window and cortisol has failed to suppress the peripheral cytokines, set the mode to chronic unresolved and raise an alarm.

Set the priming level to the greater of the current priming level and the peak central prostaglandin reached.

Publish the mode, the set-point changes, and the efferent brake command to the periphery.

The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole system is one afferent transduction, one thresholded state install, and one efferent brake, and because the priming variable, which is the part that makes this a learner, is a single line that persists across calls.

import math

VAGAL_THRESHOLD = 0.2        # peripheral load at which the fast afferent reports
SICKNESS_THRESHOLD = 0.35    # central prostaglandin at which the state installs
REFLEX_GAIN = 0.45           # efferent vagal suppression of peripheral cytokines
TRANSDUCTION = 0.8           # endothelial and circumventricular conversion efficiency
RESOLUTION_HOURS = 36.0      # beyond which non-resolution is pathological

priming = 0.0                # persists across episodes: this is the memory

def episode(peripheral, cortisol, hours_elapsed):
    global priming
    load = peripheral + math.prod([peripheral, priming])
    brake = REFLEX_GAIN if load > VAGAL_THRESHOLD else 0.0
    central = math.prod([load, TRANSDUCTION, 1.0 - brake, 1.0 - cortisol])
    priming = max(priming, math.prod([central, 0.5]))
    if central < SICKNESS_THRESHOLD:
        return "surveillant_homeostatic", round(central, 3)
    if hours_elapsed > RESOLUTION_HOURS and cortisol < 0.2:
        return "chronic_unresolved", round(central, 3)
    return "sickness_protocol", round(central, 3)

for peripheral, cortisol, hours in [(0.1, 0.3, 4), (0.9, 0.3, 4), (0.9, 0.05, 48), (0.9, 0.3, 4)]:
    mode, central = episode(peripheral, cortisol, hours)
    print(f"load {peripheral} cortisol {cortisol} at {hours:>2} h: "
          f"{mode:<24} central {central}  priming now {round(priming, 3)}")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only system in the catalogue that can rewrite the wiring of every other system, that holds a memory in cells that are not neurons, and whose most familiar output is not a perception or a movement but a change in what the organism wants.


CHAPTER 48. THE NOCICEPTIVE SYSTEM (The nocicepto-spino-limbic alarm chain) (The Two-Channel Alarm) (COG)

This chapter discharges a promise the corpus made and did not keep.

The outline entry for the somatosensory system says that touch, proprioception, temperature, and pain run in parallel labelled lines "with pain's affective branch given its own address", and the manuscript's Chapter 3 says that "pain's emotional sting has an address of its own", and no such address exists among the forty-four systems.

That address is Chapter 48, and this entry exists so that the corpus's statement and the corpus's delivery agree.

Nothing in Chapter 3 is altered by this: Chapter 3 remains the authority on the somatosensory chains as a whole, this chapter is the promised branch treated at length, and where the two documents differ Chapter 3 leads.

Put your hand on something hot and your arm is already moving before you know why, and the knowing, when it arrives, arrives twice, first as a sharp bright fact with an exact address and then, a second later, as a dull spreading insistence that will not be ignored.

Two-Channel names the architecture, the single most important fact about this system: one input, two separable products, where it is and how much it matters.

Alarm names the trade, an interrupt service with the authority to seize the whole cognitive economy, and with a gain that is itself learned.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT ACCOMPLISHES:

The nociceptive system is the chain from the nociceptor terminal in skin, muscle, joint, and viscus, through the dorsal root ganglion into the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, up two anatomically and functionally separable ascending channels, and into a descending control loop that reaches back down to the first synapse.

The lateral channel runs spinothalamic to the ventroposterior lateral thalamus and thence to the primary and secondary somatosensory cortices, and it computes the sensory-discriminative product: where, how much, what kind.

The medial channel runs spinoparabrachial and spinoreticular to the parabrachial nucleus, amygdala, hypothalamus, and medial thalamus, and thence to the insula and anterior cingulate cortex, and it computes the affective-motivational product: how bad this is and what must now be done about it.

What it accomplishes is not the production of pain but the production of nociception, the neural encoding of noxious events, which the brain then may or may not turn into pain, and holding that distinction is the whole intellectual content of this chapter.

It carries the (COG) tag without argument: the International Association for the Study of Pain's revised 2020 definition makes pain an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience, notes explicitly that pain cannot be inferred solely from activity in sensory neurons, and states that individuals learn the concept of pain through their life experiences, which places the output of this system squarely inside cognition.

THE DISTINCTION THIS CHAPTER TURNS ON:

Nociception is the neural process of encoding noxious stimuli, and it is measurable in a nerve, in a spinal cord, and in an anaesthetised animal.

Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with, or resembling that associated with, actual or potential tissue damage, and it is a psychological state that no electrode reads directly.

Nociception can occur without pain, which is what surgical anaesthesia is, and pain can occur without nociception, which is what phantom limb pain and much chronic pain are.

The corpus therefore names this system the nociceptive system and not the pain system, deliberately, and the reader should treat any sentence in this chapter that appears to equate the two as an error to be read against this section.

THE CHAIN OF STATIONS (THE LAYER 9 ROSTER):

• The nociceptor terminal, a free nerve ending in skin, muscle, joint, or viscus, expressing transducing ion channels of which the capsaicin and heat receptor is the best known.

• The nociceptive Schwann cell mesh in the skin, the corpus's Layer 6 chapter 28, a glial partner that is itself mechanosensitive and participates in transduction, which is a recent and genuinely surprising finding.

• The dorsal root ganglion, the cell body village that owns every one of these fibres, and the site where sensitisation is written into gene expression.

• The dorsal horn of the spinal cord, laminae one, two, and five, the gate, and the single most important processing station in the chain.

• The two ascending channels, crossing within one or two segments and climbing the contralateral anterolateral cord as one anatomical bundle that separates by target.

• The lateral targets, ventroposterior lateral thalamus, primary and secondary somatosensory cortices, and posterior insula.

• The medial targets, parabrachial nucleus, amygdala, hypothalamus, medial thalamus, anterior insula, and anterior cingulate cortex.

• The descending control stations, the periaqueductal grey and the rostral ventromedial medulla, plus the noradrenergic pontine cell groups, projecting back to the dorsal horn.

• The prefrontal and rostral anterior cingulate stations, which set expectation and are where the placebo effect is generated.

THE PATHWAYS AND INTERFACES:

The transduction interface is a family of ion channels rather than a specialised organ, and this is why nociceptors are called free endings: they are bare, and the specialisation is molecular rather than structural.

The first synapse in the dorsal horn is the corpus's Layer 7 entry 13, the peptidergic dense-core vesicle synapse, using substance P and calcitonin-gene-related peptide alongside glutamate, and it is this peptidergic character that gives the pain synapse its long time course and its capacity for wind-up.

The two ascending channels share one white matter bundle and separate only at their destinations, which is why a single spinal lesion damages both together and why they can nonetheless be dissociated pharmacologically and by lesion higher up.

The descending interface reaches back to the same first synapse it began at, closing a loop that spans the entire nervous system, and its terminal effectors are opioid, serotonergic, and noradrenergic, which is why three quite different drug classes all produce analgesia.

The affective channel's interface with the amygdala and hypothalamus is also an autonomic and endocrine one, which is why pain raises heart rate, blood pressure, and cortisol before it is reported.

THE TRANSFORMATION ALONG THE CHAIN:

At the nociceptor terminal the representation is a transduction event, a channel opened by heat, by acid, by mechanical distortion, or by an inflammatory mediator, with no interpretation whatever, and the terminal's threshold is already modulable by the local chemical soup.

At the axon the representation is a firing rate on one of two fibre classes with radically different conduction velocities, thinly myelinated A-delta fibres at roughly 5 to 30 metres per second and unmyelinated C fibres at roughly 0.5 to 2 metres per second, and this single anatomical fact produces the familiar double wave of a stubbed toe.

At the dorsal horn the representation is gated and can be amplified: Melzack and Wall's gate control account of 1965 describes inhibition of the thin-fibre line by thick-fibre touch input, which is the mechanism of rubbing an injury, and wind-up describes the opposite, a progressive increase in output to a constant input rate, which is the first step toward central sensitisation.

At the split into two channels the representation forks, and this is the transformation that names the system: the same afferent barrage is now being redescribed twice, once into a somatotopic intensity map and once into an aversive value, and these two products can be independently amplified, independently blocked, and independently lost.

At the lateral targets the representation is a body-mapped intensity with a quality label, and a patient with a lesion here loses the ability to say where and how much while continuing to find the stimulus horrible.

At the medial targets the representation is an aversive value with an autonomic and motivational consequence, and the classical cingulotomy and morphine observations describe the mirror-image dissociation: the patient reports the pain is still there but that it no longer troubles them, which is the cleanest evidence in all of neuroscience that these are two products and not one.

At the prefrontal and rostral cingulate stations the representation acquires expectation, and the output of the whole system becomes a function of what the person believes is about to happen, which is where a nociceptive system finishes and a pain system begins.

THE MOTIFS IT RUNS (THE LAYER 8 INVENTORY):

The dorsal horn gate runs motif 12, presynaptic inhibition, the input tap, with thick-fibre touch input as the tapping signal, and motif 7, feedforward inhibition, through the inhibitory interneurons of lamina two.

The withdrawal reflex runs motif 44, the polysynaptic withdrawal arc with crossed extension, which is why the arm moves before the knowing arrives.

The descending control runs motif 19, gain modulation, with endogenous opioid interneurons as the multiplier, and the corpus's Chapter 3 already names this as the catalogue's gain-control loop with opioid interneurons as effector.

Wind-up and central sensitisation run motif 6, recurrent mutual excitation within a population, operating on a synapse whose peptidergic character gives it the necessary time constant.

The expectation arm runs motif 38, the predictive coding motif, with the descending opioid system as the mechanism by which a prediction changes the input it is a prediction about.

TEMPORAL SIGNATURE:

First pain on A-delta fibres arrives at cortex within a few hundred milliseconds and second pain on C fibres more than a second later, and the corpus's Chapter 3 gives these as about 0.3 seconds versus more than 1 second, which this chapter adopts unchanged.

The withdrawal reflex closes at the spinal cord in tens of milliseconds and is complete before either wave arrives.

Wind-up develops over seconds of repeated stimulation at frequencies above about 0.3 hertz, and central sensitisation develops over minutes and can persist for months, which Chapter 3 gives as minutes to months and this chapter adopts unchanged.

Placebo analgesia develops over the minutes required to install an expectation and can be abolished within minutes by naloxone, which is a remarkably fast on and off switch for a psychological manipulation.

CAPACITY AND LIMITS:

The gain of this channel can swing more than tenfold in either direction, which Chapter 3 notes no other sense permits, and that swing is this system's defining capacity and its defining vulnerability.

Its spatial resolution is poor and deliberately so on the affective side: visceral pain is famously badly localised and refers to distant dermatomes, because the medial channel does not need an address to do its job.

Its worst limit is that it has no mechanism for reporting the absence of damage, so it cannot correct a false alarm, and a chronically sensitised system therefore has no route home by its own devices.

MODULATION AND GATING:

The dorsal horn gate is the primary control point, set segmentally by touch and descendingly by the periaqueductal grey and rostral ventromedial medulla using endogenous opioids, serotonin, and noradrenaline.

The rostral ventromedial medulla contains both cells that facilitate and cells that inhibit nociceptive transmission, which is why descending control is bidirectional and why the same structure that produces stress analgesia can produce stress hyperalgesia.

Expectation is a modulator of the first rank: Eippert and colleagues, Neuron 2009, showed that naloxone modulates placebo-induced responses in the hypothalamus, periaqueductal grey, and rostral ventromedial medulla, and abolishes the placebo-induced coupling between rostral anterior cingulate cortex and periaqueductal grey that predicts both the neural and the behavioural placebo effect, which establishes that expectation acts through the same descending opioid machinery as morphine.

A meta-analysis of 45 effect sizes across 12 studies and 1183 participants found placebo administration associated with reduced self-reported pain and hidden naloxone injection reversing it, so the opioid mediation of expectation-based placebo analgesia is among the better-supported claims in this chapter.

Inflammation modulates the periphery rather than the centre, lowering nociceptor thresholds so that a normally innocuous stimulus becomes noxious, which is primary hyperalgesia and is a peripheral phenomenon distinct from central sensitisation.

PLASTICITY AND LEARNING:

Central sensitisation is a long-term potentiation of the dorsal horn synapse, and the corpus should read it as exactly the same mechanism described in the Layer 7 volume, applied to an alarm line, which is the mechanism by which acute pain learns to become chronic.

Allodynia, pain from light touch, is that learning expressed as a category error: the thick-fibre touch line that once closed the gate now drives the pain line.

At the other end of the chain, expectation and conditioning are learned over minutes and revised over sessions, and nocebo, the negative counterpart, is learned faster and extinguishes slower than placebo.

Descending control is itself trainable, and this is the honest mechanistic basis of the psychological therapies for chronic pain, which act on a real circuit rather than on the patient's willingness to complain.

DEVELOPMENT AND ASSEMBLY:

Nociceptive afferents and dorsal horn circuits are functional well before birth, but descending inhibitory control matures late, which is why infant nociceptive responses are poorly damped, a point the corpus's Chapter 3 already makes.

Early painful experience in the neonatal period measurably alters later pain thresholds, which is one of the more consequential findings in developmental neuroscience and one that changed clinical practice.

The two channels are distinguishable from early development, so the fork is built in rather than learned.

EVOLUTIONARY PROVENANCE:

Nociception is among the oldest senses, present in essentially all bilaterian animals, and the corpus's Chapter 3 states this already.

The affective fork is the newer part and its evolutionary depth is genuinely uncertain: the machinery for aversive valuation is widespread, but at what point in the lineage the affective product acquires the character the 2020 definition describes is not established and probably cannot be established by the methods currently available, which the corpus should say plainly rather than assert either way.

Congenital insensitivity to pain proves the alarm's value by the mutilation its absence brings, and that observation is the strongest available argument that this system is under strong selection.

THE ENDOCRINE COUPLING:

Endogenous opioids are this system's own analgesic hormones, and they are also the effector of expectation, which is an unusually direct route from belief to chemistry.

Pain input activates the axis of Chapter 37 and cortisol modulates inflammation and pain sensitivity in return, a bidirectional loop that Chapter 3 already names as central to chronic pain.

Oxytocin damps pain and links affective touch to bonding, and oestrogen cycling measurably shifts pain thresholds, which Chapter 3 rates at moderate confidence and this chapter does not upgrade.

Sex differences in pain sensitivity and in chronic pain prevalence are robust at the population level and their mechanistic decomposition into hormonal, immune, and social components is not well established; a longitudinal within-person design across the menstrual cycle with immune profiling would settle more of it than another cross-sectional comparison.

STATES AND THE LAYER 11 SCHEDULE:

Awake, both channels run and attention sets the gains, with the affective channel able to capture attention involuntarily, which is the property that makes pain different from every other input.

In slow-wave sleep, state 7, the thalamic gate damps touch strongly yet pain retains privileged entry, and sleep loss lowers pain thresholds the next day, which Chapter 3 records as a robust human finding and this chapter adopts unchanged.

In rapid-eye-movement sleep, state 8, external nociceptive input is largely excluded along with everything else.

Under acute stress, state 18, the descending gate closes hard, giving the battlefield analgesia in which wounds go unfelt until safety, and under sustained stress, state 19, and in sickness behaviour, state 20, the picture inverts toward hyperalgesia, which is the same sign reversal the neuroimmune chapter records and is almost certainly the same mechanism seen from the other side.

DISEASES AND DISORDERS:

Chronic pain is this system's plasticity turned against the organism and is the largest single burden of disease in this addendum by any measure.

Neuropathic pain arises from damage to the system itself rather than to the tissue it reports on, which is why it feels wrong to patients and why it responds to anticonvulsants rather than to anti-inflammatories.

Nociplastic pain is the newer category for pain arising from altered nociceptive processing without evident tissue damage or nerve lesion, and fibromyalgia is its type case; the corpus should note that the classification is still being revised, with 2025 proposals to integrate nociplastic pain into the neuropathic framework, so this is a live taxonomy rather than a settled one.

Congenital insensitivity to pain, thalamic pain syndrome, phantom limb pain, and allodynia are the system's other characteristic failures, and the corpus's Chapter 3 lists these already.

Opioid-induced hyperalgesia is the iatrogenic failure, in which the treatment recruits the facilitating cells of the rostral ventromedial medulla and the system ends up louder than it began.

HOW IT COLOURS THE ORGANISM:

This is the great motivator, the one signal that can seize the whole cognitive economy at any moment and repurpose it, which is Chapter 3's formulation and cannot be improved.

It is also the system that most clearly demonstrates that the brain does not report the world but constructs it, because the same tissue damage produces different pain in different people, on different days, under different expectations, and the difference is not imaginary but is the measured output of a circuit this chapter has just described.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Noxious thermal, mechanical, and chemical events at the nociceptor terminal, plus inflammatory mediators that lower its threshold.

◦ Thick-fibre touch input to the dorsal horn, the segmental gate signal.

◦ Descending opioid, serotonergic, and noradrenergic control from the periaqueductal grey and rostral ventromedial medulla.

◦ Expectation and context from prefrontal and rostral anterior cingulate cortex, which is this system's most surprising input and its most powerful modulator.

◦ Cytokine signalling from Chapter 47, which sets the hyperalgesia of the sickness state.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Withdrawal reflex commands to spinal motoneurons within tens of milliseconds, before any percept exists.

◦ A sensory-discriminative product to the somatosensory cortices and posterior insula: location, intensity, quality.

◦ An affective-motivational product to anterior insula, anterior cingulate, amygdala, and hypothalamus: aversive value and behavioural priority, and this is the address the corpus promised.

◦ Autonomic and endocrine recruitment, including activation of the axis of Chapter 37.

◦ An interrupt to the global workspace of Chapter 44, with a priority no other input can match.

• STATE.

◦ Current nociceptor threshold map, current dorsal horn gate setting, current sensitisation level of injured territory, current descending balance between facilitation and inhibition, current expectation.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Conduction: A-delta fibres roughly 5 to 30 metres per second, C fibres roughly 0.5 to 2 metres per second; the corpus's Chapter 3 gives the whole somatosensory range as 0.5 to 70 metres per second by fibre class and governs.

◦ Channel gain swing greater than tenfold in either direction.

◦ Wind-up requires repeated stimulation above about 0.3 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Withdrawal reflex, tens of milliseconds.

◦ First versus second pain, about 0.3 seconds versus more than 1 second.

◦ Wind-up, seconds; central sensitisation, minutes to months.

◦ Placebo analgesia installation, minutes; naloxone reversal, minutes.

◦ Stress analgesia onset, seconds; its inversion to hyperalgesia under sustained stress, days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Peripheral: neuropathy silencing the line, or inflammation lowering its threshold to uselessness.

◦ Spinal: central sensitisation and allodynia, the alarm learning the wrong lesson.

◦ Ascending: syringomyelia cutting the crossing fibres, thalamic pain syndrome generating the signal centrally.

◦ Descending: loss of inhibition or recruitment of facilitation, including opioid-induced hyperalgesia.

◦ Cognitive: nocebo and catastrophising raising the gain from the top, and the absence of any mechanism for signalling the absence of damage, which is why this system cannot correct its own false alarm.

MODES AND MODE TRANSITIONS:

The nociceptive system is a two-product alarm whose modes are set by the balance between descending inhibition and descending facilitation, and by whether the dorsal horn is operating linearly or has been sensitised.

Its mode machinery is the most cognitively penetrable in the whole catalogue, because expectation is a first-class input to it and acts through the same effector as morphine.

• THE MODE REGISTER.

◦ silent_surveillance - The Quiet Watch - nociceptors at rest, thresholds high, no ascending traffic, the state of most of the body most of the time.

◦ acute_nociception - The Clean Alarm - a proportionate two-channel report of a real event, gate at baseline, both products delivered, resolving with the injury.

◦ stress_analgesia - The Battlefield Shutter - descending inhibition maximal, ascending transmission suppressed, wounds unfelt until safety.

◦ sensitised_amplification - The Stuck Amplifier - dorsal horn potentiated, thick-fibre touch now driving the pain line, allodynia and hyperalgesia present.

◦ expectation_modulated - The Belief Channel - descending opioid tone set by what the person expects, capable of producing analgesia or hyperalgesia from identical input.

◦ sickness_hyperalgesia - The Inflamed Watch - the pain gain raised by cytokine signalling as part of Chapter 47's state 20 protocol.

• THE ADMISSION RULE.

◦ acute_nociception is admitted when peripheral input exceeds the nociceptor threshold and the descending gate is at or near baseline; stress_analgesia and expectation_modulated are admitted only from above and can override the peripheral input entirely; sensitised_amplification is admitted by prior injury and, once admitted, does not require peripheral input at all, which is what makes it pathological.

• PER-MODE TRANSFER FUNCTIONS.

◦ silent_surveillance: nociceptor thresholds high, spontaneous firing near zero, no ascending traffic (high confidence).

◦ acute_nociception: A-delta arrival within about 0.3 seconds and C-fibre arrival beyond 1 second, both products delivered in proportion to input, withdrawal reflex already complete at tens of milliseconds (high confidence).

◦ stress_analgesia: descending opioid, serotonergic, and noradrenergic inhibition of the first synapse, onset within seconds of the stressor, and reversible by naloxone (high confidence on the mechanism, moderate confidence on the magnitude in humans, which varies enormously between individuals).

◦ sensitised_amplification: dorsal horn output raised for a constant input, thick-fibre touch now driving pain, established over minutes and persisting for months (high confidence on the mechanism in animals, high confidence on the clinical phenomenon in humans).

◦ expectation_modulated: placebo analgesia reduces self-reported pain and is reversed by hidden naloxone across 45 effect sizes in 12 studies and 1183 participants, acting through hypothalamic, periaqueductal grey, and rostral ventromedial medulla responses and through rostral-anterior-cingulate-to-periaqueductal-grey coupling (Eippert and colleagues, Neuron 2009); the mediation is well supported, the effect size varies widely by paradigm and this addendum declines to state one number, and a registered multi-paradigm replication with a common outcome scale would settle it.

◦ sickness_hyperalgesia: pain thresholds lowered by circulating and central cytokines over hours, resolving with the sickness state over 12 to 48 hours (moderate confidence in humans).

• THE TRANSITION TABLE.

◦ silent_surveillance to acute_nociception: peripheral input crossing the nociceptor threshold, within milliseconds at the terminal and within about 0.3 seconds at cortex.

◦ acute_nociception to stress_analgesia: an acute threat engaging the periaqueductal grey, within seconds, and this is the fastest downward gain change in the catalogue.

◦ stress_analgesia to acute_nociception: arrival at safety, over seconds to minutes, and the abruptness of this return is a familiar clinical observation.

◦ acute_nociception to sensitised_amplification: sustained or repeated input, wind-up over seconds and central sensitisation over minutes, persisting for months; this is the transition that turns an injury into a disease.

◦ Any mode to expectation_modulated: installation of a belief about what is coming, over minutes, revisable over sessions, and abolished by naloxone within minutes.

◦ acute_nociception to sickness_hyperalgesia: cytokine signalling from Chapter 47, over hours.

◦ sensitised_amplification toward acute_nociception: resolution of the injury plus restored descending inhibition, over weeks to months, and this transition is slow, unreliable, and the central problem of pain medicine.

• FAULT REGIMES AND WATCHDOGS.

◦ Boundary signature: the healthy boundary lies between insensitivity, whose signature is unnoticed injury and joint destruction, and runaway amplification, whose signature is pain without a proportionate stimulus; it is patrolled by the segmental gate as the fast watchdog and by descending inhibition as the slow one, and this system's specific and dangerous architectural weakness is that it has no channel for reporting the absence of damage, so a false alarm cannot be cancelled from below and must be corrected from above.

THE ENGINEERING NOTE:

As an engineering pack this system is the nociceptive_alarm_system, a single afferent module nociceptor_array feeding a gating module dorsal_horn_gate, which publishes on two topics, discriminative_channel and affective_channel, under a descending controller descending_modulation whose set point is written by an expectation module.

The engineering analogue is an interrupt controller with a priority line and a maskable gain, and the biological differences are three and all of them are consequential: the gain is set partly by the system's own history, partly by a belief held elsewhere in the machine, and there is no acknowledgement signal, so an interrupt that has been serviced has no way of clearing itself.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to take one nociceptive input and deliver two separable products, under a gate that is set by touch, by descending control, and by expectation.

Create a number variable called noxious input containing the current nociceptor activation.

Create a number variable called touch input containing the current thick-fibre activation at the same segment.

Create a number variable called descending inhibition, set by the periaqueductal grey and by expectation.

Create a number variable called descending facilitation, set by stress duration and by opioid exposure.

Create a number variable called sensitisation containing the accumulated potentiation of this segment, initially zero.

Set the gate to one, minus the touch input scaled by the segmental gating factor, minus the descending inhibition, plus the descending facilitation.

Set the dorsal horn output to the noxious input plus the sensitisation, scaled by the gate.

If the dorsal horn output has been above the wind-up threshold for longer than the wind-up window, add to the sensitisation.

Set the discriminative product to the dorsal horn output with its body address and its quality label.

Set the affective product to the dorsal horn output scaled by the threat weight, which is set by context, by expectation, and by the neuroimmune state.

Publish the discriminative product to the somatosensory maps and the affective product to the insula, cingulate, and amygdala, and publish an interrupt to the global workspace with a priority equal to the affective product.

Record that the two products are separable and that either may be lost without the other.

The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the entire architecture is one input, one gate, and two outputs, and because showing the identical input producing four different pairs of products under four gate settings makes the chapter's argument better than another paragraph would.

import math

SEGMENTAL_GATE_FACTOR = 0.5   # thick-fibre touch closes the gate; Melzack and Wall 1965
WINDUP_THRESHOLD = 0.6        # dorsal horn output above which sensitisation accrues

def dorsal_horn(noxious, touch, inhibition, facilitation, sensitisation, threat):
    """One input, one gate, two separable products."""
    gate = 1.0 - math.prod([touch, SEGMENTAL_GATE_FACTOR]) - inhibition + facilitation
    gate = max(0.0, gate)
    output = math.prod([noxious + sensitisation, gate])
    discriminative = round(output, 2)
    affective = round(math.prod([output, threat]), 2)
    accrued = 0.05 if output > WINDUP_THRESHOLD else 0.0
    return discriminative, affective, round(sensitisation + accrued, 2)

cases = [
    ("clean alarm        ", 0.8, 0.0, 0.00, 0.0, 0.00, 0.6),
    ("rubbing the injury ", 0.8, 0.9, 0.00, 0.0, 0.00, 0.6),
    ("battlefield        ", 0.8, 0.0, 0.75, 0.0, 0.00, 0.6),
    ("placebo expectation", 0.8, 0.0, 0.40, 0.0, 0.00, 0.3),
    ("sensitised, light  ", 0.1, 0.0, 0.00, 0.2, 0.60, 0.9),
]
for label, nox, touch, inhib, facil, sens, threat in cases:
    d, a, s = dorsal_horn(nox, touch, inhib, facil, sens, threat)
    print(f"{label}: where-and-how-much {d:<5}  how-bad {a:<5}  sensitisation now {s}")

print("Identical tissue damage, five different pains. Neither product is the other.")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only system in the catalogue that delivers two products from one input which can be lost independently, so that a patient may know exactly where it hurts and not care, or care desperately and not know where, and the only system whose output can be halved by a belief acting through the same molecule as morphine.
