


NEURONAL

Every Type of Neuron
in the Human Nervous System,
Described, Explained, and Specified

A scientific reference,
a book for the curious,
and a build specification.


D. R. Dison


This volume is dedicated to
John Schwarcz

TABLE OF CONTENTS:

• CHAPTER 1. L2/3 IT (Layer 2/3 Intra-Telencephalic) (Context-Weaving Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 2. L4 IT (Layer 4 Intra-Telencephalic) (Arrival-Amplifying Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 3. L5 IT (Layer 5 Intra-Telencephalic) (Action-Proposing Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 4. L5 ET (Layer 5 Extra-Telencephalic) (Body-Commanding Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 5. L5/6 NP (Layer 5 and 6 Near-Projecting Non-Projecting) (Short-Reach Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 6. L6 CT (Layer 6 Cortico-Thalamic) (Input-Tuning Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 7. L6 IT (Layer 6 Intra-Telencephalic) (Deep-Layer Courier Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 8. L6 IT CAR3 (Layer 6 Intra-Telencephalic Carbonic Anhydrase 3) (Cortex-To-Cortex Linking Neuron) (COG) (PUC)

• CHAPTER 9. L6B (Layer 6 Sublayer B) (Wakefulness-Listening Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 10. PYRAMIDAL CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 11. SPINY STELLATE CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 12. STAR PYRAMID CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 13. BETZ CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 14. MEYNERT CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 15. VON ECONOMO NEURONS (VENS), ALSO CALLED SPINDLE NEURONS, ROD CELLS, OR CORKSCREW CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 16. FORK CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 17. CAJAL-RETZIUS CELLS (NON-COG)

• CHAPTER 18. SUBPLATE NEURONS (First-Born Wiring-Guide Neuron) (NON-COG)

• CHAPTER 19. CORTICAL BASKET CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 20. CHANDELIER CELLS, ALSO CALLED AXO-AXONIC CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 21. TRANSLAMINAR CELLS (All-Layers Blanket-Damping Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 22. MARTINOTTI CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 23. NON-MARTINOTTI CELLS (Sentry-Freeing Entry-Layer Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 24. SST-CHODL CELLS (Far-Hushing Slow-Wave Neuron) (COG) (PUC)

• CHAPTER 25. BIPOLAR CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 26. DOUBLE BOUQUET CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 27. SMALL BASKET CELLS OF THE VIP TYPE (Slim-Column Soma-Targeting Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 28. LARGE AND SMALL BASKET CELLS EXPRESSING CHOLECYSTOKININ (Feeling-Coloured Loose-Timing Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 29. CORTICAL NEUROGLIAFORM CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 30. SINGLE BOUQUET CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 31. CANOPY CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 32. ALPHA7 CELLS, NAMED FOR A NICOTINIC RECEPTOR SUBUNIT (Fast-Alerting Inhibition Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 33. LAMP5-LHX6 CELLS (Primate-Enriched Diffuse-Inhibition Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 34. ROSEHIP CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 35. BITUFTED CELLS (Repeat-Firing Feedback Damping Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 36. HORIZONTAL CELLS OF LAYER 1 (Next-Column Tuft-Quietening Neuron) (COG)


PART THREE: HIPPOCAMPAL FORMATION - MEMORY AND NAVIGATION


• CHAPTER 37. DENTATE GRANULE CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 38. SEMILUNAR GRANULE CELLS (Signal-Sustaining Bridge Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 39. MOSSY CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 40. CA3 PYRAMIDAL CELLS (Whole-From-Fragment Recall Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 41. CA2 PYRAMIDAL CELLS (Familiar-Individual Recognition Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 42. CA1 PYRAMIDAL CELLS (Expectation-Checking Place Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 43. SUBICULAR PYRAMIDAL CELLS (Memory-Sending Burst Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 44. ENTORHINAL STELLATE CELLS (Distance-And-Direction Mapping Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 45. ENTORHINAL FAN CELLS (What-Where-When Binding Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 46. PARVALBUMIN BASKET CELLS (Clockwork-Precise Soma Brake Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 47. CHOLECYSTOKININ BASKET CELLS (Mood-Swayed Loose-Timing Silencing Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 48. AXO-AXONIC CELLS (Spike-Gate Veto Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 49. BISTRATIFIED CELLS (Inner-Dendrite Restraining Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 50. ORIENS-LACUNOSUM MOLECULARE (O-LM) CELLS (Outer-Dendrite Filtering Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 51. IVY CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 52. HIPPOCAMPAL NEUROGLIAFORM CELLS (COG)

• CHAPTER 53. HILAR PERFORANT PATH-ASSOCIATED (HIPP) CELLS (Granule-Return Muting Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 54. HILAR COMMISSURAL-ASSOCIATIONAL PATHWAY-RELATED (HICAP) CELLS (Local-Input Curbing Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 55. MOLECULAR LAYER PERFORANT PATH-ASSOCIATED (MOPP) CELLS (Incoming-Path Pre-Emptive Neuron) (COG)

• CHAPTER 56. TRILAMINAR CELLS (Three-Layer Handover Neuron) (COG)

• APPENDIX 1. THE THREE-STAGE PROVING SYSTEM OF PREVIOUSLY UNNAMED CONSTRUCTS (PUC)

• APPENDIX 2. Far-Hushing Slow-Wave Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 24.)

• APPENDIX 3. Cortex-To-Cortex Linking Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 8.)


Page numbers have been removed from this contents list because the merges, splits and renumbering in this edition have changed the pagination throughout.

Every Type of Neuron in the Human Nervous System, Described, Explained, and Specified

A scientific reference, a book for the curious, and a build specification

VOLUME 1 OF 5

Chapters 1 to 59

D. R. Dison

Founder, Artificial Intelligence University (AIU)

Open Researcher and Contributor Identification (ORCID): 0009-0001-9246-5758

Prepared 30 July 2026


ABOUT THIS VOLUME

This is the first of five volumes.

It carries the front matter and Part One, the general account of the neuron, which apply to all five volumes and are not repeated in the others.

It then gives Chapters 1 to 59 of the catalogue.


HOW TO READ THIS BOOK

This book is written for three readers at once, and it does not ask any of them to compromise.

The first reader is a scientist who needs the numbers, the markers, the projections and the citations.

The second reader is a person with no biology background at all who wants to understand the most complicated object in the known universe, and who is entitled to have it explained properly rather than simplified into mush.

The third reader is not a person.

It is an Artificial Intelligence (AI) coding agent that will be handed this document as a vision document and a product requirements document, and asked to build a working simulation of the human nervous system.

Writing for all three turned out to be easier than expected, because all three want the same thing.

They want the truth, stated exactly, in words that do not hide.

Every sentence in this book is written so that a beginner can understand it.

Every technical term is defined the first time it is used.

Every acronym is spelled out in full before it is abbreviated.

Nothing is dumbed down, because the science is more interesting than any simplification of it.


WHAT IS IN THIS BOOK

Part One describes the neuron in general: every part, every process, and every capability that all neurons share.

It ends by answering a question that turns out to be the most important question in the book, and one that most textbooks never ask directly.

Parts Two onwards work through every named type of neuron in the human nervous system, one at a time, three hundred and two of them.

For each type, twenty aspects are given, in the same order every time, so that the entries can be compared, searched, and machine-read.

The catalogue follows the human body from the surface of the brain down to the wall of the gut.

The final parts give the counts, the glossary, and the specification notes.


THE TAGS AND FLAGS

Two markings appear throughout, and both are explained here before they are used.


The Previously Unnamed Construct tag, written (PUC)

Some of the neuron types in this book are real, are functionally necessary, and are relied upon every day in the scientific literature, and yet have never been given an accepted proper name.

They are known instead by a label.

They are known by a gene symbol such as Sst Chodl, or by a cluster number from a database, or by an address such as layer 6b, or by a phrase that changes its wording from one paper to the next.

A label is a key that gets the right row out of a spreadsheet.

A name is a teaching instrument.

Eleven such cells appear in this book, each tagged (PUC), meaning Previously Unnamed Construct, and each given a plain English name for the first time.

Naming them is not a claim of discovery.

Every one of those cells was already there, already published, already proved by experiment.

What was missing was a proper name, and a science cannot reason efficiently about a thing it cannot name properly.


The cognition flags, written (COG) and (NON-COG)

Every type in this book carries one of two flags.

(COG) means the cell is involved in cognition.

(NON-COG) means it is not.

Cognition here means the acquisition, representation, transformation, storage and use of information: perception, attention, memory, language, reasoning, decision-making, and the regulation of those processes; which are especially interesting to Artificial Intelligence endeavors.

A cell is flagged (COG) if it represents, transforms, stores, selects or routes information used for perception, memory, decision or action selection, or if it sets the global brain state within which such processing happens.

A cell is flagged (NON-COG) if its documented role is pure sensory transduction at the body surface, pure motor execution at the muscle, autonomic or endocrine or homeostatic regulation of the body's internal state, or developmental scaffolding.

Of the three hundred and two types in this book, one hundred and seventy-five are flagged (COG) and one hundred and twenty-seven are flagged (NON-COG).


PART ONE: THE NEURON IN GENERAL

1.1 The Cell That Thinks

There is a cell in your head right now that is reading this sentence.

Not alone, and not in the way a person reads, but the claim is literally true.

Somewhere in the back of your skull, a cell is receiving a pattern of electrical signals that corresponds to the shapes on this page, and it is deciding whether that pattern is worth passing on.

There are roughly eighty-six billion such cells in an adult human brain.

They are called neurons, or nerve cells, and they are the reason you exist as a point of view rather than as an object.

A neuron is, at bottom, an ordinary animal cell.

It has a membrane, a nucleus, mitochondria to make energy, ribosomes to build proteins, and the same basic housekeeping machinery as a cell in your liver.

What makes it a neuron is that it has specialised, to an extreme degree, in one thing: handling information.

It has grown a branching antenna to collect signals.

It has grown a cable to send them.

It has covered its surface in molecular switches that open and close in response to voltage and to chemicals.

And it has arranged all of this so that it can perform a computation and pass on the answer.

A liver cell lives a settled life.

A neuron lives a life of continuous conversation.


1.2 The Universal Parts

Every neuron, of every type, in every animal that has them, is built from the same set of parts.

The types described in this book differ in the proportions, the numbers, the chemistry and the wiring of these parts, but never in the inventory.

• The soma, also called the cell body or perikaryon.

This is the bulbous central part that contains the nucleus.

The nucleus holds the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the cell's complete instruction set.

The soma is the factory floor: it makes most of the cell's proteins, and it keeps the whole structure alive.

Soma diameters in the human nervous system run from about four micrometres, in a cerebellar granule cell, to about one hundred micrometres, in a large sensory neuron of the dorsal root ganglion.

A micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre, so even the largest of these is far too small to see without a microscope.

• The dendrites.

These are the branching, tree-like extensions that receive incoming signals.

The word comes from the Greek for tree, and the resemblance is exact.

A single human cortical pyramidal neuron may carry a dendritic tree with a total length of several centimetres, folded into a space smaller than a grain of salt.

The surface of that tree is where nearly all incoming information arrives.

• The dendritic spines.

On many but not all neurons, the dendrites are studded with tiny knobs, each about one micrometre long, called spines.

Each spine is the receiving half of one synapse.

Spines are not fixed furniture.

They grow, shrink, appear and vanish over minutes to hours, and that motion is one of the physical forms that learning takes.

A single human cortical pyramidal neuron may carry between ten thousand and thirty thousand of them.

• The axon hillock and the axon initial segment.

The hillock is the small cone where the axon leaves the soma, and the initial segment is the short stretch of axon just beyond it.

This is the decision point.

It carries the highest density of voltage-gated sodium channels anywhere on the cell, which makes it the place where the electrical trigger is pulled.

Everything the dendrites collect is summed here, and here the cell commits.

• The axon.

This is the single output fibre that carries the outgoing signal away.

Axon lengths span six orders of magnitude in one body.

The axon of a cerebellar granule cell is a fraction of a millimetre long.

The axon of a motor neuron running from the base of your spine to the muscle of your big toe is about a metre long, and in a tall person somewhat more.

An axon is a thin tube, typically between one fifth of a micrometre and twenty micrometres across, and it may branch into thousands of endings.

• The myelin sheath and the nodes of Ranvier.

Some axons, though by no means all, are wrapped in a fatty insulating spiral called myelin.

Myelin is not made by the neuron.

It is made by other cells, oligodendrocytes inside the brain and spinal cord, and Schwann cells outside them.

The wrapping is interrupted every millimetre or so by a bare gap called a node of Ranvier.

The electrical signal jumps from node to node rather than crawling along the whole membrane, which is why a myelinated axon can conduct at up to one hundred and twenty metres per second while an unmyelinated one manages half a metre per second.

That is the difference between pulling your hand off a hot stove and thinking about it afterwards.

• The axon terminals, also called boutons.

These are the branched endings of the axon, and each one is a transmitting station.

A terminal is packed with small membrane bubbles called synaptic vesicles, each holding a few thousand molecules of a chemical messenger.

• The synapse.

This is the junction at which one neuron passes its signal to another cell.

The great majority of synapses are chemical, meaning a molecule is released across a gap of about twenty nanometres, which is roughly one fiftieth of the width of the gap itself compared to a human hair.

A minority are electrical, meaning the two cells are directly connected by protein pores called gap junctions and current flows straight from one into the other.

A typical human cortical neuron makes and receives on the order of seven thousand synapses.

Across the whole brain the number of synapses is on the order of one hundred trillion to one quadrillion.


1.3 The Universal Machinery

Underneath the visible architecture, every neuron runs the same set of molecular machines.

• The membrane and the resting potential.

Every neuron holds an electrical voltage across its outer membrane, with the inside negative relative to the outside.

At rest this is usually between minus sixty and minus eighty millivolts.

A millivolt is a thousandth of a volt, so this is a tiny voltage across an extremely thin film, which makes the electric field inside the membrane enormous, on the order of one hundred thousand volts per centimetre.

The neuron spends a large part of its energy budget simply holding this voltage steady, ready to be spent.

• The ion channels.

These are protein tunnels through the membrane that let specific charged particles through.

Sodium, potassium, calcium and chloride are the four that matter most.

Some channels open in response to voltage, some in response to a chemical binding, some in response to stretch, heat, cold or acid.

The particular set of channels a neuron builds is one of the main things that makes it the type of neuron it is, because that set determines how it fires.

• The pumps.

The sodium-potassium pump throws three sodium ions out and pulls two potassium ions in, over and over, using one molecule of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) each time.

Adenosine triphosphate is the cell's universal energy currency.

This one pump consumes a large share of the brain's entire energy budget, and it is the reason the brain, at about two percent of body weight, burns about twenty percent of the body's resting energy.

• The receptors.

These are proteins that recognise a chemical messenger and respond.

Some are themselves channels and act within a thousandth of a second.

Others are slower, working through internal chemical relays, and act over seconds to minutes, changing the cell's behaviour rather than its immediate voltage.

• The vesicles and the release machinery.

Chemical messengers are packaged into vesicles and released when calcium floods into the terminal.

The release machinery is fast, precise and probabilistic: a given vesicle may or may not fuse on a given spike, and that uncertainty is itself part of the computation.

• The cytoskeleton and axonal transport.

A neuron with a metre-long axon has a logistics problem no other cell faces.

Proteins made in the soma must be delivered to terminals a metre away, and worn-out components must be hauled back.

Motor proteins called kinesin and dynein walk cargo along microtubule tracks in opposite directions, at speeds up to about four hundred millimetres per day.

A neuron is, among other things, a freight company.

• The mitochondria.

These are the cell's power plants, and neurons position them deliberately at the places that need the most energy: the terminals, the nodes of Ranvier, and the initial segment.

A neuron actively hauls its power supply to wherever the work is.


1.4 What a Neuron Does: The Standard Answer

The standard account of what a neuron does has four steps, and it is worth stating precisely before it is complicated.

First, the neuron receives.

Chemical messengers released by other cells bind to receptors on its dendrites and soma, opening channels and producing small local voltage changes called graded potentials.

A graded potential that pushes the cell towards firing is called excitatory, and one that pushes it away is called inhibitory.

These are small, they fade as they spread, and no single one is usually enough to do anything.

Second, the neuron integrates.

The thousands of small pushes and pulls arriving across the dendritic tree spread towards the cell body, adding and cancelling as they go.

Integration is done in space, meaning inputs arriving at different places combine, and in time, meaning inputs arriving at different moments combine if they are close enough together.

Third, the neuron decides.

At the axon initial segment, the summed voltage is compared against a threshold, typically around minus fifty-five millivolts.

If the sum reaches the threshold, the cell fires.

If it does not, nothing happens.

Fourth, the neuron transmits.

An action potential, also called a spike, is launched.

It is all-or-nothing, meaning it is always the same size regardless of how far above threshold the input was, and it travels the full length of the axon without weakening.

At the terminals it triggers calcium entry, which triggers vesicle fusion, which releases the messenger onto the next cell, and the cycle begins again there.

That is the standard answer, and every word of it is true.

It is also radically incomplete.


1.5 What Else a Neuron Does

If a neuron only integrated its inputs and fired occasionally, it would be a component.

It is not a component.

It is closer to a small, self-modifying, self-provisioning organisation that happens to also do signal processing.

What follows is the list of everything else it is doing while it does the thing the textbooks describe.

This section is the answer to the question that this book was written around, and it is the single most important section in Part One.

• It computes inside its dendrites, before the summing even happens.

Dendrites are not passive wires.

They carry their own voltage-gated channels, and a cluster of inputs arriving close together on one branch can trigger a local dendritic spike that the rest of the cell sees as a single large event.

This means each dendritic branch behaves as a small processing unit in its own right.

The consequence is startling: a single human cortical pyramidal neuron has been shown, computationally, to be equivalent to an artificial neural network several layers deep.

The neuron is not a node in a network.

The neuron is a network.

• It sends its own spike backwards.

When a neuron fires, the spike does not only travel down the axon.

A copy travels back up into the dendritic tree.

This back-propagating action potential is a broadcast message to every synapse on the cell, saying "I just fired".

Synapses that were active just before that message arrives get strengthened, and synapses that were not do not.

That is the physical basis of one of the best-established learning rules in biology, spike-timing-dependent plasticity, in which the order of events within a few thousandths of a second determines whether a connection grows or shrinks.

• It rewrites its own inputs.

A neuron continuously adjusts the strength of the synapses it receives, strengthening some and weakening others, over timescales from seconds to a lifetime.

This is called synaptic plasticity, and it is the leading candidate for the physical form of memory.

The neuron is not a fixed circuit element.

It is a circuit element that edits its own wiring diagram.

• It keeps its own firing rate in range.

If a neuron is over-stimulated for hours, it turns all of its incoming synapses down together, and if it is under-stimulated it turns them all up together.

This is called homeostatic synaptic scaling, and it is how a network that is constantly strengthening some connections avoids running away into a seizure.

The neuron is its own thermostat.

• It changes its own excitability.

Separately from its synapses, a neuron alters the number and distribution of its own ion channels, changing how easily it fires at all.

This is called intrinsic plasticity, and it means the neuron can change its own personality, not merely its connections.

It can even move its own trigger zone: the axon initial segment physically shifts along the axon in response to activity, tuning the cell's threshold over hours to days.

• It builds proteins locally, far from the nucleus.

Instructions in the form of messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) are shipped out into the dendrites and held there, dormant, next to individual synapses.

When that synapse is used, the local instructions are translated into protein on the spot.

This means a single synapse can be strengthened without waiting for a signal to travel to the nucleus and back, and without strengthening every other synapse on the cell.

The neuron has distributed manufacturing.

• It changes which of its genes are switched on.

Strong or repeated activity sends calcium signals to the nucleus, which switch on a set of genes called immediate early genes, with names such as Fos and Arc.

Those genes launch programmes that consolidate short-lived changes into permanent ones.

An experience, in other words, reaches down and alters which parts of the cell's own genome are being read.

• It rebuilds its own architecture.

Spines grow and retract over minutes.

Axonal branches extend and are pruned over days.

In some regions whole new synapses form during sleep and are removed the following day.

The physical shape of the cell is a slow-moving record of what has happened to it.

• It releases messengers from places other than its axon terminals.

Several neuron types release their chemical messenger from their dendrites, sending a signal backwards into the region that is talking to them.

Others release from the soma itself.

The one-way picture, in which information enters by dendrites and leaves by the axon, is a useful simplification rather than a law.

• It broadcasts without a partner.

Much chemical signalling in the brain is not delivered across a narrow gap to one named recipient.

It is released into the fluid between cells and diffuses to whatever receptors it reaches, over distances of micrometres and timescales of seconds.

This is called volume transmission, and it is how most of the brain's mood, arousal and attention chemistry works.

A neuron doing this is not making a phone call.

It is changing the weather.

• It talks backwards across the synapse.

The receiving cell can send messages back to the sending cell, using molecules that travel in reverse across the gap.

Endocannabinoids, the body's own versions of the active compounds in cannabis, are made on demand by the receiving cell and drift back to tell the sending cell to quieten down.

Nitric oxide, a gas, does something similar and can pass straight through membranes.

The synapse is a two-way conversation.

• It is wired directly to some of its neighbours.

Gap junctions connect the interiors of two cells so that current, and small molecules, pass directly between them.

Populations coupled this way behave partly as a single electrical sheet, which is how certain groups of neurons achieve near-perfect synchrony.

• It influences its neighbours by field alone.

The electrical activity of a population creates a field in the surrounding tissue, and that field slightly biases the excitability of nearby cells that are not connected to it at all.

This is called ephaptic coupling.

Neurons overhear each other.

• It orders its own blood supply.

When a patch of brain becomes active, blood flow to that patch increases within a second or two.

Neurons participate directly in commanding that increase, releasing signals that dilate nearby vessels.

This is called neurovascular coupling, and it is the physical basis of functional brain imaging.

Every brain scan ever published is a picture of neurons ordering lunch.

• It tells other cells to insulate it.

Electrical activity in an axon signals to nearby oligodendrocytes to wrap that axon in myelin.

Because myelin sets conduction speed, and conduction speed sets arrival time, this means a neuron participates in tuning the timing of its own output.

Learning a skill measurably changes myelination in the relevant tracts.

• It manages a relationship with the immune system.

Neurons display molecules that tell microglia, the brain's resident immune cells, whether to leave them alone or to prune their synapses.

A neuron that goes quiet is at greater risk of having its connections eaten.

Use it or lose it is not a metaphor here; it is a signalling pathway.

• It runs a metabolic partnership.

Astrocytes take up glucose from the blood, convert it, and hand lactate to neurons as fuel during heavy activity.

Neurons and astrocytes also share the recycling of glutamate, the main excitatory messenger, in a loop that keeps the messenger from accumulating to toxic levels.

No neuron feeds itself alone.

• It maintains itself for a lifetime.

Most neurons in your brain are as old as you are and will never be replaced.

They must therefore run continuous quality control: clearing damaged proteins, replacing worn-out mitochondria, repairing DNA, and disposing of waste.

Much of that clearance happens during sleep, when the spaces between brain cells widen and fluid flushes through.

A neuron is a machine that must run for eighty years without being switched off.

• Some of them are sensors in their own right.

Certain neurons directly detect carbon dioxide, acidity, glucose, sodium concentration, temperature, stretch, or the presence of a hormone in the blood.

For these cells the input is not another neuron.

The input is the state of the body.

• Some of them are clocks.

Certain neurons fire rhythmically with no input at all, generating their own beat from their own channel machinery.

The cells that drive your breathing do this, and so do the cells that keep your twenty-four hour rhythm.

If every input to these cells were removed, they would keep going.

• Some of them are glands.

Certain neurons release their product not onto another cell but into the bloodstream, where it travels the whole body as a hormone.

At that point the distinction between the nervous system and the endocrine system stops being meaningful.

So the honest answer to the question is this.

A neuron does take inputs from its dendrites, calculate whether to fire, and send a signal down its axon.

It also computes locally in its branches, teaches its own synapses, rewrites its own connection strengths, regulates its own excitability, manufactures proteins on site, edits its own gene expression, rebuilds its own shape, signals backwards and sideways and by diffusion and by field, orders its own blood, commissions its own insulation, negotiates with the immune system, shares a metabolism with its neighbours, maintains itself for decades, and in some cases senses the body directly, keeps time, or secretes hormones into the blood.

The spike is the part we can measure most easily.

It is not the part that matters most.


1.6 What Makes One Type Differ From Another

Given that all neurons share the parts listed above, the question of what makes a type is the question of which knobs are turned, and how far.

Nine independent settings do the work, and every type in this book can be located on all nine at once.

• Shape: how many processes leave the cell body, and how they branch.

• Direction of information flow: toward the central nervous system, away from it, or between other neurons.

• Effect on the target: excite it, inhibit it, or modulate it.

• Chemical messenger: which molecule, or which combination, it releases.

• Reach: whether the axon stays local or travels to a distant structure.

• Firing pattern: the rhythm and style with which it produces spikes.

• Location: which region, layer, nucleus or ganglion it occupies.

• Developmental origin: which patch of embryonic tissue it was born from.

• Gene expression: which set of genes it has switched on, which is the newest scheme and now the dominant one in research.

A single cell has an answer to all nine questions simultaneously, and none of the nine answers is more correct than the others.

This is why there is no single agreed number of neuron types, and why any catalogue, including this one, is a considered position rather than a measurement.


1.7 How the Entries Are Organised

Every type in Parts Two onwards is given the same twenty aspects, in the same order.

The order runs from what you could see under a microscope, through what you could measure with an electrode, to what an engineer would need in order to build it.

• What it is and what it does.

• Structure and morphology.

• Size.

• Structural subtypes.

• Where it lives.

• Number.

• Electrical properties.

• Synaptic connections.

• Axon characteristics.

• Neurotransmitters.

• Myelination.

• Metabolic demands.

• Plasticity.

• Support system, meaning the specific glial cells around it and what they do differently.

• How it colours its region, meaning what flavour the region would lose if this one cell type were removed.

• Beyond integrate and fire, meaning everything from Section 1.5 that applies especially to this type.

• Systems interface, written as an engineering specification with inputs, outputs, state, parameters, time constants and failure mode.

• English Readable Code, giving the type's characteristic computation as pseudocode.

• Code sample, giving the same computation as real, runnable code.

• What makes it unmistakable.

Where an aspect genuinely does not apply to a given type, it is marked Not Applicable, and the reason is always given, so that a reader never mistakes an aspect that does not apply for one that was merely forgotten.


1.8 A Note on English Readable Code

The pseudocode in this book is written in English Readable Code (ERC), a formal notation that expresses algorithmic logic as structured English sentences which can be mechanically translated into any programming language.

It sits between informal pseudocode, which cannot be translated by machine, and a full programming language, which is harder for a newcomer to read.

Every English Readable Code procedure in this book opens with a line stating its purpose and closes with the line "The procedure is complete."

Each instruction is a complete English sentence on its own line.

The bodies of conditionals, loops and functions are indented by four spaces.

A reader who has never programmed can read these procedures as English and understand exactly what the cell does.

A coding agent can translate them into working software without guessing.


1.9 The Neuron Budget, and the Hundred Billion Question

Almost every popular account of the brain says that it contains one hundred billion neurons.

That figure has no clear source.

It appears to have entered circulation as a round-number estimate in the mid-twentieth century and to have been repeated ever since because it is memorable.

When the counting was finally done properly, by dissolving whole brains into a uniform suspension and counting nuclei, the answer came out lower.

Azevedo and colleagues, in 2009, reported about eighty-six billion neurons in the adult male human brain, with about sixteen point three billion in the cerebral cortex and about sixty-nine billion in the cerebellum.

A 2025 paper in the journal Brain has argued that even this figure is quoted with far more precision than the underlying evidence supports, since it rests on a small number of donated brains.

This book therefore uses a budget that sums to roughly eighty-seven billion neurons for the entire nervous system, brain and body together, and states the uncertainty honestly wherever a number is given.

The regional budget is as follows, and every per-type count in Parts Two onwards is allocated inside it.

• Cerebellum: about 69.0 billion, which is about eighty percent of all the neurons in the brain packed into about ten percent of its mass.

• Cerebral cortex: about 16.3 billion.

• Enteric nervous system, the nerve net in the wall of the gut: about 400 million.

• Retina, both eyes together: about 260 million.

• Spinal cord: about 200 million.

• Brainstem: about 200 million.

• Basal ganglia: about 200 million.

• Hippocampal formation: about 150 million.

• Thalamus and diencephalon: about 60 million.

• Amygdala, olfactory cortex and claustrum: about 50 million.

• Olfactory system, including the sensory sheet in the nose: about 22 million.

• Autonomic ganglia: about 20 million.

• Hypothalamus: about 10 million.

• Dorsal root ganglia: about 10 million.

• Cranial sensory ganglia: about 3 million.

• Auditory and vestibular ganglia: about 110 thousand.

Two facts jump out of that list, and both are worth pausing on.

The first is that the cerebellum, a structure most people have never heard of, contains four out of every five neurons you own.

The second is that the hypothalamus, which controls hunger, thirst, temperature, sleep, stress, growth and reproduction, does all of it with about ten million cells, which is roughly one neuron in every nine thousand.

Influence in the nervous system is not proportional to headcount.


PART TWO: CEREBRAL CORTEX - THE OUTER SHEET OF THE BRAIN

CHAPTER 1. L2/3 IT (Layer 2/3 Intra-Telencephalic) (Context-Weaving Neuron) (COG)

Press a finger to your forehead and you are one skull's thickness from the busiest gossip network in biology, a sheet of cells whose only job is to talk to other parts of the same two hemispheres.

Context names what it adds: a signal from the senses means nothing alone, and this cell supplies everything else the cortex knows at that instant.

Weaving names how - sideways, across columns and areas, pulling many threads into one cloth. It also reflects the fact that this is the most plastic cell in the cortex, because weaving must be learned.

Neuron marks it as a principal cortical cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The L2/3 IT neuron is an excitatory pyramidal cell of the upper cerebral cortex, the folded sheet on the outside of the brain, and IT means intratelencephalic: its axon reaches nearby cortex, distant cortex, the opposite hemisphere and the striatum, but never leaves the two cerebral hemispheres.

That restriction makes it the cortex's associative layer, where a signal from one patch is compared with signals from many others.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A classic pyramid: triangular cell body, thick apical dendrite rising into a tuft in layer 1, and a skirt of basal dendrites, all studded with dendritic spines, the tiny knobs that each hold one excitatory synapse.

Human cells of this type carry roughly three times the dendritic length of matching macaque and mouse cells in temporal cortex.

SIZE:

The cell body is 12 to 25 micrometres across, a micrometre being a thousandth of a millimetre, the apical tree measures about 7,920 micrometres of wire plus or minus 538, and spine estimates run to 25,000 to 30,000 per cell, about 12,700 of them basal.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Patch-seq, which pairs electrical recording with single-cell gene reading, found five human L2/3 IT types named for marker genes, LTK, GLP2R, FREM3, CARM1P1 and COL22A1, of which only three map onto mouse types.

Treat this as a depth-dependent family, not one uniform cell.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layers 2 and 3 of every neocortical area of both hemispheres, meaning all frontal, parietal, temporal, occipital, cingulate and insular neocortex.

Its tuft sits at an explicit interface, layer 1, the almost cell-free top layer where long-range feedback and neuromodulator fibres land, and its axon crosses a second interface, the grey to white matter boundary, on entering the corpus callosum.

NUMBER:

Best estimate 4.6 billion in both hemispheres, range 4.0 to 5.0 billion, moderate confidence, from the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons of which roughly 13.1 billion are excitatory and roughly 35 percent are L2/3 IT.

That is about 5 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the brain, and slightly less of the whole nervous system once spinal cord and peripheral ganglia are counted.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting minus 70 millivolts, threshold minus 40 millivolts, input resistance 40 to 120 megohms, time constant 10 to 20 milliseconds, firing regular and adapting, with an unusually fast action potential onset whose speed correlates with measured intelligence quotient in surgical donors.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from layer 4 below, from other L2/3 cells, from the opposite hemisphere, from layer 1 feedback and from local interneurons, while outputs go to layer 5, to other L2/3 cells, across the callosum and to the striatum.

Excitation lands on spines and inhibition on the shaft, soma and axon initial segment, placing the brake where it can veto output.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin local collaterals arch back into layers 2 and 3 at roughly 0.3 to 1 metre per second while myelinated callosal branches manage 3 to 10 metres per second, and the corpus callosum, holding more than 200 million axons, draws most of them from cells like this.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the brain's standard excitatory messenger, packaged by the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT1 encoded by SLC17A7, acting on fast AMPA and slower voltage-dependent NMDA receptors, with heavy modulation by acetylcholine, serotonin, noradrenaline and dopamine.

MYELINATION:

Myelin is the fatty insulating wrap made by oligodendrocytes that speeds conduction, and here it is famously patchy, with intermittent segments and long bare stretches along the proximal axon, better coverage on callosal branches and none on the thinnest collaterals.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

At a few hertz this class burns on the order of three billion molecules of adenosine triphosphate, the cell's energy currency, per second, split roughly 47 percent on action potentials, 34 percent on the postsynaptic effects of glutamate, 13 percent on resting voltage and 3 percent on recycling glutamate.

With tens of thousands of synapses the bill is dominated by synapses, not spikes.

PLASTICITY:

The most plastic excitatory cell in the cortex, showing long-term potentiation and depression set by pre- and postsynaptic timing within tens of milliseconds, spine turnover over hours to days, and homeostatic scaling of all its weights to hold its average rate near a target.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The human protoplasmic astrocyte here is far larger and more branched than the rodent version, one cell enwrapping on the order of a million synapses and clearing glutamate through the transporters EAAT1 and EAAT2.

Superficial cortex also holds the human-enriched interlaminar astrocyte, whose processes run from layer 1 down through layers 2 and 3, and microglia, the brain's resident immune cells, prune weak spines here using complement proteins.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this one type and the cortex loses its associations: sensation would still arrive at layer 4 and commands would still leave from layer 5, but nothing would bind the hemispheres together or carry information sideways between areas.

The upper cortex would go from a conversation to a row of separate telephones.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The apical dendrites of human L2/3 IT cells generate graded calcium-mediated dendritic action potentials seen in no other species in this form: the response is largest just above threshold, near 240 picoamperes, and is damped by weaker drive near 200 picoamperes and stronger drive near 450 picoamperes.

That inverted tuning lets one dendrite compute exclusive or, firing for either input alone but not both, a classification textbooks said required a multi-layer network.

The cell also back-propagates spikes to tag active synapses, makes protein locally in its dendrites, releases retrograde endocannabinoid messengers that quieten presynaptic partners, and helps route blood to active cortex.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Basal excitation from layer 4 and neighbours 0 to 20 nanosiemens; apical tuft excitation from layer 1 feedback 0 to 15 nanosiemens; inhibition 0 to 30 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spikes to local L2/3, layer 5, contralateral cortex and striatum, never below the telencephalon.

• STATE.

◦ Somatic voltage, apical tuft voltage, dendritic calcium spike amplitude scaled 0 to 1, adaptation current, per-synapse weights.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting minus 70, threshold minus 40, reset minus 60 millivolts; input resistance 40 to 120 megohms; dendritic spike window 0.20 to 0.45 nanoamperes peaking at 0.24; synapse count 8,000 to 30,000.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; AMPA decay 2 milliseconds; NMDA decay 100 milliseconds; adaptation 100 to 300 milliseconds; spine remodelling hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In schizophrenia, spine density on deep layer 3 pyramidal cells of dorsolateral prefrontal area 46 falls about 23 percent, concentrated in medium and large spines.

◦ Runaway recurrent excitation among these cells, when inhibition fails, is a substrate for focal seizures.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a layer two or three intratelencephalic neuron fires, using a graded dendritic calcium spike that computes exclusive or.
Create a number variable called low threshold with initial value 0.20.
Create a number variable called peak drive with initial value 0.24.
Create a number variable called high cutoff with initial value 0.45.
Create a number variable called total drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dendritic amplitude with initial value 0.
Set total drive to the sum of the basal current and the apical current in nanoamperes.
If total drive is less than or equal to low threshold is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set dendritic amplitude to 0.
Else if total drive is less than or equal to peak drive is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the difference of total drive and low threshold.
    Set dendritic amplitude to the result.
Else if total drive is less than high cutoff is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the difference of high cutoff and total drive.
    Set dendritic amplitude to the result.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set dendritic amplitude to 0.
End the conditional block.
Check if dendritic amplitude is greater than 0.02.
Display the result to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the point is the shape of one curve and the truth table it produces, and Python shows both with no ceremony.

# Graded dendritic calcium action potential in a human L2/3 IT neuron.
# Amplitude peaks just above threshold and is damped by stronger drive
# (Gidon et al., Science 2020). That inverted tuning yields exclusive or.
LOW, PEAK, HIGH = 0.20, 0.24, 0.45   # nanoamperes
UNIT = 0.24                          # nanoamperes from one active pathway

def dendritic_spike(drive):
    if drive <= LOW or drive >= HIGH:
        return 0.0                               # silent outside the window
    if drive <= PEAK:
        return (drive - LOW) / (PEAK - LOW)      # rising flank
    return (HIGH - drive) / (HIGH - PEAK)        # damped by strong drive

print("a  b   drive(nA)  dCaAP  output")
for a in (0, 1):
    for b in (0, 1):
        amp = dendritic_spike(UNIT * (a + b))
        print(f"{a}  {b}   {UNIT * (a + b):8.2f}  {amp:5.2f}  {1 if amp > 0.5 else 0}")
print("plain sums:", [a + b for a in (0, 1) for b in (0, 1)])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A pyramidal cell in the upper third of the cortex whose axon never leaves the hemispheres, carrying three times the dendrite of its monkey and mouse counterparts, and whose apical dendrite can answer exclusive or on its own.

CHAPTER 2. L4 IT (Layer 4 Intra-Telencephalic) (Arrival-Amplifying Neuron) (COG)

Everything you have ever seen, heard or felt entered your conscious brain through a thin band of small round cells about two millimetres beneath your scalp.

Arrival names the moment it owns: the instant information from outside first touches the cortex.

Amplifying corrects the usual misconception - thalamic terminals supply only ten to twenty-three percent of its excitatory synapses, so the strength is built locally by these cells exciting one another, not handed to them by the thalamus.

Neuron marks it as a principal cortical cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The L4 IT neuron is the cortex's front door, an excitatory cell in layer 4, the granular layer, so called because it looks like fine grains rather than obvious pyramids.

IT again means intratelencephalic, so the axon stays inside the hemispheres and usually inside its own cortical column, a vertical cylinder 300 to 600 micrometres wide, and its job is to take the driving input from the thalamus, the relay station at the centre of the brain, amplify it and hand a clean copy up to layer 2/3.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The spiny stellate cell has no apical dendrite at all, its dendrites radiating in a rough sphere like a sea urchin, making it the purest local integrator in the cortex, while the star pyramid keeps a short apical dendrite reaching only layer 3.

Both are densely spiny and both keep their dendrites inside their own column.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 8 to 15 micrometres across, the smallest excitatory neurons of the cortex, with a compact dendritic sphere of radius 100 to 200 micrometres holding roughly 1,500 to 4,000 micrometres of dendrite, a few thousand spines, and a local axon arbour usually under one millimetre wide.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Transcriptomics splits the population into L4 IT proper and an intermediate L4/5 IT group, while anatomically true spiny stellates dominate primary sensory cortex and are most extreme in primary visual cortex, where layer 4 divides into sublayers 4A, 4B, 4C alpha and 4C beta.

Human primary motor cortex was called agranular for a century, yet sequencing finds a layer 4 like type in it, so granular against agranular is a matter of degree.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer 4 of all granular neocortex: primary visual cortex, primary auditory cortex, primary somatosensory areas 3b and 1, and the granular parts of parietal, temporal and prefrontal association cortex.

It is densest in primary visual sublayer 4C beta, target of the parvocellular relay of the lateral geniculate nucleus, and it sits exactly at the interface between thalamocortical input and cortical microcircuit, dendrites in the thalamic terminal field and axon terminals in layer 2/3.

NUMBER:

Best estimate 2.6 billion across both hemispheres, range 2.0 to 3.0 billion, moderate confidence, roughly 20 percent of the 13.1 billion excitatory cortical neurons and about 3 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the brain.

Confidence is limited because the layer 4 share swings from very high in primary visual cortex to near zero in motor cortex.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting minus 70 to minus 75 millivolts, threshold near minus 45 millivolts, input resistance high at 100 to 200 megohms because the cell is small, time constant short at 8 to 15 milliseconds, and firing regular with strong fast adaptation, so a maintained input gives a brief burst then a slow train and the layer reports change rather than steady state.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The counterintuitive fact of layer 4 is that the thalamus supplies only a small minority of its excitatory synapses, a few percent in cat primary visual cortex and commonly quoted as 5 to 10 percent, with the rest from other layer 4 cells.

Thalamic synapses win anyway because they fire in synchrony, land close to the soma and are individually strong, and outputs are dominated by a dense projection to layer 2/3 directly above.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single thin axon rises vertically with most branches ending within about 300 micrometres horizontally of the parent cell, conducting slowly at 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second yet delivering to layer 2/3 in only 1 to 3 milliseconds because the distance is so short.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate loaded by VGLUT1, acting on AMPA and NMDA receptors, with layer 4 notable for NMDA receptors of both high and low single-channel conductance and for thalamic synapses among the most reliable glutamate release sites in the brain.

Acetylcholine and noradrenaline gate how strongly the thalamus drives the layer during attention and arousal.

MYELINATION:

Mostly unmyelinated, because a short axon inside its own column gains almost nothing in speed for a large metabolic cost, whereas the thalamic axons arriving here are thickly myelinated right up to their terminals, producing the pale band visible to the naked eye in primary visual cortex, the stria of Gennari.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Layer 4 of primary sensory cortex has the highest resting glucose uptake and the highest density of mitochondria and of the enzyme cytochrome oxidase of any cortical layer, so tightly bound to this population that anatomists use the stain to reveal ocular dominance columns and barrels.

Per cell the demand is modest; per cubic millimetre it is the highest in the cortex.

PLASTICITY:

This is the classic critical period cell, its thalamocortical synapses strongly plastic in early life and much less so later, which is why a squint or cataract in the first years permanently reshapes visual cortex while the same insult in an adult does not.

Adult layer 4 keeps short-term depression as an automatic gain control and can still remap slowly after peripheral injury.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Layer 4 is wrapped in perineuronal nets, lattices of chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan laid down as the critical period closes, and these nets are the physical brake on plasticity: dissolve them with the enzyme chondroitinase and juvenile plasticity returns.

Astrocytes here carry the highest density of glutamate transporters in the cortex, because synchronous thalamic volleys would otherwise blur the map by spilling glutamate onto neighbouring columns, and the capillary bed is the densest of any layer.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the cortex goes blind, deaf and numb while remaining fully alive, because the driving sensory signal would have no amplifier and no organised entry point.

The barrels, the ocular dominance columns and the tonotopic gradients would dissolve; layer 4 is what gives primary sensory cortex its grain.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Layer 4 dendrites integrate their spine inputs almost linearly, and in vivo calcium measurements in single spines show signals adding without cooperativity between neighbours, with a rise of about 85 milliseconds plus or minus 53 and a decay of about 412 milliseconds plus or minus 240.

Linear summation makes layer 4 an honest adder rather than a pattern detector, exactly what a first stage should be.

These cells are also gap-junction coupled in development, they instruct the maturation of surrounding interneurons, and their activity drives the vascular response that magnetic resonance imaging records as the blood oxygen level dependent signal.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Thalamocortical excitation, 5 to 10 percent of excitatory synapses but synchronous; model as 40 to 100 synapses with high release probability.

◦ Local recurrent excitation from other L4 IT cells, about 90 percent of synapses, asynchronous and weak, plus parvalbumin inhibition 1 to 2 milliseconds behind the volley.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Strong vertical projection to layer 2/3 of the same column, weaker ones to layers 5 and 6 and back into layer 4.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, adaptation current, short-term depression variable for the thalamic synapse scaled 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting minus 70, threshold minus 45, reset minus 60 millivolts; input resistance 100 to 200 megohms; thalamic synapse count 40 to 100; local synapse count 600 to 1,500.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 8 to 15 milliseconds; adaptation 60 to 120 milliseconds; thalamic depression recovery 200 to 500 milliseconds; critical period, in humans, the first months to years of life.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Deprivation in the critical period, as in amblyopia after childhood squint or cataract, permanently shrinks the layer 4 territory of the deprived eye and cannot be reversed in adulthood.

◦ Loss of thalamic drive to this layer is a common final path in cortical blindness and cortical deafness.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show how a small synchronous thalamic minority drives a layer four neuron while a large asynchronous local majority does not.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value minus 70.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called thalamic drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called local drive with initial value 9.
Create a number variable called time now with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called volley is on with initial value false.
Repeat the following steps exactly 600 times.
    Calculate the sum of time now and 0.1.
    Set time now to the result.
    Set volley is on to true when time now lies between 10 and 25 and false otherwise.
    If volley is on is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set thalamic drive to 30.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set thalamic drive to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of thalamic drive and local drive.
    Set membrane voltage to the result of one leaky integration step towards that sum minus adaptation.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to minus 45.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to minus 60.
        Calculate the sum of adaptation and 2.
        Set adaptation to the result.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to the result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole argument is a controlled comparison, thalamic volley present against absent, and Python puts the two runs side by side in two lines.

# Layer 4 IT: a small, synchronous thalamic minority beats a large,
# asynchronous cortical majority. Voltages in mV, time in ms.
import random

N_THAL, N_LOCAL = 60, 900            # synapse counts
W_THAL, W_LOCAL = 0.50, 0.02         # mV of drive per synapse

def run(thalamus_on):
    random.seed(1)                   # deterministic run
    v, adapt, spikes = -70.0, 0.0, []
    for step in range(600):          # 60 ms at 0.1 ms resolution
        t = step * 0.1
        thal = N_THAL * W_THAL if (thalamus_on and 10.0 <= t < 25.0) else 0.0
        local = N_LOCAL * W_LOCAL * random.random()    # never synchronised
        v += 0.1 * (-(v + 70.0) + thal + local - adapt) / 10.0
        adapt += 0.1 * (-adapt) / 90.0
        if v >= -45.0:
            v, adapt = -60.0, adapt + 2.0
            spikes.append(round(t, 1))
    return spikes

print(f"thalamic share of synapses: {100.0 * N_THAL / (N_THAL + N_LOCAL):.1f} percent")
print("with the thalamic volley:", run(True))
print("without the volley:     ", run(False))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The smallest excitatory neuron in the cortex, often with no apical dendrite at all, packed at record density in a thin band, wrapped in a perineuronal net, and the only cortical cell that receives the thalamus as a driver rather than a suggestion.

CHAPTER 3. L5 IT (Layer 5 Intra-Telencephalic) (Action-Proposing Neuron) (COG)

Halfway down the cortical sheet sits a pyramid that could reach the spinal cord but never does, choosing instead to whisper to the other hemisphere and to the machinery of habit.

Action names where its output goes: it carries the local conclusion into the striatum, the machinery that selects among possible choices.

Proposing names exactly what it can do and marks what it cannot: it informs the choice, it never executes it.

Neuron marks it as a principal cortical cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The L5 IT neuron is an excitatory pyramidal cell in layer 5, mostly its upper half, layer 5a, and IT means intratelencephalic, so its axon stays entirely inside the two cerebral hemispheres.

That single restriction separates it from its famous neighbour the L5 ET cell and makes this the cortex's deep associative and habit-forming channel, linking cortical areas across both hemispheres and delivering a bilateral copy of cortical activity to the striatum, the deep structure that learns which actions are worth repeating.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A slender-tufted pyramid whose apical dendrite often stops short of layer 1, and where it arrives the tuft is thin rather than the great bush of its extratelencephalic neighbour, while the basal dendrites spread widely in layer 5.

The geometry weights this cell towards local and feedforward input rather than the long-range feedback that lands in layer 1.

SIZE:

Cell body 15 to 22 micrometres across, larger than a layer 4 cell and smaller than a layer 5 extratelencephalic cell, with 5,000 to 9,000 micrometres of dendrite carrying several thousand to about 15,000 spines, and an axon adding a local arbour of one to two millimetres plus a callosal branch of 10 to 20 centimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Transcriptomics splits the layer 5 intratelencephalic population into several types, and human cortex adds a distinctive deep type, L5/6 IT Car3, closely related to the claustrum, a thin sheet of grey matter buried beside the cortex.

Anatomically the useful split is between cells whose main output crosses the callosum and cells whose main output descends to the striatum, though most do both.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer 5, chiefly layer 5a, throughout the neocortex of both hemispheres, including motor, premotor, somatosensory, visual, auditory, parietal, temporal, insular and prefrontal areas, continuing without a break into layer 5b and the top of layer 6.

It occupies an important interface: the layer 5a to 5b boundary is where the intratelencephalic and extratelencephalic output systems meet, two populations living side by side that behave like different animals.

NUMBER:

Best estimate 1.3 billion in both hemispheres, range 1.0 to 1.7 billion, moderate confidence, roughly 10 percent of the 13.1 billion excitatory cortical neurons and about 1.5 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the brain.

The uncertainty comes mainly from where one draws the line between layer 5 IT and layer 6 IT, a boundary that is transcriptomically graded rather than sharp.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting minus 72 millivolts, threshold minus 45 millivolts, input resistance 60 to 150 megohms, time constant 12 to 20 milliseconds, regular spiking and adapting, almost never bursting.

Its most diagnostic feature is what it lacks: far less hyperpolarisation-activated sag current, carried by HCN channels, than the extratelencephalic cell beside it, so a negative current makes its voltage drop and stay down where the neighbour's sags back up within a hundred milliseconds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from layers 2/3 and 4 above, from other layer 5 IT cells, from the opposite hemisphere, from higher-order thalamus onto the apical dendrite, and from local inhibitory cells.

The single most important wiring fact is an asymmetry: L5 IT cells connect strongly and frequently onto L5 ET cells while L5 ET cells almost never connect back, so the deep cortex is a one-way street and any simulation with a symmetrical matrix here will produce the wrong dynamics.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Medium calibre at 0.5 to 1.5 micrometres, with myelinated callosal branches conducting at 3 to 10 metres per second so a signal takes 10 to 30 milliseconds to cross between hemispheres, and a thin corticostriatal branch whose fine terminal field sprinkles the striatum lightly rather than concentrating on one spot.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate packaged by VGLUT1, acting on AMPA and NMDA receptors, and its corticostriatal terminals are the main excitatory input to the striatal medium spiny neuron, the site where dopamine from midbrain fibres gates whether a co-active cortical and striatal pair strengthens or weakens.

MYELINATION:

Callosal and corticostriatal branches are myelinated, patchy near the soma and continuous once in white matter, while local collaterals inside layer 5 are mostly bare, an intermediate investment that makes this cell cheaper to run than its extratelencephalic neighbour, which must insulate a metre-long wire.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate to high, dominated by maintaining a long branched axon supplied from a soma that may be twenty centimetres away, with axonal transport at a few hundred millimetres per day meaning a protein can take a day or more to reach a callosal terminal.

At 1 to 10 hertz the cell burns a few billion molecules of adenosine triphosphate per second, with the axon and its synapses, not the spikes, taking the largest share.

PLASTICITY:

Its corticostriatal synapses show dopamine-dependent long-term potentiation and depression and are the leading candidate substrate for habit learning and skill acquisition, while callosal synapses show ordinary spike-timing-dependent plasticity and the axon itself adds and prunes striatal boutons over weeks of motor learning.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing dramatic distinguishes the glia in layer 5a from those elsewhere in the cortex, and it is worth saying that plainly so no reader hunts for a specialisation that is not there.

The one real point concerns white matter: because this axon spends most of its length there, most of its oligodendrocyte partners are white matter oligodendrocytes rather than the grey matter ones wrapping its first millimetre, and the two populations differ in gene expression and injury response, so a white matter disease hits the axon while sparing the dendrites.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take this cell away and the deep cortex becomes a broadcasting station with no correspondents: layer 5 could still command muscles, but it could not tell the other hemisphere what it was doing, build habits in the striatum, or compare deep activity across areas.

Movements would become clumsy and one-sided, and practice would stop producing automaticity.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The thin apical tuft still supports NMDA receptor spikes, local regenerative events in single branches that let a cluster of nearby synapses count for far more than their sum, while back-propagating action potentials invade the basal dendrites reliably and the apical trunk less so, setting a ceiling on how far up a synapse can be tagged as recently active.

It releases the retrograde messenger 2-arachidonoylglycerol, an endocannabinoid, from its dendrites to suppress incoming inhibition for seconds after strong activity, takes up lactate supplied by astrocytes, and contributes to local blood flow control through nitric oxide.

Across weeks of learning it physically rebuilds its striatal terminals, a computation with no equivalent in an integrate and fire equation.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Feedforward excitation from layers 2/3 and 4, 0 to 20 nanosiemens; recurrent and callosal excitation, 0 to 15 nanosiemens.

◦ Higher-order thalamic excitation onto the apical dendrite, 0 to 8 nanosiemens; inhibition 0 to 30 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spikes to contralateral and ipsilateral cortex, to both striata, and critically to L5 ET cells; no output below the telencephalon, which must be a hard constraint.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, adaptation current, apical NMDA spike flag, per-synapse weights, callosal delay line holding spikes in flight.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting minus 72, threshold minus 45, reset minus 60 millivolts; input resistance 60 to 150 megohms; connection probability L5 IT to L5 ET of order 0.1 to 0.2 locally, L5 ET to L5 IT near zero.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 12 to 20 milliseconds; adaptation 100 to 400 milliseconds; callosal delay 10 to 30 milliseconds; corticostriatal plasticity seconds to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In Huntington's disease the corticostriatal terminals of these cells degenerate early, before striatal cell death is complete, and restoring cortical input slows the disease in animal models.

◦ Demyelination of the callosal branch, as in multiple sclerosis, breaks bimanual coordination while leaving each hemisphere individually competent.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to demonstrate the one way wiring rule between layer five intratelencephalic cells and layer five extratelencephalic cells.
Create a number variable called weight from intratelencephalic to extratelencephalic with initial value 0.90.
Create a number variable called weight from extratelencephalic to intratelencephalic with initial value 0.02.
Create a list variable called drive order with initial value empty list.
Add the text intratelencephalic to the end of drive order.
Add the text extratelencephalic to the end of drive order.
Create a number variable called partner spikes with initial value 0.
For each cell name in drive order, perform the following operations.
    Set partner spikes to 0.
    Repeat the following steps exactly 2000 times.
        Set the voltage of cell name to the result of one leaky integration step under injected current.
        Check if the voltage of cell name is greater than or equal to minus 45.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set the voltage of cell name to minus 60.
            Calculate the sum of the synaptic input of the partner cell and the outgoing weight of cell name.
            Set the synaptic input of the partner cell to the result.
        End the conditional block.
        Check if the voltage of the partner cell is greater than or equal to minus 45.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set the voltage of the partner cell to minus 60.
            Calculate the sum of partner spikes and 1.
            Set partner spikes to the result.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
    Display partner spikes to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the finding is a two-by-two connectivity asymmetry, and a dictionary keyed by ordered pairs states that asymmetry more honestly than a matrix of numbers.

# Layer 5 IT drives layer 5 ET, but not the reverse (Kiritani et al., 2012).
# Two leaky integrate-and-fire cells; only the connection matrix differs.
W = {("IT", "ET"): 0.90, ("ET", "IT"): 0.02}   # deliberately asymmetric
DT, TAU_M, TAU_SYN = 0.1, 13.0, 5.0            # ms
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -70.0, -45.0, -60.0    # mV
DRIVE, PSP = 32.0, 40.0                        # injected mV, synaptic mV

def run(driven):
    v = {"IT": V_REST, "ET": V_REST}
    syn = {"IT": 0.0, "ET": 0.0}
    fired = {"IT": 0, "ET": 0}
    for _ in range(2000):                      # 200 ms
        for k in ("IT", "ET"):
            inj = DRIVE if k == driven else 0.0
            v[k] += DT * (-(v[k] - V_REST) + inj + syn[k]) / TAU_M
            syn[k] += DT * (-syn[k]) / TAU_SYN
        for k in ("IT", "ET"):
            if v[k] >= V_TH:
                v[k] = V_RESET
                fired[k] += 1
                other = "ET" if k == "IT" else "IT"
                syn[other] += PSP * W[(k, other)]
    return fired

print("inject current into the L5 IT cell:", run("IT"))
print("inject current into the L5 ET cell:", run("ET"))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A slender-tufted pyramid in layer 5 with almost no sag current, whose axon crosses the corpus callosum and rains lightly on both striata, and which drives its giant neighbour without ever being driven back by it.

CHAPTER 4. L5 ET (Layer 5 Extra-Telencephalic) (Body-Commanding Neuron) (COG)

In 1874 Vladimir Betz described the largest neurons in the human brain, cells big enough to see with the naked eye, and every voluntary movement you make begins in cells of their family.

Body names its target zone, as this is the only cortical excitatory cell whose axon leaves the forebrain, reaching down to the motor systems of the brainstem, spinal cord, superior colliculus, and pons.

Commanding names the one thing no other cell in this family can do - turn a thought into a movement.

It includes the giant Betz cells.

Neuron marks it as a principal cortical cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The L5 ET neuron is the cortex's only direct line out, ET standing for extratelencephalic, meaning the axon leaves the telencephalon, the pair of cerebral hemispheres, and descends to the thalamus, superior colliculus, pontine nuclei, red nucleus, medulla and, in a subset, the spinal cord.

Its older name is pyramidal tract neuron, and its giant subset in primary motor cortex, the Betz cells, forms part of the direct cortico-motoneuronal pathway, a single-synapse connection from cortex to the spinal motor neurons that move the hand.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A thick-tufted pyramid: large soma, a stout apical dendrite running unbroken to layer 1 and exploding there into a broad tuft, oblique dendrites off the trunk, and a heavy basal skirt.

Tuft and soma are separated by up to two millimetres of dendrite, making the cell two electrically semi-independent computers joined by a cable.

SIZE:

Ordinary L5 ET somata are 20 to 35 micrometres across, while Betz cells are the giants at 60 to 110 micrometres in their long axis, visible without magnification in a stained section.

Total dendritic length runs to 15,000 to 30,000 micrometres with tens of thousands of spines, and the axon of a corticospinal Betz cell can approach one metre, among the longest cells in the body.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The divisions are by target and they overlap, because most cells branch to several: corticospinal, corticobulbar, corticopontine, corticotectal, corticorubral, and layer 5 corticothalamic cells driving higher-order thalamic nuclei.

Betz cells make up only about 10 percent of layer 5 pyramidal neurons in primary motor cortex and contribute only about 2 to 3 percent of the axons in the corticospinal tract.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer 5b of the neocortex, immediately beneath the layer 5 intratelencephalic population, concentrated above all in primary motor cortex, Brodmann area 4, in the anterior bank of the central sulcus, with Betz cells largest in the medial leg and trunk representation, plus substantial populations in premotor and supplementary motor cortex, somatosensory areas 3a, 3b, 1 and 2, and visual and auditory cortex.

The cell straddles three interfaces: its tuft in layer 1 among the feedback fibres, its soma in layer 5b, and its axon crossing into the internal capsule and then out of the telencephalon entirely at the cerebral peduncle.

NUMBER:

This number is genuinely uncertain: transcriptomic proportions would put layer 5 extratelencephalic cells at roughly 1 percent of cortical excitatory neurons, about 130 million, while classical axon counts point lower, the human corticospinal tract carrying a little over one million axons per side, about 700,000 of them myelinated.

A defensible working figure is 40 to 130 million in both hemispheres, best estimate about 60 million, low confidence, which is about 0.07 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the brain.

Betz cells specifically number roughly 30,000 to 40,000 per hemisphere, a classical count not substantially revised since.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Low input resistance at 20 to 60 megohms because the cell is large and leaky, resting minus 68 to minus 75 millivolts, threshold near minus 45 millivolts, and intrinsically bursting rather than regularly adapting.

The diagnostic feature is a large sag: hyperpolarisation-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channels, chiefly HCN1, pack into the apical dendrite at rising density towards the tuft, so a negative current makes the voltage dip then creep back up.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives layer 2/3 and layer 5 intratelencephalic input on its basal and perisomatic dendrites, long-range feedback and non-specific thalamic input on its layer 1 tuft, somatostatin inhibition on its distal dendrites and parvalbumin basket and chandelier inhibition at soma and axon initial segment, with Betz cells carrying an exceptionally dense perisomatic basket.

Its outputs reach the spinal ventral horn, the medullary and pontine reticular formation, the pontine nuclei feeding the cerebellum, the superior colliculus, the red nucleus, the striatum by collateral and the higher-order thalamus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thick at 2 to 5 micrometres for the fastest corticospinal fibres and up to 10 to 20 micrometres including myelin, conducting at up to about 70 metres per second, the highest of any central axon, giving a cortex to lumbar delay of roughly 20 milliseconds, with collaterals branching off at each level so one spike is announced simultaneously at many stations.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate loaded by VGLUT1, forming powerful AMPA and NMDA synapses directly onto spinal motor neurons and interneurons at the far end, and the cell expresses high levels of neurofilament heavy chain, a structural protein whose appearance in blood is now used as a biomarker of its degeneration.

MYELINATION:

The most heavily myelinated cortical output axon in the body, with long internodes, the myelinated stretches between nodes of Ranvier, and a g-ratio, axon diameter divided by total fibre diameter, near the optimum of 0.6 to 0.7.

The neuron partly builds its own insulation, because activity in the axon recruits oligodendrocyte precursor cells and increases myelination according to use.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Extreme, and central to its pathology: a cell maintaining up to a metre of thick, high-conductance axon with hundreds of thousands of channels at every node, shipping every protein from one distant soma, lives permanently close to its energy ceiling.

Mitochondrial density in these axons is among the highest in the nervous system, and any drop in adenosine triphosphate supply hits the most distal terminals first, exactly the pattern seen in disease.

PLASTICITY:

Plasticity at its inputs supports motor learning and the cortico-motoneuronal connection can be strengthened through practice across days to weeks, while the axon sprouts new collaterals within the spinal cord after partial injury, which is the anatomical basis of much recovery after stroke.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Betz cells attract an unusually dense sheath of astrocyte processes and a striking accumulation of perineuronal net material.

In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis the oligodendrocytes supporting these axons downregulate their myelinating genes and the surrounding microglia shift into an endolysosomal reactive state, changes that may precede the neuron's death, while a single-nucleus multiomic atlas of that disease has nominated an astrocyte population expressing the gene WDR49 as potentially neuroprotective, so the glia here are part of the disease rather than bystanders.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and primary motor cortex becomes a beautifully organised map of movements that cannot move anything, keeping its somatotopy, its cerebellar and basal ganglia inputs and its internal chatter while no instruction reaches a muscle.

Clinically that is the upper motor neuron syndrome, weakness, loss of fine finger movement, spasticity and a positive Babinski sign, with the muscles themselves intact; the flavour lost is agency.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is the cell in which dendritic computation was discovered: the tuft in layer 1 holds a calcium spike initiation zone, and when a spike back-propagating from the soma arrives while the tuft is depolarised by feedback, the two coincide and trigger a long calcium plateau that floods back to the soma and turns a single spike into a high-frequency burst.

This backpropagation-activated calcium spike firing makes the cell a coincidence detector between its base and its top, typically needing a train of about four action potentials at around 100 hertz, and appearing reliably only when the apical trunk exceeds roughly 350 micrometres.

The cell also controls local blood flow, instructs myelination of its own axon, and through its brainstem collaterals informs the cerebellum of every command before the movement has happened.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Perisomatic and basal excitation from L5 IT and L2/3 IT cells, 0 to 25 nanosiemens; apical tuft excitation from layer 1, 0 to 15 nanosiemens.

◦ Distal somatostatin and perisomatic parvalbumin inhibition, 0 to 40 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spikes to spinal ventral horn, reticular formation, pontine nuclei, superior colliculus, red nucleus, higher-order thalamus and striatum.

◦ Burst against single spike must be an explicit output flag, because downstream targets respond very differently to the two.

• STATE.

◦ Somatic voltage, apical tuft voltage, calcium plateau timer, sag current activation, time since last somatic spike.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting minus 70, threshold minus 45, reset minus 58 millivolts; input resistance 20 to 60 megohms; tuft plateau threshold about 8 millivolts; conduction velocity 40 to 70 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Somatic membrane 8 to 15 milliseconds; apical tuft 25 to 40 milliseconds; sag activation 50 to 200 milliseconds; calcium plateau 30 to 50 milliseconds; coincidence window 5 to 30 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis these neurons degenerate selectively; sequencing of 79,169 single nuclei from human cortex found THY1-positive extratelencephalic neurons expressing that disease's risk genes at significantly higher levels than other cortical neurons, ill or not, and switching on protein-homeostasis and stress-response programmes in patients.

◦ Internal capsule stroke cuts the axon while the soma survives; hereditary spastic paraplegia kills the longest axons from their distal ends first.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to detect coincidence between perisomatic drive and apical tuft drive in a layer five extratelencephalic neuron and to turn that coincidence into a burst.
Create a number variable called somatic voltage with initial value minus 70.
Create a number variable called tuft depolarisation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called plateau remaining with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called time since last spike with initial value 1000.
Create a number variable called burst spike count with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called tuft is loaded with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called spike was recent with initial value false.
Repeat the following steps exactly 2000 times.
    Set tuft depolarisation to the result of one leaky integration step towards the layer one input.
    Check if tuft depolarisation is greater than 8.
    Set tuft is loaded to the result.
    Check if time since last spike is less than 6.
    Set spike was recent to the result.
    Check if both tuft is loaded and spike was recent are true.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set plateau remaining to 40.
    End the conditional block.
    Set somatic voltage to the result of one leaky integration step including any plateau current.
    Check if somatic voltage is greater than or equal to minus 45.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set somatic voltage to minus 58.
        Set time since last spike to 0.
        Calculate the sum of burst spike count and 1.
        Set burst spike count to the result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display burst spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because a whole-cortex simulation will instantiate tens of millions of these two-compartment cells and this inner loop must run with nothing between it and the processor.

#include <stdio.h>

/* Two-compartment Betz-cell model: soma plus apical tuft. A tuft calcium
   plateau, triggered only when tuft depolarisation coincides with a recent
   somatic spike, converts steady firing into a burst. mV and ms. */
int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.05, tau_s = 12.0, tau_d = 30.0;
    const double v_rest = -70.0, v_th = -45.0, v_reset = -58.0;
    const double d_th = 8.0, plateau_ms = 40.0, bac_drive = 14.0;
    double v = v_rest, d = 0.0, plateau = 0.0, since_spike = 1000.0;
    int early = 0, late = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < 2000; i++) {                        /* 100 ms */
        double t = i * dt;
        double drive_s = (t >= 20.0 && t < 90.0) ? 30.0 : 0.0;  /* basal */
        double drive_d = (t >= 30.0 && t < 60.0) ? 14.0 : 0.0;  /* layer 1 */
        d += dt * (-d + drive_d) / tau_d;
        if (plateau <= 0.0 && d > d_th && since_spike < 6.0)
            plateau = plateau_ms;                           /* coincidence */
        double bac = (plateau > 0.0) ? bac_drive : 0.0;
        if (plateau > 0.0) plateau -= dt;
        v += dt * (-(v - v_rest) + drive_s + bac) / tau_s;
        since_spike += dt;
        if (v >= v_th) { v = v_reset; since_spike = 0.0;
                         if (bac > 0.0) late++; else early++; }
    }
    printf("spikes before the calcium plateau: %d\n", early);
    printf("spikes during the calcium plateau: %d\n", late);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only cortical neuron whose axon leaves the cerebral hemispheres, the largest cell in the human brain in its Betz form, marked by a deep sag current, a thick tuft in layer 1 and a calcium plateau that fuses top and bottom into one burst.

CHAPTER 5. L5/6 NP (Layer 5 and 6 Near-Projecting Non-Projecting) (Short-Reach Neuron) (COG)

Somewhere in the deepest quarter of your cortex is a rare cell named for what it does not do: it grows a projection axon, sends it into the white matter, and then stops almost as soon as it has started.

Short-Reach names the single solid anatomical fact - it projects sparsely and only nearby, leaving its function deliberately modest until further research establishes its precise role.

Neuron marks it as a principal cortical cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The L5/6 NP neuron is an excitatory glutamatergic cell straddling the border between cortical layers 5 and 6, and NP stands for near-projecting, a name coined when tracing from a genetic driver line based on the gene Slc17a8, which encodes the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT3, revealed only sparse projections to neighbouring cortical areas rather than long descending or callosal trunks.

It is a puzzle in plain sight, carrying the transcriptional identity of a projection neuron yet projecting almost nowhere, and the best current reading is that it is a sparse, slow integrator reporting to a few adjacent territories.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A pyramidal cell with a long, thin, sparsely branched apical dendrite and basal dendrites that spread more horizontally and further than those of neighbouring layer 5 cells, with comparatively low spine density that gives them a smoother look than the heavily beaded dendrites of a layer 2/3 cell.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 15 to 25 micrometres across, similar to a layer 5 intratelencephalic cell and smaller than a thick-tufted extratelencephalic neuron, with 4,000 to 9,000 micrometres of dendrite and, because spine density is low, a total input count probably in the low thousands rather than the tens of thousands.

These figures come from rodent reconstructions and a few human recordings, so treat them as provisional.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

In the mouse, four related deep types were distinguished by the marker genes Slc17a8, Trhr, Tshz2, Sla2 and Rapgef3, while in human cortex the near-projecting group is small, resolved into only a handful of transcriptomic types whose marker genes do not map one to one onto the mouse names.

Treat it as one class with wide parameter variance rather than several confident subtypes.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The deep half of layer 5 and the upper part of layer 6, concentrated exactly at the layer 5b to layer 6a interface, in neocortex of both hemispheres, across motor, somatosensory, visual, auditory and prefrontal cortex, but nowhere abundant.

Its position matters, because this border is where the outward-facing extratelencephalic output system meets the inward-facing corticothalamic feedback system, so the cell sits with its dendrites in one regime and its soma in the other.

NUMBER:

Best estimate about 130 million in both hemispheres, range 80 to 200 million, low to moderate confidence, which is about 1 percent of the 13.1 billion excitatory cortical neurons and roughly 0.15 percent of the approximately 86 billion neurons in the brain.

The estimate rests entirely on the proportion of nuclei assigned to this class in single-nucleus sequencing, a relative measure never checked against a direct anatomical count in humans, so the honest bound is more than 50 million and less than 400 million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The available recordings describe relatively high input resistance for a deep pyramidal neuron at 100 to 250 megohms, a slow membrane time constant of 20 to 30 milliseconds, comparatively broad action potentials and a low maximum firing rate, giving a cell that is easy to depolarise but hard to drive fast.

This rests on a small number of patch-clamp and patch-seq recordings, and confidence here is lower than for any other type in this section.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from local layer 5 and layer 6 excitatory cells, from layer 2/3 above, from higher-order thalamic nuclei, and from local interneurons with somatostatin cells prominent among them.

Outputs are the defining oddity: a sparse projection to neighbouring cortical areas, local collaterals within deep cortex, and in some tracing studies a thin projection to striatum and posterior thalamic territory, with local connectivity sparser than between other deep excitatory types.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single thin axon of roughly 0.3 to 0.8 micrometres, descending into white matter and travelling only a few millimetres to a couple of centimetres before arborising at perhaps 1 to 5 metres per second, and its distinguishing feature is negative: it never descends past the telencephalon and forms no dense terminal field anywhere.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, with VGLUT1 as the principal vesicular transporter, while the mouse marker gene Slc17a8 encodes VGLUT3, a transporter otherwise confined to a small set of specialised cells, though messenger RNA expression alone does not prove the protein loads glutamate at this cell's terminals.

The type also shows enriched expression of peptide receptor genes including thyrotropin-releasing hormone receptor in the mouse, hinting at strong neuromodulatory control.

MYELINATION:

Light and patchy, with the short white matter segment myelinated and the local grey matter collaterals largely bare, so that total investment in myelin is far below that of an extratelencephalic neighbour.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low relative to other deep projection neurons, because a short axon, a modest spine count and a low firing rate together give one of the smallest energy budgets of any cortical pyramidal cell, probably well under a billion molecules of adenosine triphosphate per second at rest, though no direct measurement exists for this type.

PLASTICITY:

Little is known, and it is better to say so than to guess: its synapses are ordinary glutamatergic synapses with AMPA and NMDA receptors and should support spike-timing-dependent plasticity, and its high input resistance would make it unusually sensitive to small weight changes.

No study has characterised long-term potentiation or spine turnover in transcriptomically identified near-projecting cells, so a simulation should use generic pyramidal rules and flag them as unverified.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing specific has been described, and that is the honest answer: the astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia at the layer 5 to 6 border serve the whole local population, and no glial specialisation has been reported around near-projecting cells in particular.

This is stated plainly so no reader assumes a specialisation exists and has merely been omitted; the question has not been asked.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the deep cortex loses a quiet, slow, wide-field channel linking each area to its immediate neighbours without using the long-range highways, and because the population is small the loss would probably be subtle rather than catastrophic: no paralysis, no blindness, but a plausible loss of the local smoothing that keeps neighbouring cortical areas in register.

The flavour lost is the cortex's short-range gossip between adjacent neighbourhoods, as distinct from the long-distance calls that L5 IT and L5 ET cells make.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

High input resistance and a slow membrane make this an integrator over tens of milliseconds rather than a coincidence detector, so it naturally reports the average of its inputs rather than their synchrony.

Its long thin apical dendrite should support NMDA receptor spikes, local regenerative events in single branches, and its broad action potential delivers more calcium into each presynaptic terminal than a narrow spike would, favouring reliable release at low rates.

Because it expresses transporters and peptide receptors associated with volume transmission, meaning chemical signalling that diffuses through the extracellular space rather than crossing one synaptic cleft, it is a plausible participant in slow chemical modulation of deep cortex, though no dendritic recordings exist from a confirmed human near-projecting cell and its gap-junction coupling, if any, is unknown.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Local excitation from deep layer 5 and layer 6 pyramidal cells, 0 to 12 nanosiemens; descending excitation from layer 2/3, 0 to 8 nanosiemens.

◦ Higher-order thalamic excitation 0 to 6 nanosiemens; inhibition dominated by somatostatin interneurons, 0 to 20 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Sparse spikes to adjacent cortical areas and to local deep cortex.

◦ Weak, uncertain projections to striatum and posterior thalamus; make this an optional switch, defaulted off and labelled uncertain.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, refractory timer reflecting the broad action potential, slow adaptation current.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting minus 70, threshold minus 42, reset minus 62 millivolts; input resistance 100 to 250 megohms; action potential half-width 1.2 to 2.0 milliseconds; population share about 1 percent of cortical excitatory neurons.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds; absolute refractory period 3 to 5 milliseconds; adaptation 200 to 600 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ No disease is yet attributed specifically to this type, and claiming one would be invention.

◦ Its high input resistance makes it disproportionately sensitive to any drop in inhibitory tone, so in models of disinhibited cortex it is among the first cells recruited, and its transcriptomic neighbours at the layer 5 to 6 border are among the populations reported as altered in single-nucleus studies of schizophrenia and autism, a correlation that is not yet a mechanism.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compare a near projecting neuron with a typical deep pyramidal neuron given the same very small injected current.
Create a number variable called injected current in nanoamperes with initial value 0.12.
Create a list variable called cells to test with initial value empty list.
Add the text near projecting to the end of cells to test.
Add the text typical deep pyramid to the end of cells to test.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value minus 70.
Create a number variable called drive in millivolts with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called refractory remaining with initial value 0.
For each cell name in cells to test, perform the following operations.
    Set membrane voltage to minus 70.
    Set spike count to 0.
    Set drive in millivolts to the product of the input resistance of cell name and injected current in nanoamperes.
    Repeat the following steps exactly 5000 times.
        If refractory remaining is greater than 0 is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set refractory remaining to the difference of refractory remaining and 0.1.
            Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
        End the conditional block.
        Set membrane voltage to the result of one leaky integration step towards drive in millivolts.
        Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to minus 42.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set membrane voltage to minus 62.
            Set refractory remaining to the action potential width of cell name.
            Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
            Set spike count to the result.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
    Display spike count to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the claim is a parameter comparison rather than a heavy computation, and a dictionary of named cell parameters reads like the table it replaces.

# L5/6 NP versus a typical deep pyramidal cell, same tiny current injection.
# High input resistance plus a broad spike gives a cell that fires easily
# but never fires fast. mV, megohms, ms.
CELLS = {
    "L5/6 NP":              {"r_in": 250.0, "tau": 25.0, "ap_width": 4.0},
    "typical deep pyramid": {"r_in":  80.0, "tau": 13.0, "ap_width": 1.5},
}
I_NA = 0.12          # nanoamperes; megohms times nanoamperes gives millivolts
DT, DURATION = 0.1, 500.0
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -70.0, -42.0, -62.0

def firing_rate(p):
    drive = p["r_in"] * I_NA        # steady-state depolarisation, mV
    v, refractory, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, 0
    for _ in range(int(DURATION / DT)):
        if refractory > 0.0:
            refractory -= DT
            continue
        v += DT * (-(v - V_REST) + drive) / p["tau"]
        if v >= V_TH:
            v, refractory, spikes = V_RESET, p["ap_width"], spikes + 1
    return drive, spikes * 1000.0 / DURATION

for name, p in CELLS.items():
    drive, rate = firing_rate(p)
    print(f"{name:22s} drive {drive:5.1f} mV   rate {rate:5.1f} Hz")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A rare, high-resistance, broad-spiking pyramid at the layer 5 to 6 border that builds a projection axon and then declines to project, the only cortical excitatory type defined by the shortness of its reach.

CHAPTER 6. L6 CT (Layer 6 Cortico-Thalamic) (Input-Tuning Neuron) (COG)

At the very bottom of the cortex lives a cell that spends its life talking back to the structure that fed it, outnumbering the incoming fibres ten to one and telling the thalamus what to listen for next.

Input names its target: it sends its axon back down to the thalamus, the structure that fed the cortex in the first place, and sets how much of the stream gets through on the next pass.

Tuning names the loop: the cortex is not fed passively; it specifies its own diet.

Neuron marks it as a principal cortical cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The L6 CT neuron is the cortex's feedback engine, CT standing for corticothalamic, and its defining property is a long axon descending from layer 6, the deepest cortical layer, into the thalamus, the relay station through which almost all sensory information reaches the cortex, and specifically back into the nucleus that supplies its own cortical area.

Its role is not to relay but to modulate, adjusting the gain, timing and firing mode of thalamic relay cells and so deciding whether the thalamus passes signals faithfully or fires in rhythmic bursts, which is the difference between the waking brain and the sleeping one.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small upright pyramid whose apical dendrite, in most corticothalamic cells, ends around the layer 4 and 5 border and never reaches layer 1, so unlike almost every other cortical pyramid this cell does not sample the great feedback field at the cortical surface.

Basal dendrites are short and bushy and stay in layer 6, while the minority that do reach layer 1 tend to be the cells projecting to higher-order thalamic nuclei.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are small at 10 to 18 micrometres across, with a modest 2,000 to 5,000 micrometres of dendrite and spine counts in the low thousands, while the axon descends several centimetres and produces an enormous number of very small terminal boutons, so a cell with a small dendritic tree may make thousands of thalamic synapses.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

One group projects to the primary relay nucleus alone, for example the ventral posterior medial nucleus for touch or the lateral geniculate nucleus for vision, and a second projects to both that and a higher-order nucleus such as the posterior medial nucleus or the pulvinar, with both sending collaterals into the thalamic reticular nucleus, a thin shell of inhibitory cells wrapped around the thalamus.

Transcriptomics separates corticothalamic cells from layer 6 intratelencephalic cells and from the subplate-derived L6b cells beneath them.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer 6, chiefly layer 6a, throughout the neocortex of both hemispheres: primary somatosensory cortex projecting to the ventral posterior medial and posterior medial nuclei and the thalamic reticular nucleus, primary visual cortex to the lateral geniculate nucleus and pulvinar, primary auditory cortex to the medial geniculate body, and prefrontal cortex to the mediodorsal nucleus.

The cell sits at the deepest interface in the cortex, its soma in the last layer of grey matter, its axon crossing immediately into white matter and its dendrites sampling the layer 5 to 6 boundary above.

NUMBER:

Best estimate about 900 million in both hemispheres, range 700 million to 1.2 billion, moderate confidence, roughly 7 percent of the 13.1 billion excitatory cortical neurons and about 1 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the brain.

One reason to keep the estimate below what mouse proportions suggest is that humans and marmosets have proportionally fewer layer 6 corticothalamic and layer 5 extratelencephalic neurons than mice, probably because the primate neocortex has expanded far more than its subcortical targets.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting minus 72 millivolts, threshold minus 45 millivolts, input resistance 100 to 200 megohms and a slow membrane time constant of 15 to 25 milliseconds.

Firing in vivo is famously sparse, layer 6 being the quietest layer of the cortex with many of these cells firing less than one spike per second during ordinary sensory stimulation, and when they do fire they often fire short high-frequency bursts, which matters because their synapses facilitate.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from layer 5 above, from local layer 6 cells, from a modest ascending thalamic projection and from long-range cortical feedback.

The output side is extraordinary: layer 6 corticothalamic axons outnumber ascending thalamocortical axons by about ten to one and supply roughly 30 to 44 percent of all synapses onto thalamocortical relay neurons, more than the sensory periphery itself supplies, while collaterals excite the thalamic reticular nucleus so that every spike delivers direct excitation and, milliseconds later, indirect inhibition to the same relay cell.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A thin, lightly myelinated axon of 0.5 to 1.0 micrometres conducting at roughly 2 to 8 metres per second, slow compared with the thick ascending thalamocortical fibres, and the asymmetry is deliberate: information comes up fast and correction goes down slowly, so feedback acts on the next moment rather than the present one.

Terminal boutons in the primary relay nucleus are very small and sit on distal dendrites, the classic signature of a modulator rather than a driver.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate packaged by VGLUT1, acting on AMPA receptors, NMDA receptors and group I metabotropic glutamate receptors, which are slow G-protein coupled receptors producing depolarisations lasting hundreds of milliseconds to seconds.

That slow action is why sustained corticothalamic activity can switch a relay cell from burst mode into tonic mode and hold it there.

MYELINATION:

Light but real: the descending axon is myelinated once in white matter, with a thin sheath and short internodes matching its small diameter, while the dense terminal arbour inside the thalamus is unmyelinated.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low per spike because the cell fires rarely, but surprisingly high in total because of the sheer number of terminals it maintains, the dominant cost being the housekeeping of thousands of small synapses several centimetres from the cell body, all supplied by axonal transport.

PLASTICITY:

The corticothalamic synapse is one of the most strongly facilitating synapses in the brain, growing stronger with each spike in a rapid train, and this short-term plasticity is arguably its main computation.

Over longer timescales the projection is refined by experience during development, in adults its strength tracks attentional state and sleep pressure, and long-term potentiation has been demonstrated at these synapses though it is less studied than at cortical ones.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Layer 6 sits directly against the white matter, so oligodendrocyte density around these somata is the highest of any cortical layer and the local astrocytes have a fibrous, white-matter-like character rather than the bushy protoplasmic form of the upper layers.

Within the thalamus these axons terminate in a quite different glial environment, dominated by thalamic astrocytes that regulate the extracellular potassium concentration governing burst firing, so one neuron depends on two different glial regimes at its two ends.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the cortex loses its volume control over its own input: sensation would still arrive and layer 4 would still receive it, but the cortex could no longer tell the thalamus what to emphasise, switch it between burst and tonic mode, or sculpt attention at the gate.

Sleep spindles, the brief bursts of 11 to 16 hertz activity that punctuate light sleep and help consolidate memory, are generated by the loop between cortex, relay nuclei and the thalamic reticular nucleus, and without this cell they would not exist; the flavour lost is selectivity, leaving a cortex that hears everything and listens to nothing.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The most important non-linear property of this cell lives not in its membrane but in its synapse: corticothalamic terminals show pronounced short-term facilitation, so repeated stimulation produces progressively larger excitatory postsynaptic currents while the accompanying inhibition through the reticular nucleus depresses slightly, shifting the balance at the relay cell towards excitation as a cortical burst proceeds.

The cell is thus a temporal differentiator that ignores isolated spikes and responds explosively to sustained cortical demand.

Beyond that, its metabotropic action is slow chemical control outlasting the spike by a second, it drives layer 5a locally so feedback and cortical output stay coordinated, its reticular collaterals implement a built-in feedforward inhibition circuit, and its activity can induce high gamma oscillations through both cortico-cortical and cortico-thalamo-cortical routes.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Descending excitation from layer 5, 0 to 10 nanosiemens; local layer 6 recurrent excitation, 0 to 8 nanosiemens.

◦ Weak ascending thalamic excitation, 0 to 5 nanosiemens; inhibition from layer 6 interneurons, 0 to 20 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Facilitating excitatory synapses onto thalamocortical relay neurons in the matched primary nucleus, and in a subset onto a higher-order nucleus.

◦ Excitation of thalamic reticular nucleus inhibitory cells, producing delayed inhibition of the same relay cells, plus local excitation of layer 5a.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, adaptation current, burst counter, and per synapse the facilitation variable u and available-resource variable R, each scaled 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting minus 72, threshold minus 45 millivolts; input resistance 100 to 200 megohms; baseline release probability U about 0.09, very low, which is exactly what makes facilitation possible.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds; facilitation decay 500 to 700 milliseconds; vesicle pool recovery 130 to 150 milliseconds; metabotropic response 200 milliseconds to several seconds; spindle rhythm 11 to 16 hertz.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Excessive or badly timed corticothalamic drive switches the thalamocortical loop from normal spindle waves into spike-and-wave discharges, the electroencephalographic signature of absence epilepsy, in which a child stops mid-sentence and stares for a few seconds.

◦ Reduced corticothalamic tone accompanies the fall in sleep spindle density seen before typical spike-and-wave discharges appear and reported in schizophrenia, where it is linked to impaired overnight memory consolidation.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to model the facilitating corticothalamic synapse so that a burst of layer six spikes produces a growing response in the thalamus.
Create a number variable called baseline release probability with initial value 0.09.
Create a number variable called release readiness with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called available resources with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called released amount with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called previous time with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called thalamic responses with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 8 times.
    Add the next spike time at ten millisecond intervals to the end of spike times.
End the loop.
For each spike time in spike times, perform the following operations.
    Set release readiness to the result of decaying release readiness towards baseline release probability since previous time.
    Set available resources to the result of recovering available resources towards one since previous time.
    Calculate the difference of 1 and release readiness.
    Calculate the product of baseline release probability and that difference.
    Calculate the sum of release readiness and that product.
    Set release readiness to the result.
    Calculate the product of release readiness and available resources.
    Set released amount to the result.
    Calculate the difference of available resources and released amount.
    Set available resources to the result.
    Add released amount to the end of thalamic responses.
    Set previous time to spike time.
End the loop.
Display thalamic responses to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the Tsodyks and Markram synapse is three lines of arithmetic per spike and the whole point is watching two parameter sets diverge in the printed output.

# Corticothalamic (L6 CT) synapses facilitate; driver synapses depress.
# Tsodyks-Markram model. Times in ms; release is a fraction of one pool.
import math

def synapse(U, tau_rec, tau_fac, times):
    u, R, out = 0.0, 1.0, []
    last = times[0]
    for i, t in enumerate(times):
        if i > 0:                                   # decay between spikes
            gap = t - last
            u = U + (u - U) * math.exp(-gap / tau_fac)
            R = 1.0 - (1.0 - R) * math.exp(-gap / tau_rec)
        u = u + U * (1.0 - u)                       # facilitation on arrival
        released = u * R
        R -= released                               # deplete the pool
        out.append(round(released, 4))
        last = t
    return out

burst = [0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70]             # 100 Hz cortical burst
ct     = synapse(U=0.09, tau_rec=138.0, tau_fac=670.0, times=burst)
driver = synapse(U=0.50, tau_rec=671.0, tau_fac=17.0, times=burst)

print("L6 CT modulator (facilitating):", ct)
print("driver synapse  (depressing) :", driver)
print("CT last over first     =", round(ct[-1] / ct[0], 2))
print("driver last over first =", round(driver[-1] / driver[0], 2))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small, slow, near-silent pyramid in the deepest cortical layer whose apical dendrite stops short of layer 1, which outnumbers the thalamus ten to one on its way back down, and whose synapses get stronger the longer it talks.

CHAPTER 7. L6 IT (Layer 6 Intra-Telencephalic) (Deep-Layer Courier Neuron) (COG)

Deep at the floor of the cortex sits a cell that spends its life whispering back to the areas that just spoke to it.

Deep-Layer names its location and pathway: it carries messages from the deep layer out to other cortical areas without descending to the thalamus, which is what separates it from its neighbour in Chapter 6.

Courier was chosen because a courier is defined by carrying rather than by the contents of the parcel - the right level of commitment for the least characterised cell in the family.

Neuron marks it as a principal cortical cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

L6 IT means layer six intratelencephalic: a neuron in the deepest sheet of the cortex whose output never leaves the two cerebral hemispheres and the striatum inside them.

It carries feedback from higher areas back down to earlier ones, and layer six corticocortical cells are a major route for feedback both within and between hemispheres.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

One thick apical dendrite, an input branch, climbs from the pyramid-shaped cell body toward the brain surface and often reaches layer four, while basal dendrites fan sideways, every branch studded with spines that each receive one excitatory synapse.

SIZE:

The cell body is 10 to 20 micrometres across, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre, and the dendritic tree spans 200 to 400 micrometres sideways by 500 to 1200 vertically.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Upright versus inverted trunks, short versus tall trunks, and one-hemisphere versus callosal cells crossing the corpus callosum, the bridge of some 200 million axons joining left and right.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer six a, the upper and thicker part of the deepest cortical layer, everywhere in the neocortex of both hemispheres, from primary visual and somatosensory cortex to every frontal association area.

It straddles the layer six a to six b boundary below and, with its apical dendrite, the layer six to layer five boundary above.

NUMBER:

Layer six holds about a fifth of neocortical neurons and intratelencephalic cells are its larger excitatory family, giving 800 million to 1.4 billion cells, near 1.0 billion centrally, about 6 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons counted by Azevedo and colleagues in 2009.

Confidence is low to moderate, since the intratelencephalic share of human layer six is inferred from gene expression rather than counted.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Rest near minus 72 millivolts, threshold minus 45, input resistance 100 to 250 megaohms, a slow 15 to 25 millisecond membrane time constant, a modest sag from the current called I h, and strong spike frequency adaptation.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from local layer six and five cells, weak thalamic fibres, long-range descending cortical axons and neuromodulatory fibres, while its 3000 to 10000 outputs reach distant cortical layers, the matching area across the callosum, and often the striatum.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

One thin axon, 0.5 to 1.0 micrometres wide, sheds a dense local branch network in layers five and six, then dives into the white matter for tens of millimetres at a few metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the standard excitatory messenger, acting on fast AMPA receptors, named for alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid, and slow NMDA receptors, named for N-methyl-D-aspartate, while the cell itself carries acetylcholine, noradrenaline, serotonin, adenosine and orexin receptors.

MYELINATION:

Myelin, the fatty insulation made by oligodendrocyte cells, wraps the axon in the white matter but only patchily inside the cortex, with a g ratio, inner over outer fibre diameter, of 0.6 to 0.8.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and below layer five giant cells, since resting rates are often under 1 spike per second, with most energy spent by the sodium-potassium pump restoring ion gradients across a large dendritic surface.

PLASTICITY:

Ordinary long-term potentiation and depression, the lasting strengthening and weakening of synapses that underlies learning, plus lifelong spine turnover, and because these axons tell earlier areas what to expect they are a prime substrate for perceptual learning.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes, the star-shaped housekeeping glia, are sparser here than in upper layers, while oligodendrocyte precursor cells crowd the white matter border just below where the cortex's cabling begins; microglia are unremarkable around this cell.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and an area still registers what its senses deliver but is never told what the rest of the cortex expects, so ambiguity stops being resolved by prior knowledge and the hemispheres stop stitching one scene together.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The apical trunk supports NMDA spikes, local regenerative events that let one branch compute alone, spikes travel backwards from the axon into the dendrites to gate plasticity, and dendrites make their own proteins.

Adenosine accumulating with time awake suppresses these cells presynaptically, so sleep pressure dials down cortical feedback, and glutamate escaping the synaptic cleft reaches astrocytes as slow volume transmission.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: local layer six glutamate, 0 to 40 hertz; layer five input, 0 to 20 hertz; thalamic feedforward, 0 to 50 hertz; long-range feedback, 0 to 30 hertz; acetylcholine and noradrenaline, 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate to distant cortical layers one, two, three, five and six, the contralateral matching area, and striatum; 0 to 15 hertz, usually under 1 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage in millivolts; adaptation current in nanoamps; per-synapse depression factor 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 72 millivolts; threshold minus 45; reset minus 60; input resistance 150 megaohms; adaptation increment 0.035 nanoamps per spike; axonal delay 5 to 30 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 18 milliseconds; AMPA 2; NMDA 100; adaptation 180; depression recovery 400.

• FAILURE MODE: in schizophrenia, disturbed corticocortical and callosal wiring weakens the expectation signal, one proposed route to hallucination; in multiple sclerosis, demyelination delays feedback until it arrives after the response it was meant to shape.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a layer six intratelencephalic feedback neuron that integrates slowly and adapts strongly.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -72.
Create a number variable called adaptation current with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called outgoing messages with initial value empty list.
For each input sample in the input stream, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of adaptation current and 0.99945.
    Set adaptation current to that result.
    Calculate the difference of input sample and adaptation current.
    Calculate the product of that result and 150.
    Set a number variable called drive to that result.
    Calculate the difference of -72 and membrane voltage.
    Calculate the sum of that result and drive.
    Calculate the quotient of that result divided by 180.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and that result.
    Set membrane voltage to that result.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -45.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current time to the end of outgoing messages.
        Set membrane voltage to -60.
        Calculate the sum of adaptation current and 0.035.
        Set adaptation current to that result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in outgoing messages to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: no libraries, runs anywhere, reads almost like the specification above.
DT, TAU_M, R_IN = 0.1, 18.0, 150.0             # ms, ms, megaohms
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -72.0, -45.0, -60.0    # millivolts
TAU_W, B_W = 180.0, 0.035                      # ms, nanoamps per spike

def run(current_na, duration_ms):
    """Adapting layer 6 IT cell. Returns spike times in milliseconds."""
    v, w, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, []
    for step in range(int(duration_ms / DT)):
        w += DT * (-w / TAU_W)             # adaptation decays back to zero
        drive = R_IN * (current_na - w)    # megaohms times nanoamps gives mV
        v += DT * ((V_REST - v) + drive) / TAU_M
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes.append(round(step * DT, 1))
            v = V_RESET
            w += B_W                       # each spike makes the next harder
    return spikes

s = run(0.25, 1000.0)
gaps = [round(s[i + 1] - s[i], 1) for i in range(len(s) - 1)]
print("spikes:", len(s), " first gap:", gaps[0], " last gap:", gaps[-1])
# The last gap is far longer than the first: that is adaptation.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A deep cell with a tall apical trunk, strong adaptation, and an axon that dives into the white matter yet never turns toward the thalamus.

CHAPTER 8. L6 IT CAR3 (Layer 6 Intra-Telencephalic Carbonic Anhydrase 3) (Cortex-To-Cortex Linking Neuron) (COG) (PUC)

Somewhere in your left hemisphere a neuron is firing whose only purpose is to tell the matching spot in your right hemisphere what just happened - and the news will take about sixteen thousandths of a second to arrive.

Cortex-To-Cortex names the pathway: its long axon crosses the corpus callosum to connect distant cortical areas across the hemispheric divide.

Linking describes its functional role: it synchronizes information processing between bilaterally paired cortical networks, binding two distinct halves into a unified perceptual map.

Neuron marks it as a primary excitatory projection neuron bridging the neocortical architecture.


WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a Previously Unnamed Construct: the dedicated long-range linking pyramidal neuron whose one job is to keep two distant patches of cortex in register.

A pyramidal neuron is the cortex's standard excitatory cell, shaped like a pyramid with one thick dendrite pointing at the surface.

Most pyramidal neurons talk to their neighbours; this one exists to talk across the brain.

Its best-documented members are the callosal projection neurons, whose axons cross the corpus callosum, the bridge of about 190 million fibres joining the hemispheres.

They belong to the intratelencephalic class, meaning their axons stay within the cortex and never descend to brainstem or spinal cord.

Their function is unification: they make two half-maps of the body, the world and the self behave as one map.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A classic pyramid, usually with its cell body in layer 3, with about 20 percent of the population deeper, mainly in layer 5.

One thick apical dendrite runs up to layer 1 and opens into a tuft, which is exactly where the two previous cell types in this section deliver their signals.

A skirt of basal dendrites spreads sideways at the soma.

The axon leaves the base, gives local collaterals in its own column, then commits to a long course, typically crossing the midline and also branching to areas in its own hemisphere.

Single-cell reconstructions show these are not simple point-to-point cables: one neuron often innervates several distant targets with different branch patterns.

SIZE:

The soma is about 15 to 25 micrometres across, larger in areas that project further.

Total dendritic length runs to roughly 10 to 20 millimetres per cell.

Spine counts are the headline number: layer 2 and 3 pyramidal neurons in human prefrontal cortex carry about 15,138 spines on their basal dendrites alone, against about 12,700 in temporal cortex, and prefrontal cells have up to sixteen times more spines than cells in primary visual cortex.

The axon is the extreme dimension, commonly 100 to 250 millimetres of total length once the crossing and both hemispheres' branches are counted.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Homotopic linkers project to the mirror-image point in the other hemisphere, and they dominate.

Heterotopic linkers project to a different area on the other side.

Dual linkers send one branch across the callosum and another to a distant area on their own side, so the same spike lands in two places at two different times.

A further split is by conduction speed, because callosal axon diameters vary and so do the delays.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in layer 3, chiefly its deeper sublayers 3b and 3c, and in layer 5a, across essentially all neocortical areas.

Densities are highest where function is bilateral: primary and secondary somatosensory cortex near the midline representation of trunk and face, auditory cortex, premotor and supplementary motor areas, and prefrontal cortex.

Density is low in the parts of primary visual cortex representing the far periphery of the visual field.

The axons traverse the corpus callosum through its named parts, the rostrum, genu, body, isthmus and splenium.

Two interfaces are critical: the layer 3 to layer 1 interface, where the apical tuft collects feedback, and the callosal midline, which every axon of this type must cross.

NUMBER:

My best estimate is 200 million across both hemispheres, defensible range 180 to 220 million, and confidence is moderately high because it is anchored to a direct anatomical count.

The corpus callosum contains about 190 million axons in the adult human, and each such neuron contributes one axon, so the counts should match closely.

That is about 1.2 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons and about 1.5 percent of the roughly 13.1 billion excitatory ones.

It is about 0.23 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

Note the boundary I draw: I count only neurons whose principal axon crosses the midline, not the far larger population of purely local or purely ipsilateral pyramidal neurons that other parts of this section count.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

A regular-spiking cell, whose train of action potentials slows over a few hundred milliseconds, an effect called spike-frequency adaptation.

Membrane capacitance is around 200 picofarads and input resistance around 100 megaohms, giving a membrane time constant near 12 to 20 milliseconds.

Resting potential is about minus 70 millivolts, threshold about minus 50, and reset after a spike about minus 58.

Human layer 3 pyramidal neurons have a faster dendritic membrane and greater electrical separation between tuft and soma than rodent cells, so the tuft can compute somewhat on its own.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Basal dendrites receive local layer 3 and layer 4 input carrying the area's own sensory or motor content.

The apical tuft in layer 1 receives thalamic matrix input, cortico-cortical feedback, and the two interneurons described earlier in this section.

Inhibition arrives at the soma from parvalbumin-expressing basket cells and at the tuft from somatostatin-expressing Martinotti cells.

Outputs land mainly on basal and proximal apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons in layers 2, 3 and 5 of the target area, with roughly 10 to 20 percent of terminals contacting inhibitory interneurons, which keeps the interhemispheric link from turning into runaway excitation.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Most callosal axons are thin, under 1 micrometre across, in every primate studied.

Measured conduction velocities range from 2.8 to 22.5 metres per second with a median near 7.4.

Delay from soma to callosal midline is roughly 4.4 to 4.8 milliseconds, and full interhemispheric transfer time averages about 11.7 milliseconds with a spread of about 2.9.

A small minority of thick fast axons deliver the copy in under 10 milliseconds, and those few fibres are what any task needing tight bilateral timing must depend on.

Position within the callosum predicts destination, so an axon's route through the bridge is not random.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate at every terminal, acting on fast AMPA receptors, named for alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid, and on slower NMDA receptors, named for N-methyl-D-aspartate, which pass current only when the target is already partly depolarised.

That NMDA dependence is the key to the function: a message from the other hemisphere counts for far more if the receiving cortex is already active on the same subject.

MYELINATION:

Heavily myelinated along the callosal course, thinly or not at all near the terminals.

Myelin is the fatty insulation wrapped by oligodendrocytes, and it is what makes 7 metres per second possible in a fibre well under a micrometre thick.

Myelination of these axons continues into the third decade of life, later than almost anywhere else in the brain, which is one reason interhemispheric coordination keeps improving into adulthood.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, and dominated by the axon rather than the soma.

Holding sodium and potassium gradients along 100 to 250 millimetres of axon, and supplying thousands of distant terminals with transmitter and mitochondria, makes this among the most expensive cortical cell types per spike.

Axonal transport at a few hundred millimetres per day means a protein made in the soma can take a day to reach the far terminals.

PLASTICITY:

Callosal synapses show classical long-term potentiation and depression, and the projection is famously activity-dependent in development: block activity in one hemisphere and the callosal map from the other fails to refine.

Myelin thickness along these axons is adjusted by activity, so learning changes not only synaptic weights but conduction delays, which for a cell defined by timing is a form of plasticity most models omit.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The specialised glia here are oligodendrocytes, doing something they do nowhere else at this scale: holding tens of millions of near-parallel axons in tight timing agreement across 100 millimetres.

One oligodendrocyte myelinates up to about 50 segments, and in the callosum those segments are shared among neighbouring axons, so a single glial cell's health sets the delay of many fibres at once.

Oligodendrocytes also feed the axon directly, passing lactate through monocarboxylate transporters, which is essential because the axon is far from its cell body and cannot supply itself.

Callosal astrocytes are fibrous rather than protoplasmic, with long straight processes aligned to the fibre bundles, and microglia here are unusually numerous, patrolling white matter for damaged myelin.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and each hemisphere still works, but it works alone.

The cortex would lose its sense that the left hand and the right hand belong to the same person, and the seam down the middle of the visual field, the body map and the auditory field would stop being stitched.

Bilateral acts such as doing up a button would fragment, and each half of the brain would build its own version of an event with no way to reconcile them.

The flavour lost is unity: every local computation would survive, and the guarantee that its answer matches its twin's would not.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The apical tuft in layer 1 runs its own calcium-based computation: if tuft and soma are active together the cell fires a burst instead of single spikes, so it signals coincidence between local content and long-range context.

Action potentials travel backwards from the soma into the dendrites, which is how a dendrite learns that the cell fired and which synapses to strengthen.

Local protein synthesis in the dendrites lets a tagged synapse be rebuilt on the spot without waiting for the soma.

The axon instructs its own myelination, releasing glutamate along its length to tell oligodendrocyte precursors where to wrap, so the cell partly sets its own conduction delay.

It sends messengers backwards across its synapses, including endocannabinoids that turn down incoming inhibition.

Its activity drives local blood flow through neighbouring astrocytes, and it is metabolically coupled to them through the lactate shuttle.

Axonal boutons are added and removed over days, so the map itself is a moving structure.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamatergic drive on basal dendrites from local layers 3 and 4, 0 to 600 picoamps; glutamatergic drive on the apical tuft from thalamic matrix and feedback axons, 0 to 300 picoamps; perisomatic inhibition from parvalbumin basket cells, GABA type A conductance 0 to 20 nanosiemens; tuft inhibition from the layer 1 interneurons described above, including the slow GABA type B brake.

• OUTPUTS: glutamatergic spikes delivered to the homotopic target area in the opposite hemisphere and to one or more ipsilateral areas, each on its own delay line; a bursting mode signalling tuft and soma coincidence; an endocannabinoid retrograde signal from 0 to 1.

• STATE: membrane voltage; adaptation current; separate tuft voltage and calcium; a per-branch axonal delay queue holding at least 250 milliseconds of spike history; a short-term depression variable at each output.

• PARAMETERS: capacitance about 200 picofarads; leak conductance about 10 nanosiemens; resting potential minus 70 millivolts; soft threshold minus 50; reset minus 58; spike-triggered adaptation about 60 picoamps; callosal path length 80 to 160 millimetres; conduction velocity 2.8 to 22.5 metres per second, median 7.4.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 12 to 20 milliseconds; adaptation 200 to 400 milliseconds; callosal delay 4 to 30 milliseconds; short-term depression recovery 200 to 800 milliseconds; myelin remodelling, days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: complete failure of the projection is agenesis of the corpus callosum, present in roughly 1 in 4,000 live births, and up to a third of affected people meet the diagnostic criteria for autism; partial agenesis and thinning, especially of the splenium, are reported in idiopathic autism; demyelination in multiple sclerosis leaves the neurons alive but scrambles their delays, which is functionally as damaging as losing them; surgical section for epilepsy produces the split-brain syndrome, in which each hemisphere can report only what it saw.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire a cortex to cortex linking neuron and deliver each of its spikes to a distant patch of cortex only after the correct travel time has elapsed.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative seventy.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value zero.
Create a list variable called axon queue with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called arrivals with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called step counter with initial value zero.
Repeat the following steps exactly one hundred and sixty two times.
    Add zero to the end of axon queue.
End the loop.
While step counter is less than ten thousand, repeat the following steps.
    Create a number variable called input current with initial value three hundred.
    Create a number variable called leak with initial value zero.
    Calculate the difference of membrane voltage and negative seventy.
    Set leak to the product of ten and that difference.
    Calculate the difference of input current and leak.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of the difference of that result and adaptation divided by two thousand.
    Set adaptation to the product of adaptation and nine hundred and ninety nine thousandths.
    Create a number variable called launched with initial value zero.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative fifty.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to negative fifty eight.
        Set adaptation to the sum of adaptation and sixty.
        Set launched to one.
    End the conditional block.
    Add launched to the end of axon queue.
    Access the item at position one in axon queue.
    Set arrivals to the sum of arrivals and that item.
    Remove the item at position one from axon queue.
    Set step counter to the sum of step counter and one.
End the loop.
Display arrivals to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because a whole-cortex model must walk hundreds of millions of axonal delay slots every tenth of a millisecond, and a fixed ring buffer with no memory allocation is the only honest way to do that at scale.

/* Cortex-to-cortex linking neuron: adaptive exponential soma plus delay lines. */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#define DT 0.1          /* ms per step                    */
#define RING 4096       /* 409.6 ms of axonal history     */
#define CM 200.0        /* capacitance, pF                */
#define GL 10.0         /* leak conductance, nS           */
#define EL (-70.0)      /* leak reversal, mV              */
#define VT (-50.0)      /* soft threshold, mV             */
#define DELTA 2.0       /* threshold sharpness, mV        */
#define A 2.0           /* subthreshold adaptation, nS    */
#define TAUW 300.0      /* adaptation time constant, ms   */
#define B 60.0          /* spike-triggered adaptation, pA */
#define VPEAK 0.0       /* spike detected here, mV        */
#define VRESET (-58.0)  /* reset, mV                      */
typedef struct { double v, w, buf[RING]; int head, delay; } Link;
static void init(Link *L, double path_mm, double vel_m_s) {
    int i; L->v = EL; L->w = 0.0; L->head = 0;
    for (i = 0; i < RING; i++) L->buf[i] = 0.0;
    L->delay = (int)(path_mm / vel_m_s / DT + 0.5);   /* mm / (m/s) = ms */
    if (L->delay >= RING) L->delay = RING - 1;
}
/* fired says a spike left the soma now; the return value says one launched
   earlier has just ARRIVED at the far patch of cortex. */
static int step(Link *L, double i_pA, int *fired) {
    int arrived, read;
    double dv = (-GL * (L->v - EL) + GL * DELTA * exp((L->v - VT) / DELTA)
                 - L->w + i_pA) / CM;
    *fired = 0;
    L->v += DT * dv;
    if (L->v > VPEAK) L->v = VPEAK;                   /* clamp the exponential */
    L->w += DT * (A * (L->v - EL) - L->w) / TAUW;
    if (L->v >= VPEAK) { L->v = VRESET; L->w += B; *fired = 1; }
    L->buf[L->head] = *fired;
    read = (L->head - L->delay + RING) % RING;
    arrived = (int)L->buf[read];
    L->head = (L->head + 1) % RING;
    return arrived;
}
int main(void) {
    Link callosal, ipsi; int k, f1, f2, sent = 0, got_c = 0, got_i = 0;
    init(&callosal, 120.0, 7.4);      /* 120 mm across the callosum at 7.4 m/s */
    init(&ipsi, 20.0, 4.0);           /* 20 mm to a neighbour area at 4 m/s    */
    for (k = 0; k < 10000; k++) {     /* one second at 0.1 ms resolution */
        double drive = (k * DT > 100.0 && k * DT < 900.0) ? 300.0 : 0.0;
        got_c += step(&callosal, drive, &f1);
        got_i += step(&ipsi, drive, &f2);
        sent += f1;
    }
    printf("sent %d spikes; callosal delay %.1f ms (%d arrived), ipsi %.1f ms (%d)\n",
           sent, callosal.delay * DT, got_c, ipsi.delay * DT, got_i);
    return 0;
}

Compiled with gcc and run, it reports 6 spikes sent, a callosal delay of 16.2 milliseconds and an ipsilateral delay of 5.0 milliseconds, with all 6 arriving on both lines.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Inject a dye into one of these cells and the label turns up in the other hemisphere, at the mirror-image spot, having crossed a bridge of 190 million fibres.

No other cortical cell is defined by its destination in this way: a layer 3 pyramid with a thin myelinated axon under a micrometre, crossing the midline, arriving about 12 milliseconds later at the place thinking about the same thing.

CHAPTER 9. L6B (Layer 6 Sublayer B) (Wakefulness-Listening Neuron) (COG)

In a layer so thin it was long dismissed as a smudge, live the oldest neurons in your brain: cells born before the cortex existed, which stayed on after the scaffolding came down.

Wakefulness names the chemical signal it monitors: it is the only cortical cell type carrying receptors for orexin, the peptide whose loss causes narcolepsy.

Listening names its posture - it does not report on the world, it listens for whether the brain is awake at all.

Neuron marks it as a principal cortical cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Layer six b is the deepest sliver of cortex, lying directly on the white matter, and its cells are survivors of the subplate, the temporary foetal structure that guides thalamic axons to their cortical addresses and then largely disappears.

Long assumed inert, they are now known to control brain state through the apical dendrites of the cells above and the higher-order thalamocortical system, and they are the cortex's private receiver for the arousal chemicals of the hypothalamus.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Pyramidal, inverted, spindle-shaped, horizontal and multipolar cells crowd a band a few bodies thick, many with long spiny dendrites running sideways along the white matter and some sending a slender apical dendrite all the way to layer one.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are a small 8 to 15 micrometres, horizontal dendritic spread reaches 400 to 600 micrometres, and the tallest cells span the whole 2 to 4 millimetre thickness of human cortex.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

A large group expresses connective tissue growth factor, abbreviated CTGF and also called CCN2, and is densest in primary sensorimotor areas, while others carry NR4A2, SEMA3E or MGST1, and electrically the layer splits into slow bursting excitatory cells and a separate fast-spiking class.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer six b of the neocortex in both hemispheres, plus the deepest layer of allocortex such as entorhinal cortex, where these cells send a direct excitatory projection into the hippocampus that supports spatial coding and memory.

The defining interface is the grey to white matter border itself, and related interstitial neurons lie scattered fully inside the white matter below.

NUMBER:

Layer six b is thin and sparsely populated, giving an estimated 50 million to 200 million neurons in both hemispheres, near 100 million centrally, roughly 0.6 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons.

Confidence is low, because the human layer six b border is hard to draw in stained tissue and the uncounted interstitial neurons below belong to the same family.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

A prominent excitatory subgroup bursts rhythmically with no input at all, fires with a delay to depolarising steps, and at stronger steps shows spike inactivation followed by a long depolarised plateau and a depolarising afterpotential, alongside mild adaptation and strong hyperpolarisation-activated rectification indicating the current I h.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They receive higher-order thalamic, corticocortical, hypothalamic and brainstem input, and they excite both pyramidal cells and interneurons above, crucially contacting the apical dendrites of upper-layer pyramidal cells, the exact place where feedback and context arrive.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin axons run horizontally along the white matter border for long distances before turning up into the cortex, some entering the white matter to reach distant areas or the hippocampus, conducting slowly at 0.5 to 2 metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for the excitatory majority and gamma-aminobutyric acid, abbreviated GABA and the main inhibitory messenger, for the fast-spiking minority.

What sets them apart is what they hear: orexin, also called hypocretin, the wake-promoting peptide of the hypothalamus, strongly depolarises them through orexin receptor type 2, which is expressed in layer six b excitatory neurons and essentially nowhere else in the neocortex, and they also respond powerfully, sometimes exclusively, to neurotensin and cholecystokinin.

MYELINATION:

They sit in the most heavily myelinated neighbourhood of the cortex yet their own thin axons are lightly wrapped at best inside the grey matter, acquiring a normal thin sheath only where they travel through white matter.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low in absolute terms because the cells are small and slow, although the spontaneously bursting subgroup carries a continuous never-resting load, which is unusual for a cortical excitatory cell.

PLASTICITY:

Their greatest act of plasticity was prenatal and permanent, deciding where thalamic axons would land and thereby shaping the whole cortical map, while in adulthood their excitability swings modulatorily across the sleep and wake cycle.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Their glial environment is genuinely unusual because of their address: they are surrounded by the myelin-making machinery of the white matter border, with high oligodendrocyte and precursor density and fibrous rather than bushy astrocytes, unlike any cell in the upper layers.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove layer six b and the cortex loses its volume knob for state, since orexin has almost no other cortical receiver, so pyramidal apical dendrites would stop being pre-set for the animal's behavioural state and the transition between attentive and internally generated activity would blur.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Their long plateau potentials are an analogue memory lasting hundreds of milliseconds, and they work largely by peptide reception through volume transmission, answering chemicals released into the tissue at large rather than into a synapse.

Because their output targets other cells' apical dendrites their computation is really the modulation of somebody else's dendritic computation, and CTGF itself is a secreted signalling protein, a hint that these cells remain builders as well as signallers.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: higher-order thalamic glutamate, 0 to 30 hertz; corticocortical input, 0 to 20 hertz; orexin, 0 to 1, high in waking and near zero in slow wave sleep; neurotensin and cholecystokinin, 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto apical dendrites of layer two, three and five pyramidal cells, onto local interneurons and back to higher-order thalamus; 0 to 20 hertz in bursts of 2 to 6 spikes.

• STATE: membrane voltage; slow recovery variable; plateau timer in milliseconds; orexin receptor occupancy 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 70 millivolts; burst threshold drive 4 model units; orexin gain 6 units per unit occupancy; plateau 100 to 400 milliseconds; interburst period 0.5 to 3 seconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 35 milliseconds; recovery about 50; plateau 100 to 400; peptide action 1 to 30 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: in the DISC1 mutant mouse model of schizophrenia, CTGF-positive layer six b density rises by about 21.5 percent alongside white matter changes, and in narcolepsy, where orexin neurons die, the cortical arm of the disease runs through this cell, the cortex's main orexin target.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a layer six b neuron whose slow rhythmic bursting is switched on by the arousal peptide orexin.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called recovery with initial value -14.
Create a number variable called orexin level with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called burst spikes with initial value empty list.
For each millisecond in the simulation, perform the following operations.
    Check if the current millisecond is greater than 1000.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set orexin level to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of orexin level and 6.
    Calculate the sum of 1 and that result.
    Set a number variable called drive to that result.
    Repeat the following steps exactly 2 times.
        Calculate the product of 0.04 and the product of membrane voltage and membrane voltage.
        Calculate the sum of that result and the product of 5 and membrane voltage.
        Calculate the sum of that result and 140.
        Calculate the difference of that result and recovery.
        Calculate the sum of that result and drive.
        Calculate the product of that result and 0.5.
        Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and that result.
        Set membrane voltage to that result.
    End the loop.
    Calculate the product of 0.2 and membrane voltage.
    Calculate the difference of that result and recovery.
    Calculate the product of that result and 0.02.
    Calculate the sum of recovery and that result.
    Set recovery to that result.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to 30.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current millisecond to the end of burst spikes.
        Set membrane voltage to -55.
        Calculate the sum of recovery and 4.
        Set recovery to that result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in burst spikes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python with the Izhikevich two variable model: it reproduces bursting and
# plateaus in four lines of arithmetic, which matters when millions of these
# cells must run inside a whole cortex simulation.
A, B, C, D = 0.02, 0.2, -55.0, 4.0   # intrinsically bursting parameter set
BASE_I, OREXIN_GAIN = 1.0, 6.0       # base drive sits below the firing threshold of 4

def run_l6b(duration_ms, orexin_on_at):
    """Silent until orexin arrives, then bursts. Returns spike times in ms."""
    v, u, spikes = -70.0, B * -70.0, []
    for t in range(duration_ms):
        drive = BASE_I + OREXIN_GAIN * (1.0 if t >= orexin_on_at else 0.0)
        for _ in range(2):            # two half ms steps keep this stable
            v += 0.5 * (0.04 * v * v + 5.0 * v + 140.0 - u + drive)
        u += A * (B * v - u)
        if v >= 30.0:                 # spike peak detected
            spikes.append(t)
            v, u = C, u + D           # reset voltage and recovery
    return spikes

s = run_l6b(3000, 1000)
print("spikes before orexin:", len([t for t in s if t < 1000]))
print("spikes after orexin :", len([t for t in s if t >= 1000]))
# Nothing, then bursting: the cortex has just been told the animal is awake.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A tiny, oddly oriented neuron sitting directly on the white matter, expressing CTGF or NR4A2, born before every other cortical cell, and depolarised by orexin through a receptor no other neocortical neuron carries.

CHAPTER 10. PYRAMIDAL CELLS (COG)

Draw a triangle, add a mast on top and roots below, and you have drawn the cell that does most of the thinking in the human brain: more than ten billion of them, carrying every conscious thought you have ever had.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The pyramidal cell is the workhorse excitatory neuron of the cortex, named for the rough triangle of its cell body, and it gathers thousands of small inputs, decides whether they amount to anything, and sends the answer somewhere else, often centimetres away.

It is an umbrella category: L6 IT, L6 IT CAR3, layer six b and star pyramid cells are all pyramidal or pyramid-like, so those entries are carved out of this one and their numbers must never be added to it.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Three features define it: a triangular cell body with one thick apical dendrite rising to the surface and usually ending in a spray called the apical tuft in layer one, a skirt of basal dendrites below, and a single axon leaving the base, with all dendrites more densely spined in humans than in any rodent or other primate examined.

SIZE:

Cell bodies run from about 10 micrometres in layer two to 50, and up to 100 in the giant Betz cells of motor cortex, while a human layer five apical dendrite can be 2 millimetres long, which is why the top and bottom of one cell behave almost like two cells.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

By layer, from layer two and three association cells to layer six corticothalamic cells; by projection, callosal, corticostriatal, corticothalamic, corticospinal and corticopontine; by firing, regular spiking, intrinsically bursting and chattering; and by region, including Betz cells and the von Economo neurons of anterior cingulate and frontoinsular cortex.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Every neocortical layer except layer one, which holds few cell bodies, plus hippocampal fields CA1, CA2 and CA3, the subiculum, amygdala, entorhinal cortex, piriform cortex and claustrum.

The interface that matters is internal: a layer five cell's apical trunk crosses every layer to reach layer one, bridging the deep output zone, the thalamic input zone of layer four and the feedback zone of layer one.

NUMBER:

Roughly 70 to 80 percent of neocortical neurons are excitatory and the overwhelming majority of those are pyramidal, giving about 11.4 billion to 13.1 billion cells out of the 16.34 billion counted by Azevedo and colleagues in 2009, plus a few hundred million more in hippocampus and related structures.

Confidence is moderate to high for the excitatory fraction, which was directly counted, and moderate for the pyramidal share, since spiny stellate cells are excitatory but not pyramidal.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Rest near minus 70 millivolts, threshold near minus 50, a one millisecond spike, rates from under 0.1 to 50 hertz, mostly regular spiking with moderate adaptation, and in humans unusually leaky large dendrites that paradoxically help keep separate computations separate in different branches.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

A single cortical pyramidal cell receives roughly 5000 to 30000 excitatory synapses, almost all on spines, plus 10 to 20 percent as many inhibitory ones placed on the soma and axon initial segment, and it outputs to pyramidal cells, interneurons, striatum, thalamus, brainstem and, for the largest cells, spinal cord.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

One axon per cell with a 20 to 60 micrometre initial segment where the spike is actually born, local collaterals within a millimetre or two, and a main trunk up to a metre long, with diameters from 0.2 to over 10 micrometres and speeds from under 1 to over 70 metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate at every synapse without exception in the healthy adult cortex, often alongside brain-derived neurotrophic factor, the growth signal that keeps target cells healthy, while the cell carries AMPA, NMDA, kainate, GABA type A and B, acetylcholine, dopamine, serotonin, noradrenaline, adenosine and cannabinoid receptors.

MYELINATION:

Long-range axons are myelinated and local collaterals largely bare, and the sheath along a cortical axon is deliberately patchy, wrapped stretches alternating with naked ones, a pattern tuned to set precise conduction delays rather than to maximise speed.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high in aggregate, since pyramidal synapses consume most of the brain's energy while the brain uses about 20 percent of the body's resting energy at 2 percent of its mass, most of it spent reversing synaptic ion flows rather than firing spikes.

PLASTICITY:

They are the canonical site of long-term potentiation and depression, their spines appear, enlarge, shrink and vanish over hours to days, learning a motor skill measurably grows new spines, and homeostatic plasticity rescales all of a cell's synapses to keep its average rate in range.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

One human protoplasmic astrocyte enwraps hundreds of thousands to millions of mostly pyramidal synapses, recycling glutamate, supplying lactate and buffering potassium, and human astrocytes are far larger and more complex than rodent ones, a specialisation built around this cell; microglia physically eat the spines they prune.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove pyramidal cells and there is no cortex left, only inhibitory neurons and glia with nothing to inhibit, because cortical inhibitory cells are almost entirely local, so every long-range signal out of the cortex would vanish and the organ would become a silent island.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Human layer two and three pyramidal cells generate calcium-mediated dendritic action potentials that are graded rather than all-or-none, largest at threshold and damped by stronger input, letting a single dendrite compute the exclusive-or function, long thought to need a network with a hidden layer.

Layer five cells perform backpropagation-activated calcium firing, where a spike travelling back from the axon coincides with tuft input and triggers a plateau that turns one spike into a burst, and they also make proteins locally, send endocannabinoids backwards across the synapse, and release signals that dilate capillaries, the physical basis of functional brain imaging.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: 5000 to 30000 basal and proximal excitatory synapses, each 0 to 50 hertz; distal tuft synapses from feedback and higher-order thalamus; 500 to 5000 inhibitory synapses; neuromodulator levels 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate at 1000 to 10000 boutons onto local pyramidal cells, interneurons, distant cortex, striatum, thalamus, brainstem and spinal cord; 0 to 50 hertz, with burst versus single spike as a second channel.

• STATE: somatic voltage; dendritic voltage; dendritic calcium; adaptation current; per-synapse weight and depression factor.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 70 millivolts, threshold minus 50, reset minus 70; input resistance 40 to 120 megaohms; tuft to soma coupling 0.05 to 0.2; plateau current 0.5 to 1.0 nanoamps; coincidence window 5 to 15 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: somatic membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; dendritic 25 to 50; AMPA 2; NMDA 100; calcium plateau 30 to 50; adaptation 100 to 300.

• FAILURE MODE: in schizophrenia, spine density on deep layer three prefrontal pyramidal cells falls by about 23 percent while layer five and six cells are spared; in Alzheimer disease, spine loss tracks cognitive decline more closely than plaques do; in epilepsy, failed inhibition lets these cells recruit each other into a seizure.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a pyramidal cell that turns a single spike into a burst when feedback reaches its distal dendrite just after the cell has fired.
Create a number variable called soma voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called time of last spike with initial value -1000.
Create a number variable called plateau end time with initial value -1000.
Create a list variable called output spikes with initial value empty list.
For each time point in the simulation, perform the following operations.
    Create a number variable called plateau current with initial value 0.
    Check if the current time point is less than plateau end time.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set plateau current to 0.7.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of basal input current and plateau current.
    Calculate the product of that result and 80.
    Set a number variable called drive to that result.
    Calculate the difference of -70 and soma voltage.
    Calculate the sum of that result and drive.
    Calculate the quotient of that result divided by 120.
    Calculate the sum of soma voltage and that result.
    Set soma voltage to that result.
    Check if soma voltage is greater than or equal to -50.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current time point to the end of output spikes.
        Set soma voltage to -70.
        Set time of last spike to the current time point.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of the current time point and time of last spike.
    Set a number variable called since spike to that result.
    Check if both tuft input is greater than 0.5 and since spike is less than 10 are true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of the current time point and 40.
        Set plateau end time to that result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in output spikes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: this two compartment coincidence detector is the model other groups
# reuse most, and plain Python drops into any simulator with no build step.
DT, TAU, R_IN = 0.1, 12.0, 80.0                  # ms, ms, megaohms
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -70.0, -50.0, -70.0      # millivolts
BAP_WINDOW, CA_DUR, CA_AMP = 10.0, 40.0, 0.7     # ms, ms, nanoamps

def run(basal_na, tuft_drive, duration_ms):
    """Basal drive alone gives single spikes. Basal plus tuft gives bursts."""
    v, last_spike, plateau_until, spikes = V_REST, -1e9, -1e9, []
    for step in range(int(duration_ms / DT)):
        t = step * DT
        i_ca = CA_AMP if t < plateau_until else 0.0
        v += DT * ((V_REST - v) + R_IN * (basal_na + i_ca)) / TAU
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes.append(round(t, 1))
            v, last_spike = V_RESET, t     # this spike backpropagates
        # tuft input just after a backpropagating spike opens a calcium plateau
        if tuft_drive > 0.5 and (t - last_spike) < BAP_WINDOW and t >= plateau_until:
            plateau_until = t + CA_DUR
    return spikes

print("tuft only      :", len(run(0.00, 1.0, 500.0)), "spikes")
print("basal only     :", len(run(0.28, 0.0, 500.0)), "spikes")
print("basal plus tuft:", len(run(0.28, 1.0, 500.0)), "spikes")
# Feedback alone is silent, feedforward alone ticks, the two together burst.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A triangular cell body, one thick apical dendrite pointing at the surface, a skirt of basal dendrites, spines everywhere, and a single axon leaving the base for the white matter.

CHAPTER 11. SPINY STELLATE CELLS (COG)

Take a pyramidal cell, snap off its mast, and let the remaining branches bristle out in every direction like a sea urchin: you have made the cell that catches the world as it arrives from the senses.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Spiny stellate cells are excitatory neurons of layer four, the middle cortical layer where signals from the thalamus first land, the thalamus being the egg-shaped relay in the centre of the brain through which nearly all sensory information passes.

Their job is amplification: a thalamic axon delivers a weak, sparse message, and the layer four population multiplies it and hands the result up to layers two and three, never reporting outside the local cortical column.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

No apical dendrite, which is the defining negative feature; instead five to eight primary dendrites radiate in a rough sphere confined to layer four, and in rodent whisker cortex the tree leans toward the centre of its barrel, an asymmetry built after birth under instruction from the thalamic input itself.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are a small 8 to 15 micrometres, which is why layer four looks grainy and is called the granular layer, while dendritic fields in upper layer 4C of monkey visual cortex are 100 micrometres or more across.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

In primate primary visual cortex, cells of layer 4C alpha receive the magnocellular stream carrying fast coarse colour-blind motion information while those of layer 4C beta receive the parvocellular stream carrying slow fine colour-sensitive detail, and spiny stellate neurons also occupy layers 4A and 4B.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer four, and nowhere else, of primary sensory cortex: layers 4A, 4B, 4C alpha and 4C beta of primary visual cortex, also called V1, in the occipital lobe; layer four of primary somatosensory cortex in the postcentral gyrus; and layer four of primary auditory cortex.

They are rare or absent in agranular cortex such as primary motor cortex, and the interface that matters is the layer four to layer three boundary, across which the amplified signal is passed.

NUMBER:

Human primary visual cortex holds about 140 million neurons per hemisphere, so roughly 280 million in both, and adding layer four of somatosensory and auditory cortex gives an estimated 150 million to 400 million spiny stellate cells, near 250 million centrally, about 1.5 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons.

Confidence is low to moderate, because the stellate share of human layer four has never been counted directly and human layer four holds proportionally more pyramidal cells than rodent layer four does.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Regular spiking with moderate adaptation, resting near minus 70 millivolts and firing near minus 45, with a short 8 to 12 millisecond membrane time constant that makes the cell a coincidence detector rather than a slow integrator, and both high-conductance and low-conductance NMDA receptors.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Thalamic synapses are the famous input but a minority, estimated at 18 to 188 per neuron in primate visual cortex, the rest coming from other layer four spiny cells, which is why the layer amplifies; over 90 percent of its own contacts land on spines and shafts of excitatory neurons in layers four and two and three.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon stays local, arborising densely inside its own barrel or column and supplying output to virtually all layers of that column while projecting most strongly to layers two and three, and almost never entering the white matter.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, received through thalamic synapses that depress strongly, so the second and third pulse of a rapid train produce far smaller responses than the first, making the cell a detector of change rather than of steady input.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none, because the axon never leaves the local grey matter, making this one of the few cortical excitatory cells for which myelination is honestly negligible, even though the thalamic axons arriving on it are heavily myelinated.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High per unit volume, since layer four of primary sensory cortex has the densest synapses and the strongest cytochrome oxidase staining of any cortical layer, that mitochondrial enzyme being used as a stain precisely because it marks metabolic intensity.

PLASTICITY:

Their dendritic asymmetry is sculpted by thalamic input during a critical period in the first days and weeks of life, and depriving an animal of retinal input then permanently changes layer four dendritic shape, after which layer four becomes among the least plastic parts of the cortex.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Layer four astrocytes face the heaviest glutamate load in the cortex and carry correspondingly high levels of the glutamate transporters EAAT1 and EAAT2, the layer has the densest capillary network in the cortex, and in rodents astrocyte processes help define barrel boundaries.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove spiny stellate cells and primary sensory cortex loses its amplifier: the thalamus still delivers its messages, but as a whisper too faint to drive layers two and three, and fine detail is lost first, because fine detail depends on weak sparse drive being multiplied by local recurrence.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Their signature computation is recurrent amplification, a network property no single-cell model captures, since the layer's output depends on loop gain across thousands of these cells and slightly higher gain would make the layer seize.

Their two classes of NMDA receptor give dendritic branches supralinear summation, their depressing thalamic synapses make them compute the derivative of their input, and their tight coupling to local blood flow makes them a principal generator of the functional brain imaging signal.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: 18 to 188 thalamocortical synapses, each 0 to 100 hertz with strong depression; 1000 to 3000 recurrent layer four synapses at 0 to 20 hertz; inhibition from a small fast-spiking pool arriving 1 to 2 milliseconds later.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto layer two and three pyramidal cells, other layer four spiny cells, and weakly onto layers five and six of the same column; 0 to 40 hertz, sparse at rest.

• STATE: membrane voltage; excitatory conductance; inhibitory conductance; per-synapse depression resource 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 70 millivolts; threshold minus 45; reset minus 60; excitatory reversal 0; inhibitory reversal minus 80; depression factor per pulse 0.75; inhibition delay 1.5 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 9 milliseconds; excitatory conductance 1.5; inhibitory conductance 6; depression recovery 300 to 500; critical period days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: if feedforward inhibition fails the input window widens and the recurrent loop runs away, the classic route into a focal sensory seizure; if critical period input is missing, as in congenital cataract, the dendritic geometry is set wrong for life.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a layer four spiny stellate cell that answers the first volley of a thalamic burst and then falls silent as its synapses depress and inhibition arrives.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called excitatory conductance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called inhibitory conductance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called synaptic resource with initial value 1.
Create a list variable called output spikes with initial value empty list.
For each time step in the simulation, perform the following operations.
    Check if a thalamic volley arrives at this time step.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of 5 and synaptic resource.
        Calculate the sum of excitatory conductance and that result.
        Set excitatory conductance to that result.
        Calculate the product of synaptic resource and 0.75.
        Set synaptic resource to that result.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if a thalamic volley arrived 1.5 milliseconds ago.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of inhibitory conductance and 6.
        Set inhibitory conductance to that result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the quotient of excitatory conductance divided by 15.
    Calculate the difference of excitatory conductance and that result.
    Set excitatory conductance to that result.
    Calculate the quotient of inhibitory conductance divided by 60.
    Calculate the difference of inhibitory conductance and that result.
    Set inhibitory conductance to that result.
    Calculate the product of excitatory conductance and the difference of 0 and membrane voltage.
    Set a number variable called excitatory drive to that result.
    Calculate the product of inhibitory conductance and the difference of -80 and membrane voltage.
    Set a number variable called inhibitory drive to that result.
    Calculate the difference of -70 and membrane voltage.
    Calculate the sum of that result and excitatory drive.
    Calculate the sum of that result and inhibitory drive.
    Calculate the quotient of that result divided by 90.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and that result.
    Set membrane voltage to that result.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -45.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current time step to the end of output spikes.
        Set membrane voltage to -60.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in output spikes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C: sensory cortex needs millions of these cells at 0.1 ms resolution, and C
   gives the tightest inner loop. Build with: cc -std=c99 -o stel stel.c      */
#include <stdio.h>
#define STEPS 5000                /* 500 ms at 0.1 ms per step */

int main(void) {
    const double DT = 0.1, V_REST = -70.0, V_TH = -45.0, V_RESET = -60.0;
    const double TAU_M = 9.0, TAU_E = 1.5, TAU_I = 6.0, TAU_REC = 400.0;
    const double E_E = 0.0, E_I = -80.0, W_E = 5.0, W_I = 6.0;
    double v = V_REST, ge = 0.0, gi = 0.0, res = 1.0;
    int spikes = 0, volleys = 0, refractory = 0;
    for (int s = 0; s < STEPS; s++) {
        if (s < 1000 && s % 100 == 0) {  /* 100 Hz thalamic burst for 100 ms */
            ge += W_E * res;             /* scaled by the resource left */
            res *= 0.75;                 /* these synapses depress hard */
            volleys++;
        }
        /* feedforward inhibition from fast spiking cells, 1.5 ms behind */
        if (s >= 15 && (s - 15) < 1000 && (s - 15) % 100 == 0) gi += W_I;
        ge -= DT * ge / TAU_E;
        gi -= DT * gi / TAU_I;
        res += DT * (1.0 - res) / TAU_REC;          /* slow recovery */
        if (refractory > 0) { refractory--; v = V_RESET; continue; }
        v += DT * ((V_REST - v) + ge * (E_E - v) + gi * (E_I - v)) / TAU_M;
        if (v >= V_TH) { spikes++; v = V_RESET; refractory = 30; } /* 3 ms */
    }
    printf("volleys %d, stellate spikes %d\n", volleys, spikes);
    return 0;   /* fewer spikes than volleys: it reports onset, not duration */
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small spiny star-shaped excitatory neuron with no apical dendrite, living only in layer four of a primary sensory area, its dendrites stopping at the layer four border and its axon never leaving the column.

CHAPTER 12. STAR PYRAMID CELLS (COG)

Halfway between the star and the pyramid sits a cell that could not decide: it kept the triangular body and the upward mast, but cut the mast short, so it reaches just far enough to touch the layer above.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Star pyramid cells are excitatory neurons of layer four that keep an apical dendrite but a markedly short one, which gives their branching a star-like look while leaving a recognisable mast, and they receive thalamic input and relay it upward as spiny stellate cells do.

The difference is decisive: because the apical dendrite pokes into layer two and three it forms synapses with superficial axons the spiny stellate cannot reach, so this cell can weigh what the senses deliver now against what the cortex above already believes.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small pyramidal cell body with basal dendrites spreading through layer four exactly like a stellate's, plus an apical dendrite whose branching stays inside layer four except for its distal part, which extends into layer two and three and may end in a small tuft or simply taper.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 10 to 18 micrometres, slightly larger than neighbouring stellates, and the apical dendrite is typically 100 to 400 micrometres long, an order of magnitude shorter than the 1 to 2 millimetre mast of a layer five cell.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

By apical reach, cells stopping at the layer four to three border versus cells penetrating well into layer three, and by ending, a small tuft versus a simple taper; star pyramids are one of three layer four excitatory morphologies alongside spiny stellate and full pyramidal cells, forming a continuum rather than three sealed boxes.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer four of sensory and association cortex in both hemispheres, including primary visual cortex where star pyramids are a recognised class in circuit reconstructions, primary somatosensory cortex where they amplify thalamic input alongside spiny stellate cells, and primary auditory cortex.

The defining interface is the layer four to layer three boundary, which this cell straddles with its own dendrite rather than merely with an axon.

NUMBER:

In samples of connected spiny neuron pairs from rodent layer four, roughly 80 percent were spiny stellate cells and the remainder star pyramids, and since human layer four outside primary visual cortex is thin and stellate-poor the balance shifts further toward this type, giving an estimated 100 million to 400 million cells, near 200 million centrally, about 1.2 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons.

Confidence is low, because the line between a star pyramid and a small layer four pyramidal cell is a judgement made by eye, and because these cells sit inside the pyramidal umbrella already counted, so this figure is a breakdown of that total and must not be added to it.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Regular spiking with moderate adaptation, resting near minus 70 millivolts and firing near minus 47, with a 10 to 15 millisecond membrane time constant slightly slower than a stellate's because the extra apical membrane adds capacitance, and excitatory connections involving layer four pyramidal cells show short-term depression.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Thalamocortical axons reach the basal and proximal dendrites, recurrent excitation comes from other layer four spiny cells, fast-spiking interneurons deliver feedforward inhibition, and uniquely for a layer four cell the apical dendrite receives direct input from horizontal and feedback axons in layer three.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon leaves the cell body base and ramifies within the home column, projecting most strongly to layers two and three, and unlike the spiny stellate a proportion send a collateral beyond the column, giving layer four a modest long-range output it would otherwise lack.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, with the standard cortical excitatory pharmacology of AMPA and NMDA receptors at its inputs and GABA receptors for inhibition; nothing peculiar has been reported for this type, and it is more useful to say so plainly than to invent a distinction.

MYELINATION:

Local collaterals are unmyelinated and the minority of cells sending an axon out of the column acquire thin myelin only on that segment, so myelination is minimal overall, as for all layer four excitatory cells.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High per unit volume in line with the rest of layer four, the most metabolically active layer of sensory cortex, with the apical dendrite adding surface area and therefore a continuous pumping cost that a spiny stellate does not pay.

PLASTICITY:

Layer four pyramidal neurons show robust dendritic spine plasticity in vivo after input deprivation, striking because layer four as a whole is the least plastic cortical layer, which makes star pyramids the layer four cells that can still be rewired by adult experience.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

They share the specialised layer four glial environment of very high astrocyte glutamate transporter levels and a dense capillary bed, with one difference: because the apical dendrite passes into layer three, one cell is served by two astrocyte territories with different transporter densities and vascular supply.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove star pyramids and layer four becomes a pure relay with no opinion, still amplifying and forwarding the thalamic message but losing the one cell that weighs sensation against the state of the layer above, so the earliest meeting of expectation and sensation moves one synapse later.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Their short apical dendrite makes them gain modulators rather than adders, because apical input in layer three depolarises the trunk and unblocks NMDA receptors on the basal tree, multiplying the effect of thalamic input instead of adding to it.

Layer four pyramidal neuron dendritic bursting underlies the post-stimulus alpha rhythm of visual cortex, the roughly 10 hertz oscillation appearing after a visual stimulus ends, so this cell is a rhythm generator as well as a relay.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: thalamocortical glutamate to basal dendrites, 0 to 100 hertz with depression; recurrent layer four input, 0 to 20 hertz; apical input from layer three as a modulation level 0 to 1; inhibition delayed 1.5 milliseconds.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto layer two and three pyramidal cells, other layer four spiny cells, layers five and six, and a minority projection beyond the column; 0 to 40 hertz plus a dendritic burst mode.

• STATE: somatic voltage; apical trunk depolarisation; adaptation current; synaptic depression resource; gain factor derived from apical input.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 70 millivolts; threshold minus 47; reset minus 60; input resistance 70 megaohms; apical gain coefficient 0.8, so full apical drive nearly doubles the effect of basal drive; adaptation increment 0.02 nanoamps per spike.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 12 milliseconds; apical modulation 60; adaptation 200; depression recovery 400; alpha rhythm period about 100.

• FAILURE MODE: because their dendritic bursting generates a cortical alpha rhythm, dysfunction here shows up as abnormal resting rhythms rather than blindness, and after chronic sensory loss their spines remodel extensively, so their wiring drifts furthest from the original map.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a layer four star pyramid cell in which input on the short apical dendrite from layer three multiplies the effect of thalamic input on the basal dendrites.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called adaptation current with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called apical level with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called output spikes with initial value empty list.
For each time point in the simulation, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of layer three input and apical level.
    Calculate the quotient of that result divided by 600.
    Calculate the sum of apical level and that result.
    Set apical level to that result.
    Calculate the product of apical level and 0.8.
    Calculate the sum of 1 and that result.
    Set a number variable called gain to that result.
    Calculate the product of thalamic current and gain.
    Calculate the difference of that result and adaptation current.
    Calculate the product of that result and 70.
    Set a number variable called drive to that result.
    Calculate the difference of -70 and membrane voltage.
    Calculate the sum of that result and drive.
    Calculate the quotient of that result divided by 120.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and that result.
    Set membrane voltage to that result.
    Calculate the quotient of adaptation current divided by 2000.
    Calculate the difference of adaptation current and that result.
    Set adaptation current to that result.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -47.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current time point to the end of output spikes.
        Set membrane voltage to -60.
        Calculate the sum of adaptation current and 0.02.
        Set adaptation current to that result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in output spikes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the point of this cell is a single multiplication, and Python lets the
# gain term stand out with no language ceremony around it.
DT, TAU_M, TAU_AP, TAU_W = 0.1, 12.0, 60.0, 200.0   # all in milliseconds
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -70.0, -47.0, -60.0         # millivolts
R_IN, GAIN_K, B_W = 70.0, 0.8, 0.02   # megaohms, gain factor, nA per spike

def run(thalamic_na, layer3_input, duration_ms):
    """Layer 3 input scales the thalamic drive rather than adding to it."""
    v, w, apical, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, 0.0, []
    for step in range(int(duration_ms / DT)):
        apical += DT * (layer3_input - apical) / TAU_AP  # slow apical charging
        gain = 1.0 + GAIN_K * apical                     # the multiplication
        v += DT * ((V_REST - v) + R_IN * (thalamic_na * gain - w)) / TAU_M
        w -= DT * w / TAU_W
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes.append(round(step * DT, 1))
            v, w = V_RESET, w + B_W
    return spikes

print("thalamic alone     :", len(run(0.36, 0.0, 1000.0)), "spikes")
print("thalamic plus L3   :", len(run(0.36, 1.0, 1000.0)), "spikes")
print("L3 with no thalamus:", len(run(0.00, 1.0, 1000.0)), "spikes")
# Layer 3 input alone does nothing: it is a multiplier, not a driver.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A spiny excitatory cell in layer four with a real apical dendrite far too short for a pyramidal cell and far too long for a stellate, ending in layer three, and the only layer four cell that owns dendrite in two layers at once.

CHAPTER 13. BETZ CELLS (COG)

You can see one with the naked eye on a stained slide, and the single wire it sends out may be longer than your leg.

Gloss: the motor cortex's giant, fastest line to the spinal cord.

These are among the largest neurons in the central nervous system at up to about one hundred micrometres of soma diameter, and they send axons down the corticospinal tract, though they supply only about one to two percent of its fibres.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A Betz cell is the largest neuron in the human brain measured by cell body volume, sitting in the motor strip and sending one command fibre straight down into the spinal cord.

Vladimir Betz described these giants in 1874, and clinicians call them upper motor neurons: they are what a doctor is probing when they tap your knee and watch the reflex.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is a huge pyramid, and unlike an ordinary pyramidal neuron it throws its lower branches out in a full circle around the soma rather than only sideways.

A dendrite is a branch that collects incoming signals, and a spine is the tiny knob where most excitatory contacts land; the Betz soma and the first stretch of every dendrite are completely bare of spines, so the nearest inputs are inhibitory contacts placed directly on the cell surface.

One thick apical dendrite climbs toward the brain surface, and some Betz cells send a taproot dendrite downward into the white matter, the cabling layer beneath the cortex.

SIZE:

Betz measured roughly 60 by 120 micrometres and Brodmann recorded 53 by 106 micrometres, where a micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre.

Reconstruction gives a mean cell body volume near 86,685 cubic micrometres, and soma diameters of 70 to 100 micrometres are routinely quoted, putting the biggest at the edge of unaided human vision.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There is no accepted formal subtype scheme, but Betz cells vary with the body part they control: those in the leg region of the paracentral lobule have the longest axons and the most pronounced taproot dendrites, while hand and face cells sit in denser clusters.

About seventy five percent are concentrated in the upper third of the motor strip, the part commanding trunk and lower limb.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer 5b of the primary motor cortex, which is Brodmann area 4, on the anterior bank of the central sulcus, the crown of the precentral gyrus, and the anterior paracentral lobule on the inner face of each hemisphere.

They do not form a continuous sheet but sit alone or in small columnar nests, and the critical interface is the layer 5b to layer 6 boundary where the axon leaves the cortex and enters the white matter.

NUMBER:

The counts disagree by a factor of four and you should know it: Lassek's classic 1940 count gave about 34,000 in area 4 of one hemisphere and the older literature settles on 25,000 to 40,000 per hemisphere, while a recent stereological estimate gives about 125,290 per hemisphere.

The full plausible span is therefore 50,000 to 250,000 across both hemispheres, which against the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons reported by Azevedo and colleagues in 2009 is at most 0.0015 percent, or fifteen cells in every million.

Confidence is high on the order of magnitude and low on the exact value, and one review places them at roughly one in ten of the pyramidal neurons in layer 5 of the giant cell zone.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Primate Betz cells show a firing pattern rodents simply do not have: given a steady command they fire briefly, fall almost silent, then accelerate to a high sustained rate, described in the literature as an early cessation of firing followed by a delayed sustained acceleration in spike frequency and magnitude.

They are among the earliest cortical cells to become active, discharging roughly 40 to 100 milliseconds before a movement begins.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from primary somatosensory cortex, premotor and supplementary motor areas, the thalamus, and dense local recurrents within layer 5.

Because the soma is spine free, the closest and most powerful controllers are parvalbumin expressing basket cells, a fast inhibitory type that wraps the cell body in a basket of contacts; the main output is the spinal ventral horn, where in humans a fraction of Betz axons contact motor neurons directly.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single Betz axon runs about 60 to 70 centimetres from the paracentral lobule to the lumbar enlargement, and over a metre in tall adults.

Its axons are the thickest in the corticospinal tract, the great descending motor bundle, conducting faster than 70 metres per second, yet they make up only about 1 to 3 percent of the roughly one million fibres in each medullary pyramid.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the brain's main excitatory chemical messenger.

The cell also carries receptors for acetylcholine, serotonin and dopamine, so arousal and reward systems tune its excitability even though it releases none of those chemicals itself.

MYELINATION:

Heavily myelinated, meaning the axon is wrapped in a fatty insulating sheath made by oligodendrocytes, glial cells whose only job is insulation.

The sheath is thick in proportion to the very large axon diameter, which is exactly why the conduction speed is so high.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Extreme, and the transcriptome shows it: Betz cells are unusually rich in messenger molecules for oxidative phosphorylation, the mitochondrial process that makes cellular fuel, including the ATP synthase subunit ATP5F1B.

Maintaining a metre of thick axon plus a giant soma means an enormous continuous bill for pumping ions and shipping proteins.

PLASTICITY:

Motor learning changes the strength of the inputs onto Betz dendrites rather than the cell itself, and long term potentiation, the lasting strengthening of a synapse after repeated use, is readily induced in layer 5 motor cortex.

The cell count does not increase with practice; the wiring onto it is what changes when you learn an instrument.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The perisomatic astrocytes here face an unusual load, because one Betz spike dumps a large amount of potassium into a small space, and the oligodendrocytes serving Betz axons build some of the thickest sheaths in the central nervous system over the longest distance.

In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, microglia, the brain's resident immune cells, cluster around Betz cells early, one of the first visible cortical signs of the disease.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove Betz cells and the motor cortex loses its fastest, most direct line to the muscles.

What remains is a slower, committee driven motor system that still moves the body but loses the crisp, precisely timed onset of a skilled voluntary act.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The circumferential basal dendrites let a Betz cell sample its whole neighbourhood rather than a strip of it, and back propagating action potentials, spikes travelling backwards from soma into dendrites, tag recently active branches for strengthening.

The taproot dendrite dips into the white matter and can be contacted by axons that never enter grey matter at all.

Long distance axonal transport is a computation of its own, because proteins made in the soma take days to reach the far end, so the cell must anticipate its own needs.

The very high energy demand couples it tightly to astrocytes, which supply lactate as fuel, and to local blood vessels, which dilate in response to its activity.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: excitatory glutamate from primary somatosensory cortex, premotor cortex, supplementary motor area, motor thalamus and local layer 5 recurrents, as a current in the range 0 to 3 nanoamperes.

◦ Perisomatic inhibition from parvalbumin basket cells, a fractional shunt from 0 to 1.

◦ Acetylcholine, serotonin and dopamine levels, each 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: single spikes to spinal ventral horn motor neurons and interneurons, the red nucleus, and the pontine nuclei, with 8 to 15 milliseconds conduction delay to lumbar targets.

• STATE: membrane voltage, spike triggered potassium brake, delayed persistent inward current, intracellular calcium, axonal transport queue.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential near minus 70 millivolts, threshold near minus 50 millivolts, membrane time constant 10 to 15 milliseconds, soma volume near 86,685 cubic micrometres, conduction velocity above 70 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 15 milliseconds, spike frequency adaptation 1 to 3 seconds, delayed acceleration onset 100 to 200 milliseconds, premovement lead 40 to 100 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and primary lateral sclerosis the cell shrinks, loses dendrites and dies, producing weakness, spasticity and brisk reflexes; in hereditary spastic paraplegia the long axon degenerates from its far end first.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to reproduce the two phase discharge of a Betz cell during a sustained voluntary movement command.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called potassium brake with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called late inward current with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called voltage change with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step counter with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
While step counter is less than 10000, repeat the following steps.
    If step counter is greater than or equal to 1200, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage change to the difference of 26 and late inward current.
        Set late inward current to the sum of late inward current and the quotient of voltage change divided by 3000.
    End the conditional block.
    Set potassium brake to the difference of potassium brake and the quotient of potassium brake divided by 20000.
    Set voltage change to the difference of -70 and membrane voltage.
    Set voltage change to the sum of voltage change and 32.
    Set voltage change to the sum of voltage change and late inward current.
    Set voltage change to the difference of voltage change and potassium brake.
    Set voltage change to the quotient of voltage change divided by 120.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and voltage change.
    If membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -50, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to -70.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and 1.
        If potassium brake is less than 28, then perform the following actions.
            Set potassium brake to the sum of potassium brake and 6.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Set step counter to the sum of step counter and 1.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because a Betz cell in a whole brain simulation is one of millions of fixed step integrations per millisecond, and a tight deterministic loop is what that kernel actually looks like.

#include <stdio.h>

/* Betz cell: integrate and fire soma plus two slow currents.
   A spike triggered, saturating potassium current silences the cell
   early; a delayed persistent inward current drives the late climb. */
int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.1;        /* ms per step                      */
    const double tau_m = 12.0;    /* membrane time constant, ms       */
    const double v_rest = -70.0, v_th = -50.0;   /* mV                */
    const double cmd = 32.0;      /* steady movement command, mV      */
    const double da = 6.0, a_cap = 28.0, tau_a = 2000.0;  /* K+ brake */
    const double r_max = 26.0, tau_r = 300.0, r_onset = 120.0; /* PIC */
    double v = v_rest, a = 0.0, r = 0.0;
    int bin[8] = {0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0};
    int s;
    for (s = 0; s < 10000; s++) {          /* 1000 ms of movement */
        double t = s * dt;
        if (t >= r_onset) r += dt * ((r_max - r) / tau_r);
        a -= dt * (a / tau_a);
        v += dt * ((v_rest - v + cmd + r - a) / tau_m);
        if (v >= v_th) {                   /* spike */
            v = v_rest;
            a += da;
            if (a > a_cap) a = a_cap;      /* the brake saturates */
            bin[(int)(t / 125.0)]++;
        }
    }
    for (s = 0; s < 8; s++)
        printf("%4d to %4d ms: %3d Hz\n", s*125, s*125+125, bin[s]*8);
    return 0;
}

Compiled and run, this prints 24, 8, 8, 32, 48, 64, 64, 64 hertz across eight windows: a brief opening volley, near silence, then the delayed sustained climb.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else in the human cortex is that big.

A pyramid with a cell body approaching one tenth of a millimetre across, spine free basal dendrites radiating in a full circle, sitting in a small nest in layer 5b of the precentral gyrus, is a Betz cell and nothing else.

CHAPTER 14. MEYNERT CELLS (COG)

Deep in the visual cortex, spaced out like street lamps, sit large lonely neurons that shout the same message to two completely different parts of the brain at once.

Gloss: visual cortex's long reach to motion areas and midbrain.

Single Meynert cells at the layer five and six border of the primary visual cortex send divergent collaterals both to the motion area V5 and to the superior colliculus, while their precise computational role is still openly described as elusive.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A Meynert cell is a giant, isolated pyramidal neuron in the deep layers of primary visual cortex, described by Theodor Meynert in the 1860s and known ever since as the solitary cell of Meynert because it sits alone rather than in a crowd.

Its job is to take a strong motion signal and broadcast it simultaneously to the midbrain, which moves the eyes, and to the motion analysing cortex, which tells you what is moving and where.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Each cell has one apical dendrite reaching upward and an unusually large basal spread that is lopsided, extending much further to one side than the other, and that asymmetry is thought to give the cell its preference for motion in one direction.

The soma and proximal dendrites are bare, but further out a single Meynert cell carries about 36,000 spines, unevenly distributed across its branches.

They stain strongly with silver, a property called argyrophilia, because they are stuffed with neurofilaments, the internal protein cables that give a large neuron its shape.

SIZE:

Large by the standards of visual cortex and the biggest neurons in it, though nowhere near the scale of a Betz cell; precise human soma measurements are scarce, so the honest statement is that they are several times the volume of a neighbouring layer 5 pyramid.

The spacing is better documented than the diameter: in the part of cortex serving central vision they sit a minimum of about 110 micrometres apart.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two populations are distinguished by depth: the inner Meynert cells lie at the border between layers 5 and 6 and project to both the superior colliculus and the motion area, while the outer group described in layer 4B projects to the motion area alone.

Both are strongly direction selective and both show the lopsided lateral dendritic field.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Primary visual cortex, Brodmann area 17, also called striate cortex, lining the calcarine sulcus on the inner face of each occipital lobe.

The classic position is deep layer 5 at the interface with layer 6, which the older literature often simply calls layer 6, and the inner cells lie under the cytochrome oxidase interblobs, the pale patches between the colour processing pillars, itself an interface between two functional compartments of area 17.

NUMBER:

Density is known and total number is not, so here is the arithmetic: in the macaque these cells reach about 8,000 per square centimetre of cortical surface in the region serving the very centre of vision, falling to about 625 per square centimetre in surrounding perifoveal cortex.

Human primary visual cortex covers roughly 2,400 square millimetres per hemisphere, which is 24 square centimetres, and most of that is not foveal, so an average density near the perifoveal figure gives tens of thousands per hemisphere, of the order of 100,000 across both.

That is well under 0.001 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons, and confidence is low because the estimate is extrapolated from monkey densities.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Regular spiking pyramidal behaviour with strong direction selective tuning, meaning the cell responds vigorously to motion one way and barely at all to motion the other way.

Their large size and heavy myelination make them fast, well placed to deliver an early motion signal to structures that must react quickly.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from the magnocellular stream, the fast motion sensitive channel of the visual pathway, arriving through layer 4C alpha and the local circuitry above it.

Outputs go by divergent axon collaterals, branches of the same axon, to the superior colliculus in the midbrain and to area V5, also called MT, on the posterior bank of the superior temporal sulcus, so the same spike reaches an eye movement controller and a perceptual motion analyser at nearly the same moment.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single thick axon leaves the cortex and splits, one branch descending to the midbrain and the other running forward through white matter to the motion area.

This branching is the defining functional feature: one cell, one decision, two very different consequences.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the main excitatory messenger, at every one of its targets.

MYELINATION:

Heavily myelinated on both collaterals, consistent with a cell whose value lies in getting a motion signal to the midbrain before the eye has moved too far.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High for a visual cortical neuron, because of the large soma, the 36,000 spines and two long myelinated output branches.

They shrink measurably after visual deprivation, which shows their upkeep is activity dependent rather than fixed.

PLASTICITY:

Dendritic size and spine number depend on visual experience, and depriving an animal of vision reduces both.

Once the critical period of early life closes, the direction preference itself is largely fixed.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing dramatically unusual is documented for the glia around Meynert cells, and it is better to say so plainly than to invent a specialisation.

The one point worth making is that these cells sit in the most metabolically active cortex in the brain, so astrocyte and capillary density around them is already exceptionally high compared with cortex elsewhere.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take Meynert cells out and area 17 keeps its exquisite analysis of edges, colour and depth but loses its fast hotline to the eye movement system.

The flavour lost is urgency: the reflexive snap of your eyes toward something that just moved in the corner of your vision.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The asymmetric dendritic tree performs a spatial computation before the soma sees anything, because motion sweeping along the long axis of the tree recruits inputs in a sequence that summates far better than motion the other way.

Back propagating spikes into that long lateral dendrite let the cell mark which branch just contributed.

Axonal divergence is itself a computation, because the cell cannot send different messages to the colliculus and the motion area and therefore enforces a shared assumption between a reflex system and a perceptual one.

Activity dependent shrinkage after deprivation shows the cell continuously remodels its own structure to match how much work it is getting.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: magnocellular driven excitation from layer 4C alpha and local layer 4B, as a directional motion energy vector over eight directions, each 0 to 1.

◦ Local inhibition from layer 5 and 6 interneurons, a fractional shunt from 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: identical spikes on two collaterals, one to the superior colliculus and one to area V5 or MT, with conduction delays of roughly 2 to 5 and 4 to 8 milliseconds respectively.

• STATE: membrane voltage, per branch activation of the asymmetric lateral tree, adaptation level, spine count as a slow structural state.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential near minus 65 millivolts, threshold near minus 48 millivolts, preferred direction in degrees, direction selectivity index 0 to 1, about 36,000 spines, minimum spacing 110 micrometres near the fovea.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, direction tuning window 20 to 60 milliseconds, structural remodelling after deprivation days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: loss or shrinkage after early visual deprivation degrades reflexive orienting to moving targets, and damage to this output limb contributes to the residual motion sensitivity of blindsight, where a person denies seeing anything yet still responds to movement.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a Meynert cell has detected motion in its preferred direction and, if so, to fire one spike into two very different destinations at the same time.
Create a number variable called preferred energy with initial value 1.0.
Create a number variable called opposite energy with initial value 0.1.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called voltage change with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called colliculus messages with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called area MT messages with initial value empty list.
While clock is less than 100, repeat the following steps.
    Set drive to the difference of preferred energy and opposite energy.
    Set drive to the product of drive and 40.
    Set voltage change to the difference of -65 and membrane voltage.
    Set voltage change to the sum of voltage change and drive.
    Set voltage change to the quotient of voltage change divided by 15.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and voltage change.
    If membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -48, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to -65.
        Add clock to the end of colliculus messages.
        Add clock to the end of area MT messages.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 1.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in colliculus messages to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the point of this cell is a tuning curve and a two way broadcast, and Python lets both be read at a glance without ceremony.

import math

DIRECTIONS = [i * 45.0 for i in range(8)]   # eight motion directions, degrees
PREFERRED = 90.0                            # set by the lopsided lateral dendrite

def dendrite_weight(theta):
    # rectified cosine tuning produced by the asymmetric dendritic field
    return max(0.0, math.cos(math.radians(theta - PREFERRED)))

def meynert_step(v, energy, dt=1.0):
    tau, v_rest, v_th, gain = 15.0, -65.0, -48.0, 40.0
    drive = gain * sum(w * e for w, e in
                       zip((dendrite_weight(d) for d in DIRECTIONS), energy))
    v += dt * ((v_rest - v + drive) / tau)
    if v >= v_th:
        return v_rest, {"superior_colliculus": 1, "area_MT": 1}
    return v, {"superior_colliculus": 0, "area_MT": 0}

energy = [0.0] * 8
energy[2] = 1.0            # motion at 90 degrees, the preferred direction
v, n = -65.0, 0
for t in range(100):
    v, out = meynert_step(v, energy)
    n += out["superior_colliculus"]
print("spikes in 100 ms to BOTH targets:", n)

tuning = [dendrite_weight(d) for d in DIRECTIONS]
pref, null = tuning[2], tuning[6]
print("tuning curve:", [round(x, 2) for x in tuning])
print("direction selectivity index:", round((pref - null) / (pref + null + 1e-9), 3))

Run, this prints 11 spikes in 100 milliseconds delivered to both targets, and a direction selectivity index of 1.0.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A very large, silver loving, solitary pyramid at the layer 5 to 6 border of the calcarine cortex, standing well clear of its neighbours, with a basal dendritic field that leans hard to one side.

No other cell in area 17 is both that big and that alone.

CHAPTER 15. VON ECONOMO NEURONS (VENS), ALSO CALLED SPINDLE NEURONS, ROD CELLS, OR CORKSCREW CELLS (COG)

They look like a stretched cigar with one thick wire out of each end; they appear in only a handful of large-brained species, and they die first in the dementia that destroys a person's manners before it touches their memory.

Big, fast spindle output cell of social and gut-feeling cortex.

These cells sit in layer five of the frontoinsula and anterior cingulate cortex, average roughly four and a half times the volume of neighbouring layer five pyramidal neurons, and align transcriptomically with extratelencephalic neurons that project below the cortex.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A von Economo neuron is a large, slender, top to bottom symmetrical projection neuron found in just two patches of cortex, described systematically by Constantin von Economo in the 1920s.

They sit inside the salience network, the circuit that decides which of the thousand things happening to you right now actually matters, and they appear to carry a fast summary of that decision to distant targets.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is elongated and roughly spindle shaped, and unlike a pyramid it is nearly symmetrical about its middle, with one thick dendrite leaving the top, one leaving the bottom, very little branching and few spines on the proximal parts.

That simplicity is the whole design: instead of a bushy tree sampling thousands of separate opinions, a von Economo neuron samples two narrow columns of tissue and reports quickly.

SIZE:

They are large, and the identification criterion used by stereologists is that a candidate must be at least as big as the neighbouring layer 5 pyramidal neurons.

Typical descriptions give an elongated soma several tens of micrometres long and only ten to fifteen micrometres wide, giving the characteristic stick like profile.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No formal subtypes are recognised, and variation is regional rather than categorical.

Cells in the frontoinsula are on average slightly larger and more numerous than those in the anterior cingulate, and there are consistently more in the right hemisphere than the left.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer 5, specifically layer 5b, of the anterior cingulate cortex, which is Brodmann areas 24, 32 and 33 on the inner face of the frontal lobe, and of the frontoinsular cortex, the agranular front end of the insula buried under the frontal and temporal lobes, with small numbers reported in dorsolateral prefrontal area 9.

The frontoinsular site is itself an interface, sitting where the insula meets the frontal operculum and where signals from the body meet signals about the outside world.

NUMBER:

Careful stereology gives a density rather than a total: in non demented controls these cells number about 501 per 10,000 layer 5 neurons in the anterior cingulate, with a ninety five percent confidence interval of 398 to 604, so about five percent of the layer 5 neurons in the sampling frame.

Working that upward is necessarily rough, but if the anterior cingulate and frontoinsula together hold a few hundred million neurons and layer 5 is a modest fraction of those, the total falls somewhere between one hundred thousand and one million across both hemispheres.

Against the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons that is at most about 0.006 percent, and confidence in the total is low while confidence in the five percent density is good.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Direct recordings from human von Economo neurons do not exist, so this must be stated as unknown.

Transcriptomic work places them firmly with layer 5 extratelencephalic projecting excitatory neurons, the deep output class that also contains Betz cells, and their expression of the alpha 1A adrenoceptor and dopamine D3 receptor means excitability should be strongly set by the arousal chemicals bathing the tissue.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive on two narrow vertical columns rather than a spreading tree, one from the superficial layers and one from the deep layers and white matter.

Outputs are long range and extratelencephalic, meaning they leave the cerebral hemispheres altogether, with likely targets in the brainstem and other subcortical autonomic centres, plus long corticocortical branches.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single long axon leaving from the base of the spindle.

The extratelencephalic transcriptomic signature implies a thick, fast, subcortically directed fibre, though the human axon has not been traced end to end and its diameter is unmeasured.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, as an excitatory projection neuron, but the striking finding is a monoamine handling profile.

About 92 percent carry vesicular monoamine transporter 2, the pump that loads monoamines such as dopamine, noradrenaline and serotonin into synaptic vesicles, about 82 percent carry the theta subunit of the type A receptor for gamma aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory messenger, and they also express the alpha 1A adrenoceptor and the dopamine D3 receptor.

Critically they lack the enzymes that make monoamines and the transporters that recapture them, so they package monoamines they did not make, a mode of signalling nobody has yet explained.

MYELINATION:

Myelinated, consistent with a long range projection neuron, with thickness unquantified in humans.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Presumed high, in line with other large layer 5 projection neurons, though not directly measured.

Their selective vulnerability in disease is the clearest indirect evidence, because cells that die first in a metabolic or protein handling crisis are usually the ones living closest to the edge.

PLASTICITY:

Their number is developmentally plastic in a striking way: they first appear around the 36th week after conception, are rare at birth, increase over the first eight months of life, and reach adult numbers by about four years of age.

That timetable maps neatly onto the years in which a child learns to read other people.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing distinctive is established for the glia surrounding von Economo neurons in health.

In disease the picture changes sharply, with microglial activation and abnormal protein deposits, including tau and TDP-43, appearing preferentially in and around these cells in frontotemporal lobar degeneration.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove von Economo neurons and the anterior cingulate and insula still register the state of the body, but they lose their fast reporter.

The flavour lost is social immediacy: the instant flush of embarrassment, the pull of another person's distress, the internal alarm that stops you saying the thing you were about to say.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The bipolar geometry is a computation, because it forces the cell to compare a superficial input stream with a deep one along a single axis instead of averaging hundreds of branches.

The vesicular monoamine transporter 2 finding raises the real possibility of non classical release, in which the cell secretes a monoamine scavenged from its surroundings, a form of volume transmission that would affect a whole neighbourhood rather than a single partner.

Expression of the alpha 1A adrenoceptor makes the cell a gain control device whose sensitivity is set by the ambient noradrenaline level, so the same bodily signal produces a bigger response when you are already aroused.

They also express activating transcription factor 3 and interleukin 4 receptor, tying them to stress driven gene transcription and to immune signalling inside the cortex.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: interoceptive prediction error from insular cortex, 0 to 1, meaning how far the body's actual state departs from what was expected.

◦ Autonomic arousal from anterior cingulate and brainstem, 0 to 1.

◦ Ambient noradrenaline, dopamine and serotonin concentration, each 0 to 1, acting on the receptor set rather than on a synapse.

• OUTPUTS: spikes on a long extratelencephalic axon to brainstem autonomic nuclei and to distant cortical nodes of the salience network.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation level, superficial dendrite activation, deep dendrite activation, vesicular monoamine load.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential near minus 68 millivolts, threshold near minus 47 millivolts, adrenergic gain factor 1.0 to 2.5, density about 5 percent of layer 5 neurons, right hemisphere excess of roughly 20 to 30 percent.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds, adaptation 200 to 300 milliseconds, monoamine tone over seconds, developmental population growth over months to four years.

• FAILURE MODE: in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia they are lost selectively and early, with reported reductions of about 53 percent in neuropathologically early cases and up to 74 percent relative to neighbouring neurons, producing loss of empathy, disinhibition and loss of self awareness while memory is initially spared; in Alzheimer's disease they survive even into advanced stages.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make a von Economo neuron report a sudden bodily surprise, with the size of the report set by how much noradrenaline is bathing the tissue.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -68.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called noradrenaline with initial value 0.6.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called error with initial value 0.05.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Set gain to the sum of 1 and the product of 1.5 and noradrenaline.
While clock is less than 400, repeat the following steps.
    Set error to 0.05.
    If both clock is greater than or equal to 100 and clock is less than 160 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set error to 0.9.
    End the conditional block.
    Set drive to the sum of the product of 26 and error and 3.2.
    Set drive to the difference of the product of drive and gain and adaptation.
    Set drive to the sum of drive and the difference of -68 and membrane voltage.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of drive divided by 18.
    Set adaptation to the difference of adaptation and the quotient of adaptation divided by 220.
    If membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -47, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to -68.
        Set adaptation to the sum of adaptation and 6.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 1.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the interesting part is a single multiplicative gain term set from outside the cell, and a plain dictionary of state makes that dependence impossible to miss.

def make_ven():
    return {"v": -68.0, "adapt": 0.0}

def ven_step(cell, error, arousal, noradrenaline, dt=1.0):
    TAU_M, TAU_A, V_REST, V_TH = 18.0, 220.0, -68.0, -47.0
    # ADRA1A sets the gain from outside. The cell loads monoamines with
    # VMAT2 but synthesises none, so its tone is imported, not generated.
    gain = 1.0 + 1.5 * noradrenaline
    drive = gain * (26.0 * error + 8.0 * arousal) - cell["adapt"]
    cell["v"] += dt * ((V_REST - cell["v"] + drive) / TAU_M)
    cell["adapt"] -= dt * (cell["adapt"] / TAU_A)
    if cell["v"] >= V_TH:
        cell["v"] = V_REST
        cell["adapt"] += 6.0        # strong spike frequency adaptation
        return 1
    return 0

for na in (0.0, 0.3, 0.6, 1.0):
    cell, total, before = make_ven(), 0, 0
    for t in range(400):
        err = 0.9 if 100 <= t < 160 else 0.05   # a sudden bodily surprise
        f = ven_step(cell, err, 0.4, na)
        total += f
        if t < 100:
            before += f
    print("noradrenaline %.1f -> %2d spikes, %d of them before the surprise"
          % (na, total, before))

Run, this prints 1, 3, 4 and 6 spikes for rising noradrenaline and none before the surprise: the same bodily event is reported six times more loudly in an aroused brain.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A long, thin, cigar shaped cell body with exactly one thick dendrite out of the top and one out of the bottom, no basal skirt, in layer 5 of the anterior cingulate or the frontoinsula.

Turn the picture upside down and it looks the same, which no pyramidal neuron ever does.

CHAPTER 16. FORK CELLS (COG)

Its apical dendrite splits into two equal prongs like a tuning fork, and it will not speak unless both prongs agree.

Twin-pronged partner of the spindle cell in feeling-aware cortex.

Fork cells share layer five of the frontoinsula and a single transcriptomic cluster with von Economo neurons.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A fork cell is the second unusual large neuron of layer 5 in the frontoinsular and anterior cingulate cortex, the constant companion of the von Economo neuron.

Where a von Economo neuron has one thick dendrite going up, a fork cell has one that divides near the soma into two roughly equal branches, and it shares its neighbour's chemistry, territory and fate in disease, which is why the two are almost always counted together.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

One single large basal dendrite descends from the bottom of the cell body, while from the top an apical dendrite rises a short way and then bifurcates into two prongs of similar calibre that ascend in parallel toward the cortical surface.

The soma is large and shares the elongated look of a von Economo neuron, but the divided apical shaft is the diagnostic feature and it is visible in a routine silver or Nissl stain.

SIZE:

Comparable to a von Economo neuron and to the larger layer 5 pyramidal neurons around it, which is the criterion used to identify it in counting studies.

Exact human soma dimensions are not well tabulated and should be treated as unknown rather than guessed.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

None are recognised.

The only reliable variation is the height at which the apical shaft divides, ranging from a split almost at the soma to one several tens of micrometres above it.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer 5 of the frontoinsular cortex, the agranular anterior insula, and layer 5 of the anterior cingulate cortex, Brodmann areas 24, 32 and 33, interleaved with von Economo neurons in exactly the same laminar position and markedly more affected on the right side of the brain in disease.

The relevant interface is the layer 1 to layer 2 boundary, because that is where the two prongs of the apical dendrite terminate and collect long range feedback.

NUMBER:

No independent total exists for fork cells, and inventing one would be dishonest.

What is documented is that in the counting frames used by Seeley's group in the frontoinsula, fork cells are consistently found alongside von Economo neurons and are the rarer of the two.

A defensible bound is therefore fewer than the von Economo population, so of the order of one hundred thousand across both hemispheres, well under 0.001 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons, with low confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Unrecorded in humans, so genuinely unknown.

Their expression of the alpha 1A adrenoceptor and vesicular monoamine transporter 2 means excitability should be set by ambient monoamines in the same way as their von Economo neighbours.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The two apical prongs sample the superficial layers, which carry feedback from higher areas and from the thalamic matrix, a diffuse thalamic system that spreads context across wide swathes of cortex, while the single basal dendrite samples the deep local circuit and the incoming white matter.

Outputs are long range projections, in company with the von Economo neurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

One axon from the base of the soma.

Nothing quantitative is published on human fork cell axon diameter or conduction velocity, and it should be modelled as similar to the von Economo neuron until measured.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate as the released transmitter.

About 84 percent of fork cells carry vesicular monoamine transporter 2 and about 84 percent carry the theta subunit of the type A receptor for gamma aminobutyric acid, essentially the same proportions as von Economo neurons, and like them they express the alpha 1A adrenoceptor while lacking every enzyme needed to synthesise a monoamine.

MYELINATION:

Myelinated as a projection neuron, with no quantitative human data available.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Presumed high and unmeasured.

The strongest indirect evidence is vulnerability, because fork cells and von Economo neurons degenerate in synchrony in early behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia, and cells that fail together usually share a metabolic burden.

PLASTICITY:

Not directly studied.

Because fork cells appear in the same regions and are counted in the same postnatal windows as von Economo neurons, the reasonable working assumption is a similar late developmental arrival, but this is an assumption and not a finding.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

No distinctive glial specialisation is documented around fork cells in health.

In frontotemporal lobar degeneration caused by particular variants of the microtubule associated protein tau gene, tau aggregates preferentially inside fork cells and von Economo neurons, which implicates the local astrocytic and microglial clearance machinery in their selective death.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Fork cells give the frontoinsula a coincidence detector.

Take them away and the region can still report that something in the body has changed and that something in the world has changed, but it loses the cell that insists both must be true before the alarm is raised.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The divided apical shaft creates two electrically semi independent compartments, each capable of generating its own local calcium spike, a slow regenerative event confined to a dendrite.

Two prongs mean the cell can implement a logical AND across two separate patches of superficial cortex, then require the basal dendrite to agree before the soma fires.

Back propagating action potentials reach both prongs and can license strengthening in whichever one was active, so the cell can learn which pairs of contexts are worth linking.

Like von Economo neurons, the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 content raises the possibility of dendritic or somatic release of scavenged monoamines into the surrounding volume.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: superficial layer 1 feedback onto apical prong A, 0 to 1, and onto apical prong B, 0 to 1, from separate cortical sources.

◦ Deep local and white matter input onto the single basal dendrite, 0 to 1.

◦ Ambient noradrenaline setting gain, 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: spikes on one long range axon shared with the von Economo neuron population, targeting brainstem and distant cortex.

• STATE: prong A activation, prong B activation, basal activation, apical calcium flag, somatic voltage.

• PARAMETERS: prong calcium threshold near 0.55 in normalised units, somatic threshold near 0.70, basal weight 0.5, apical calcium weight 0.6.

• TIME CONSTANTS: apical prong integration 10 to 15 milliseconds, basal integration 5 to 8 milliseconds, dendritic calcium spike 20 to 50 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: selective loss alongside von Economo neurons in early behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia, right side worse, correlating with the severity of anatomical, functional and behavioural symptoms; preserved in Alzheimer's disease even at advanced stages.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make a fork cell fire only when both prongs of its divided apical dendrite are loaded at once and its single basal dendrite agrees.
Create a number variable called left prong with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called right prong with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called basal branch with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called branch input with initial value 0.05.
Create a number variable called soma voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
While clock is less than 300, repeat the following steps.
    Set branch input to 0.05.
    If both clock is greater than or equal to 100 and clock is less than 150 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set branch input to 1.0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set left prong to the sum of left prong and the quotient of the difference of branch input and left prong divided by 12.
    Set right prong to the sum of right prong and the quotient of the difference of branch input and right prong divided by 14.
    Set basal branch to the sum of basal branch and the quotient of the difference of branch input and basal branch divided by 6.
    Set soma voltage to the product of 0.5 and basal branch.
    If both left prong is greater than 0.55 and right prong is greater than 0.55 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set soma voltage to the sum of soma voltage and 0.6.
    End the conditional block.
    If soma voltage is greater than 0.7, then perform the following actions.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 1.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because the two prongs are naturally two small objects with independent state, and a dependency free script makes the coincidence rule obvious to any reader.

function branch(tau) { return { v: 0.0, tau: tau }; }
function integrate(b, input, dt) { b.v += dt * ((input - b.v) / b.tau); return b.v; }

const CA_TH = 0.55;   // calcium spike threshold inside one apical prong
const SOMA_TH = 0.70; // somatic firing threshold

function trial(leftOn, rightOn, basalOn) {
  const L = branch(12.0), R = branch(12.0), B = branch(6.0);
  let spikes = 0;
  for (let t = 0; t < 300; t++) {
    const l1L = (leftOn  && t >= 100 && t < 140) ? 1.0 : 0.05;
    const l1R = (rightOn && t >= 110 && t < 150) ? 1.0 : 0.05;
    const loc = (basalOn && t >= 120 && t < 130) ? 1.0 : 0.10;
    const a1 = integrate(L, l1L, 1.0);
    const a2 = integrate(R, l1R, 1.0);
    const bs = integrate(B, loc, 1.0);
    // the fork reports only when BOTH prongs are loaded together
    const apicalCa = (a1 > CA_TH && a2 > CA_TH) ? 1.0 : 0.0;
    if (0.5 * bs + 0.6 * apicalCa > SOMA_TH) spikes += 1;
  }
  return spikes;
}
console.log("both prongs + basal  :", trial(true,  true,  true));
console.log("one prong  + basal   :", trial(true,  false, true));
console.log("both prongs, no basal:", trial(true,  true,  false));

Run, this prints 21, 0 and 0: the cell is completely silent unless all three conditions hold at once.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A large layer 5 neuron in the anterior insula or anterior cingulate with exactly one fat basal dendrite below and an apical shaft that forks into two matched prongs above.

No pyramidal neuron has a symmetrically divided apical trunk, and no von Economo neuron has any apical branching at all.

CHAPTER 17. CAJAL-RETZIUS CELLS (NON-COG)

They build the cortex; they tell every other neuron where to stop climbing, and then almost all of them die before you are born.

Early layer-one cell whose reelin signal stacks the cortex.

These transient marginal zone neurons secrete the glycoprotein reelin, and without it, as in the reeler mouse, the inside-out stacking of cortical layers fails entirely.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A Cajal-Retzius cell is a temporary neuron lying just under the surface of the developing brain that secretes a protein called reelin, and it is named for Santiago Ramon y Cajal, who described it in 1890, and Gustaf Retzius, who described it in 1893.

Reelin is the stop signal telling each wave of young neurons climbing up from the deep brain where to halt, and it is why the cortex is built inside out, with the oldest cells deepest and the youngest nearest the surface.

Without it the layers are inverted and scrambled, which in people is the condition called lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The classic form is a horizontal cell with an oval body and one thick dendrite running parallel to the brain surface, ending in fine tufted branches, plus a long horizontal axon running sideways within the topmost sheet of tissue.

In humans the picture is richer than in a mouse, because the human marginal zone is far thicker and contains several distinct reelin producing shapes alongside the classic horizontal one.

SIZE:

Small to medium, with a cell body typically ten to twenty micrometres across, a fraction of the size of the giant projection cells described elsewhere in this chapter.

The horizontal axon is disproportionately long for such a small cell, spreading its signal far along the surface.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Human studies at midgestation distinguish several reelin producing morphotypes in the marginal zone rather than one uniform cell.

By origin there are also several populations, arising from the cortical hem, the septum, the ventral pallium at the pallial to subpallial boundary, and the thalamic eminence, and a further human specialty is the subpial granular layer of Ranke, a transient sheet of small cells found in human but not rodent cortex.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The marginal zone, the outermost band of the developing cortex, which becomes layer 1 of the mature neocortex, across the whole neocortical surface, plus the hippocampus, where they are required for the hippocampal fissure to form, and the entorhinal cortex.

Their position is itself the point: they sit at the interface between the pia mater, the delicate membrane covering the brain, and the top of the cortical plate, exactly where the migrating neurons arrive.

NUMBER:

In the fetal marginal zone they are the dominant neuron of that layer, dense enough to establish a reelin gradient across the whole cortical surface, but in the adult they are a small remnant and no reliable adult total has been published.

A defensible upper bound comes from layer 1 as a whole, which holds well under one percent of cortical neurons, so the surviving population must be under ten million, under 0.06 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons, and the true figure is very likely far smaller.

Most human Cajal-Retzius cells begin degenerating around gestational weeks 23 to 24, though persistent cells have been documented in people as old as 28.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They fire action potentials but with immature properties: a high input resistance, meaning a small current produces a large voltage change, and slow, broad spikes.

Early in development they are depolarised rather than quietened by gamma aminobutyric acid, the transmitter that becomes purely inhibitory later, so the usual brake acts as an accelerator, and their spontaneous activity helps drive the earliest patterned activity in the cortical sheet.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They receive both glutamatergic and gamma aminobutyric acid mediated inputs within the marginal zone and are contacted by the earliest ingrowing afferent fibres.

Their most important output is not a synapse at all but the secretion of reelin into the extracellular space, acting on the apical processes of every migrating neuron below them, although they also make conventional contacts onto the apical tufts of arriving pyramidal neurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single long axon running horizontally within the marginal zone, sometimes for several millimetres, keeping both the reelin signal and the electrical signal spread evenly across the surface.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the transmitter of the classic Cajal-Retzius cell, but the functionally decisive secretion is not a transmitter at all: it is reelin, a very large extracellular protein released constitutively rather than at a synapse.

They also express the transcription factor p73 and the calcium binding protein calretinin, which are the markers used to identify them.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable, and here is why: Cajal-Retzius axons run entirely within the marginal zone during a period before myelination of the cortex has begun, and the cells are largely gone before oligodendrocytes arrive in force.

There is no myelinated Cajal-Retzius axon to describe, so this is a genuine absence rather than a gap in the record.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest for electrical work, because the cell is small and fires slowly.

The unusual load is secretory, because reelin is a very large glycoprotein and continuously manufacturing and exporting it demands a well developed endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, the cell's protein factory and packaging plant.

PLASTICITY:

The whole population is plastic in the deepest sense, because its job is finished and then it is deleted by programmed cell death in late fetal and early postnatal life, after which a subpopulation of gamma aminobutyric acid producing interneurons takes over reelin production in smaller amounts.

Persistence varies by region, with high numbers lingering in the medial entorhinal cortex long after they have vanished from neighbouring cortex.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The critical partner is not a mature glial cell but radial glia, the long scaffolding cells stretching from ventricle to pial surface that act as climbing ropes for migrating neurons, and Cajal-Retzius cells sit at the pial end of every one of those ropes and terminate the climb.

Later, microglia clear the dying Cajal-Retzius cells, one of the earliest large scale clearance jobs in the brain.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and there is no cortex to colour.

Without the reelin gradient, migrating neurons stop too early or overshoot, layer 1 fills with cells that should be deeper, and the neat inside out sequence collapses into a jumble, which is exactly what is seen in the reeler mouse and in human reelin mutations.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Almost everything this cell does is beyond spiking, because its main output is volume transmission of a secreted protein, a signal that diffuses through tissue and reaches many cells at once rather than travelling down a wire to one partner.

Reelin binds receptors on migrating neurons and triggers a phosphorylation cascade inside them, so the Cajal-Retzius cell is reprogramming other cells' internal chemistry rather than merely exciting them.

The cells are coupled to one another within the marginal zone network, and their early spontaneous activity helps synchronise the first cortical rhythms.

Finally, their own programmed death is an instructed, timed event, and delaying it disrupts the maturation of layer 1 inhibitory circuits.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamatergic and gamma aminobutyric acid mediated synaptic input within the marginal zone, 0 to 1.

◦ Positional signals from the cortical hem and pial surface during migration into the marginal zone.

◦ A developmental clock input in gestational weeks, which triggers programmed death.

• OUTPUTS: reelin secreted into the extracellular space as a scalar concentration field in arbitrary units, plus conventional glutamatergic synapses onto arriving apical tufts.

• STATE: reelin synthesis rate, local reelin concentration in each depth slice, membrane voltage, survival flag.

• PARAMETERS: reelin diffusion coefficient, reelin degradation rate, stop threshold concentration, soma diameter 10 to 20 micrometres, onset of degeneration near gestational week 23.

• TIME CONSTANTS: reelin diffusion across the cortical thickness in minutes to hours, migration of one neuron in days, population lifetime in weeks to months, rare persistence in decades.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of reelin signalling produces inverted cortical layering, and in humans reelin mutations cause lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia, while reduced reelin has been reported in schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and autism.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to build a reelin gradient from the pial surface and use it to stop each successive wave of migrating neurons, producing the inside out order of the cortical layers.
Create a list variable called reelin with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called level with initial value 20.
Repeat the following steps exactly 40 times.
    Add level to the end of reelin.
    Set level to the product of level and 0.8.
End the loop.
Create a number variable called stop depth with initial value 39.
Create a number variable called probe with initial value 0.
While probe is less than 40, repeat the following steps.
    If the item at position probe in reelin is less than 0.35, then perform the following actions.
        Set stop depth to the difference of probe and 1.
        Break out of the current loop immediately.
    End the conditional block.
    Set probe to the sum of probe and 1.
End the loop.
Create a list variable called settled depths with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called wave with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called final depth with initial value 0.
While wave is less than 6, repeat the following steps.
    Set final depth to the sum of stop depth and the difference of 5 and wave.
    Add final depth to the end of settled depths.
    Set wave to the sum of wave and 1.
End the loop.
Display settled depths to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this is a small diffusion problem with a rule attached, and Python lists let the diffusion step and the stop rule sit side by side without any library.

DEPTH, D, DECAY, STOP = 40, 0.25, 0.01, 0.35

def run(secreting):
    reelin = [0.0] * DEPTH          # slice 0 is the pia, slice 39 the ventricle
    settled = []
    cells = [{"pos": 39.0, "born": 150 + i * 70, "state": "waiting"}
             for i in range(6)]
    for t in range(1500):
        if secreting:
            reelin[0] += 1.0        # Cajal-Retzius cells secrete at the surface
        nxt = list(reelin)
        for i in range(1, DEPTH - 1):
            nxt[i] = reelin[i] + D * (reelin[i-1] - 2*reelin[i] + reelin[i+1])
        nxt[0] = reelin[0] + D * (reelin[1] - reelin[0])
        nxt[-1] = reelin[-1] + D * (reelin[-2] - reelin[-1])
        reelin = [c * (1.0 - DECAY) for c in nxt]
        for c in cells:
            if c["state"] == "waiting" and t >= c["born"]:
                c["state"] = "climbing"
            if c["state"] != "climbing":
                continue
            c["pos"] -= 0.08                    # climbing the radial glial rope
            if c["pos"] <= 0.0:
                c["pos"], c["state"] = 0.0, "in the marginal zone"
            elif reelin[int(c["pos"])] >= STOP:
                c["state"] = "settled"
                for old in settled:
                    old["pos"] += 1.0           # the plate grows toward the pia
                settled.append(c)
    return [round(c["pos"], 1) for c in cells]

print("reelin present:", run(True))
print("reelin absent :", run(False))

Run, this prints [25.0, 24.0, 23.0, 22.0, 21.0, 20.0] with reelin, a perfect inside out stack, and all zeros without it, every cell piled into the marginal zone.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small horizontal neuron lying flat in the very top sheet of fetal cortex, with one thick dendrite parallel to the surface, a long horizontal axon, and staining positive for both reelin and the transcription factor p73.

Nothing else in the brain lies down flat right under the pia and hands out a stop signal to everyone below it.

CHAPTER 18. SUBPLATE NEURONS (First-Born Wiring-Guide Neuron) (NON-COG)

For a few months before birth, the busiest circuit in the human brain is one that will mostly be gone by your first birthday.

Subplate is an address and nothing more, naming a temporary shelf of tissue beneath the growing cortex rather than any work the cell does.

First-Born records the hardest fact about them: they are among the very first cortical neurons generated, appearing around embryonic days eleven to thirteen in the mouse, long before the layer four cells they serve have even migrated into place.

Wiring-Guide names the job proved by lesion - incoming thalamic axons pause in the subplate for weeks in a documented waiting period, and removing these neurons from kitten visual cortex prevents thalamic axons from segregating in layer four and blocks ocular dominance columns from forming.

Neuron marks it as a fundamental cortical cell, though most of these early-born cells persist as the core of adult layer six b rather than simply dying.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Subplate neurons are the first cortical neurons to be born and the first to become functional, occupying a temporary layer just below the developing cortex, and their job is to run the cortex before the cortex can run itself.

Incoming fibres from the thalamus, the great relay station at the centre of the brain, park in the subplate for weeks in what is called the waiting period, forming working synapses there before they are allowed up into the cortical plate.

During that time subplate neurons amplify spontaneous activity, teach layer 4 how to respond, and are absolutely required for the formation of ocular dominance columns, the stripes of cortex serving each eye.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

They are a mixed bag rather than a single shape, with polymorphic, inverted pyramidal, fusiform, multipolar and horizontal forms all described, and they mature early, so at a stage when cortical plate neurons still look primitive the subplate neurons already have elaborate dendrites and clear axons.

In humans the layer they occupy is the thickest transient compartment of the whole fetal brain, several times thicker than the cortical plate above it at its peak.

SIZE:

Medium sized, commonly quoted in the range of ten to thirty micrometres for the soma across the different morphological types.

The survivors in adult white matter are small to medium neurons scattered thinly through the cabling.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

By chemistry rather than shape there are two great divisions.

One is excitatory and glutamatergic, marked by connective tissue growth factor and the nuclear receptor NURR1, and it is these cells that mostly persist as layer 6b; the other is inhibitory, using gamma aminobutyric acid, and includes cells containing neuropeptide Y, somatostatin, and nitric oxide synthase, the enzyme that makes the gas nitric oxide.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Before birth, the subplate zone, immediately beneath the cortical plate and above the intermediate zone, across the entire neocortex and thickest under the association areas of the frontal and temporal lobes.

After birth the survivors live in two places, layer 6b, the very deepest sliver of grey matter, and the subcortical white matter as interstitial neurons, so their address is defined by an interface, the grey matter to white matter boundary, which is precisely why they are so easy to overlook.

NUMBER:

The adult survivors have been counted properly: Sedmak and Judas in 2019 measured about 594 million white matter interstitial neurons in the whole adult human subcortical white matter, with a standard deviation of about 265 million, and published estimates run from about 450 to 670 million.

That is roughly 1.3 to 3.5 percent of the number of cortical neurons, and it lies alongside rather than inside the 16.34 billion neocortical figure, because these cells are counted in white matter, not in the cortical sheet, while the layer 6b survivors do fall inside that total and are a small fraction of one percent of it.

Only about 10 to 20 percent of the original fetal subplate population survives, so the fetal population must have been several billion, and confidence in the adult figure is good while confidence in the fetal one is poor.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They mature electrically far earlier than any other cortical neuron, so they can spike while the cortical plate is still silent, and they generate and amplify spindle bursts, brief oscillatory volleys that sweep the immature cortex and are the fetal brain's main form of self stimulation.

They have long membrane time constants and high input resistance, so small inputs produce large responses, which suits an amplifier.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They receive the first thalamocortical axons, the first callosal axons crossing between the hemispheres, and the first ingrowing fibres from the brainstem carrying acetylcholine, serotonin and noradrenaline.

They project upward into the cortical plate, particularly onto layer 4, and some send pioneer axons the other way, down to the thalamus, laying the first track that later cortical axons follow, while adult survivors keep sparse long range links between neighbouring cortical columns through the white matter.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Two directions matter: ascending axons deliver amplified thalamic drive into layer 4 during the waiting period, and descending pioneer axons reach the thalamus before any cortical plate axon does.

Those pioneers act as a guide wire for the entire corticothalamic system.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Both of the cortex's main transmitters, depending on subtype: glutamate for the excitatory majority and gamma aminobutyric acid for the inhibitory minority.

Peptides are prominent, especially neuropeptide Y and somatostatin, and a subset produces nitric oxide, a gas that diffuses freely through tissue and dilates blood vessels.

MYELINATION:

Largely unmyelinated during fetal life, because myelination of the human cortex barely begins before birth.

The adult interstitial survivors sit inside heavily myelinated white matter but their own thin axons are mostly unmyelinated, which makes them electrically slow neighbours in a very fast neighbourhood.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High relative to their neighbours during the waiting period, because they are the only electrically active cells in an otherwise quiet cortex.

That early activity is the leading explanation for why they are so selectively killed by a shortage of oxygen or blood in premature infants.

PLASTICITY:

They are the substrate of the first great wave of cortical plasticity and then largely delete themselves, with programmed cell death removing the majority in late fetal and early postnatal life and the timing of that death setting the closing edge of the earliest critical periods.

Survivors retain some plasticity, and abnormal survival or misplacement is one of the more reproducible findings in the brains of people with schizophrenia.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here behave differently from glia in the cortical plate above, because the subplate is rich in extracellular matrix molecules, the scaffolding gel between cells, which makes it a permissive corridor where growing axons can pause and wait rather than the tightly packed plate above.

Microglia colonise the subplate early, clear the vast numbers of dying subplate neurons, and are also the cells whose activation in preterm brain injury damages the survivors.

Around adult interstitial neurons, oligodendrocytes dominate the neighbourhood entirely, so these neurons live as isolated grey matter cells inside a white matter world.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove subplate neurons before birth and the cortex above them never wires up properly: thalamic axons fail to find their targets, ocular dominance columns never form, and layer 4 never learns its job, so what is lost is not a flavour in an adult region but the entire recipe.

In the adult, removing the interstitial survivors would take away a thin, slow, peptide rich cross talk running through the white matter between cortical areas.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The subplate is the clearest case in the brain of a cell type whose function is to be a temporary scaffold and then disappear on schedule.

They instruct other neurons through activity, since blocking subplate firing prevents ocular dominance columns from forming even though the axons are physically present.

The nitric oxide producing subset controls local blood flow directly, coupling early neural activity to the growing vasculature, while the pioneer axons perform structural guidance, a computation written in geometry rather than in spikes.

In rodents, layer 6b neurons are among the very few cortical cells directly excited by orexin, also called hypocretin, the peptide that keeps you awake, which hints at a role in arousal, though whether the human survivors share this is untested.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: thalamocortical axon activity, 0 to 1, including spontaneous retinal waves before the eyes open.

◦ Callosal input from the opposite hemisphere, 0 to 1.

◦ Brainstem neuromodulator tone for acetylcholine, serotonin and noradrenaline, each 0 to 1.

◦ A developmental clock in gestational weeks, which sets the handover fraction.

• OUTPUTS: amplified drive to layer 4 of the cortical plate, descending pioneer axon activity to thalamus, and nitric oxide released into the local tissue volume.

• STATE: membrane voltage, burst count, handover fraction from 0 to 1, survival flag, surrounding extracellular matrix density.

• PARAMETERS: amplification gain about 3.0 falling to 0 across the handover, burst threshold near 1.2 in normalised units, survival fraction 0.10 to 0.20, adult interstitial population about 594 million.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds, spindle burst 0.5 to 3 seconds, waiting period several weeks, handover across gestational weeks 22 to 32, programmed death over months.

• FAILURE MODE: hypoxic and ischaemic injury in premature infants kills subplate neurons selectively and is a leading cause of cerebral palsy and later cognitive impairment; abnormal numbers and placement of interstitial neurons are reported in schizophrenia; focal cortical dysplasia and some epilepsies involve retained clusters of these cells.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run the subplate as a waiting room and amplifier for thalamic axons and then to hand its job over to layer four.
Create a number variable called subplate voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called handover with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called week with initial value 24.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called thalamic input with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called burst count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive to layer four with initial value 0.
If week is greater than 22, then perform the following actions.
    Set handover to the quotient of the difference of week and 22 divided by 10.
End the conditional block.
Set gain to the product of 3 and the difference of 1 and handover.
While clock is less than 500, repeat the following steps.
    Set thalamic input to 0.
    If the remainder of clock divided by 100 is less than 20, then perform the following actions.
        Set thalamic input to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set subplate voltage to the sum of subplate voltage and the quotient of the difference of the product of gain and thalamic input and subplate voltage divided by 25.
    Set drive to layer four to the sum of drive to layer four and the product of handover and thalamic input.
    If subplate voltage is greater than 1.2, then perform the following actions.
        Set subplate voltage to 0.
        Set burst count to the sum of burst count and 1.
        Set drive to layer four to the sum of drive to layer four and the difference of 1 and handover.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 1.
End the loop.
Display burst count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the essential story is a state machine that changes its own role over developmental time, and a small class makes that handover explicit.

class Subplate:
    """A transient amplifier that trains layer 4 and then stands down."""
    def __init__(self):
        self.v = 0.0
        self.tau = 25.0     # long time constant: an immature, leaky cell
        self.bursts = 0

    def step(self, thalamic, week, dt=1.0):
        # the waiting period: afferents pile up in the subplate first
        handover = 0.0 if week < 22 else min(1.0, (week - 22) / 10.0)
        gain = 3.0 * (1.0 - handover)
        self.v += dt * ((gain * thalamic - self.v) / self.tau)
        fired = 0
        if self.v > 1.2:
            self.v = 0.0
            self.bursts += 1
            fired = 1
        relayed = (1.0 - handover) * fired      # subplate to layer 4
        direct = handover * thalamic            # thalamus straight to layer 4
        return relayed + direct

for week in (20, 24, 28, 32):
    cell, drive_to_l4 = Subplate(), 0.0
    for t in range(500):
        wave = 1.0 if (t % 100) < 20 else 0.0   # spontaneous retinal wave
        drive_to_l4 += cell.step(wave, week)
    print("week %d: subplate bursts %2d, total drive reaching layer 4 %5.1f"
          % (week, cell.bursts, drive_to_l4))

Run, this prints 5 bursts and 5.0 units of drive at week 20, then 5 and 24.0, then 0 and 60.0, then 0 and 100.0: the subplate carries the whole load, then quietly stands down.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Before birth, a mature looking neuron with a full dendritic tree sitting in a thick, loose, matrix rich band directly beneath a cortical plate whose own cells still look primitive.

After birth, a lone neuron stranded in the white matter, positive for connective tissue growth factor or neuropeptide Y, surrounded by nothing but myelin and oligodendrocytes, with no cortical layer to call home.

CHAPTER 19. CORTICAL BASKET CELLS (COG)

A basket cell weaves its axon around the cell bodies of hundreds of neighbours like wickerwork, and with one spike it mutes the lot of them.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A basket cell is an inhibitory cortical neuron: it releases gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main braking chemical, making its targets less likely to fire.

What makes it special is where it brakes, on the cell body and thick nearby dendrites, a zone called perisomatic, which is the last place a decision to fire can be overruled.

Sitting at that choke point, it does not merely reduce activity, it dictates the millisecond at which its neighbours may speak.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is round with several thick dendrites, the receiving branches, radiating in all directions, a pattern called multipolar.

Those dendrites are smooth, lacking the tiny mushroom-shaped spines that excitatory cells use.

The axon, the output cable, breaks immediately into a dense horizontal thicket that stays largely within the home layer and ends in clusters of swellings cupping other cells' somata.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 25 micrometres across, roughly a quarter of a hair's width.

Small basket cells spread their axon about 300 micrometres sideways, while large ones reach a millimetre or more, and axons within a single layer have been traced several millimetres; total axonal length runs to several centimetres packed into a volume smaller than a grain of salt.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Small basket cells, axon confined to the home layer and column, giving tight private inhibition.

• Nest basket cells, intermediate in reach, whose terminals form loose nests rather than tight baskets.

• Large basket cells, crossing both columns and layers to inhibit a slab of cortex hundreds of micrometres wide.

• Cholecystokinin basket cells, a chemically distinct family named for the peptide cholecystokinin they carry, which fire more slowly, release GABA less reliably, and are switched off by cannabis-like molecules the brain makes itself.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Basket cells occupy layers 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the whole neocortex, the six-layered sheet covering the hemispheres, and are essentially absent from layer 1.

They are present in every cortical area: primary visual, auditory, somatosensory, motor, prefrontal, insular and cingulate cortex and all association territories.

They are dense at two interfaces in particular, the layer 4 to layer 3 boundary where thalamic sensory input is handed upward, and the layer 5 to layer 6 boundary where cortical output is assembled.

NUMBER:

Parvalbumin-containing basket cells are reported to be fewer than 8 percent of all neocortical neurons.

Against this section's budget of 16.34 billion neocortical neurons and 3.2 billion inhibitory ones, a defensible estimate is about 600 million, range 480 to 800 million: roughly 3.7 percent of neocortical neurons, about 19 percent of cortical inhibitory neurons, and about 0.7 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

Confidence is moderate, because the fraction is well constrained in rodent, monkey and sampled human tissue but nobody has counted human basket cells brain-wide.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

This is the classic fast-spiking neuron, firing 100 to 200 spikes per second for long stretches with almost no slowing.

Its action potential is unusually narrow, 0.2 to 0.4 milliseconds at half height, because potassium channels of the Kv3 family repolarise the membrane extremely fast.

A short membrane time constant of 5 to 10 milliseconds and a low input resistance of 60 to 150 megaohms make it a coincidence detector rather than a patient accumulator, and its fast upstroke depends on Nav1.1 sodium channels encoded by the gene SCN1A.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input arrives on the smooth dendrites from nearby pyramidal cells, from thalamic fibres carrying sensory data, and from long-range cortical axons.

Output reaches the somata and proximal dendrites of hundreds, by some estimates more than a thousand, pyramidal cells plus other basket cells, through GABA type A receptors rich in the alpha-1 subunit that open and close within a few milliseconds.

Human basket cells also synapse on themselves: robust perisomatic self-innervation, called an autapse, is common in human and mouse supragranular basket cells and prolongs their own silence after each spike.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres, and branches many hundreds of times in a small volume, with terminal swellings clustered in strings of three to eight around each target soma.

Conduction along these local axons is fast, and measured velocity rises with the amount of myelin present.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter is GABA, built by the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 and loaded into vesicles by the vesicular GABA transporter.

Parvalbumin basket cells carry parvalbumin, not a transmitter but a fast calcium sponge that shortens the calcium signal and keeps release crisp; cholecystokinin basket cells co-release that peptide and are silenced from the target's side by endocannabinoids acting on cannabinoid receptor type 1.

MYELINATION:

Unusually for an inhibitory cell, the proximal axon is myelinated in patches, myelin being the fatty insulating sheath that speeds conduction.

The sheath is discontinuous, with long bare stretches between short internodes, and mitochondria, the cell's power plants, gather beneath those internodes, an arrangement that looks tuned for timing precision rather than raw speed.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

These are among the most energy-hungry neurons in the cortex, holding more and larger mitochondria than neighbouring interneurons, enriched in cytochrome c oxidase, the final enzyme of the oxygen-burning chain.

The bill comes from pumping sodium and potassium back after high-frequency firing and from sustaining a high probability of release, and gamma-band synchrony collapses quickly when that energy supply is disturbed.

PLASTICITY:

The maturation of these cells opens and closes critical periods, the windows in early life when cortex is most reshapeable by experience.

Their axonal arbors remodel extensively during development, and in adulthood the perineuronal net encasing them limits further structural change, so dissolving that net experimentally restores juvenile plasticity.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The distinctive support here is the perineuronal net, a stiff lattice of sugar-coated proteins including aggrecan and brevican, secreted jointly by astrocytes and the neuron, wrapping the soma like a string bag.

No other cortical cell is so consistently enwrapped, and the net does two jobs: it pins perisomatic synapses in place and it absorbs the oxidative damage this cell's furious metabolism generates.

Oligodendrocytes also treat these axons differently, laying short discontinuous internodes instead of the long uniform ones they build elsewhere.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete basket cells and the region loses its clock.

Gamma rhythms, the 30 to 80 cycles per second oscillation that binds the features of a percept together, are paced by these cells, and without them cortical activity becomes an unsynchronised murmur in which everything fires a little and nothing fires together.

The region also loses gain control, so a weak stimulus and a strong one would produce nearly the same saturated response.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Basket cells are wired to each other by gap junctions, protein tunnels built largely of connexin 36 that pass current directly, so a network of them synchronises within a millisecond.

The autapse gives each cell a private negative feedback loop limiting its own burst length, and cholecystokinin basket cells are shut off retrogradely when a depolarised target manufactures endocannabinoids on the spot and sends them backwards across the synapse for seconds at a time.

Parvalbumin buffers calcium inside the terminal and so shapes short-term plasticity from within, and these axons help instruct oligodendrocytes where to place myelin.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamatergic conductance from local pyramidal cells (0 to 20 nanosiemens); thalamocortical drive (0 to 8 nanosiemens, latency 1 to 3 milliseconds); acetylcholine and noradrenaline tone (0 to 1 normalised); gap junction current from coupled basket cells (coupling coefficient 0.02 to 0.15).

• OUTPUTS: GABA type A conductance onto pyramidal somata and proximal dendrites, 1 to 5 nanosiemens per connection, reversal minus 70 to minus 80 millivolts, onto 300 to 1500 targets; autaptic conductance onto self of similar size.

• STATE: membrane potential, sodium and potassium gating variables, autaptic conductance, short-term depression factor, intracellular calcium.

• PARAMETERS: membrane time constant 5 to 10 milliseconds; input resistance 60 to 150 megaohms; threshold minus 45 to minus 40 millivolts; spike half-width 0.2 to 0.4 milliseconds; maximum sustained rate 100 to 200 hertz; release probability 0.4 to 0.9.

• TIME CONSTANTS: inhibitory decay 4 to 10 milliseconds; autaptic decay about 4 milliseconds; refractory period about 1 millisecond; gamma cycle 12 to 33 milliseconds; perineuronal net turnover, weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: in schizophrenia these cells show reduced glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 messenger ribonucleic acid and thinned perineuronal nets, and gamma synchrony and working memory degrade; in Dravet syndrome, loss of one SCN1A copy stops them sustaining firing and the cortex tips into seizure.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run one fast-spiking basket cell that brakes itself through its own autapse, and to report how many inhibitory pulses it delivers.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called self inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called refractory countdown with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 400 times.
    Calculate the difference of 40 and self inhibition.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.06.
    Calculate the sum of voltage and the result.
    Set voltage to the result.
    Calculate the product of self inhibition and 0.88.
    Set self inhibition to the result.
    If refractory countdown is greater than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of refractory countdown and 1.
        Set refractory countdown to the result.
        Set voltage to -70.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    If voltage is greater than or equal to -42, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to the result.
        Calculate the sum of self inhibition and 22.
        Set self inhibition to the result.
        Set refractory countdown to 2.
        Set voltage to -70.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because a whole-cortex simulation holds hundreds of millions of these cells stepping every 0.05 milliseconds, so this inner loop must compile to a handful of machine instructions.

#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    /* Fast-spiking basket cell with a GABAergic autapse on its own soma. */
    const double dt = 0.05;         /* ms per step */
    const double tau_m = 6.0;       /* membrane time constant, ms */
    const double v_rest = -70.0;    /* mV */
    const double v_thresh = -42.0;  /* mV */
    const double e_gaba = -75.0;    /* chloride reversal, mV */
    const double tau_aut = 4.0;     /* autaptic decay, ms */
    const double g_aut_step = 6.0;  /* conductance added per own spike */
    const double drive = 40.0;      /* steady excitatory drive, mV */
    double v = v_rest, g_aut = 0.0;
    int refrac = 0, spikes = 0;

    for (int step = 0; step < 8000; step++) {  /* 8000 steps = 400 ms */
        g_aut -= g_aut * dt / tau_aut;         /* self-inhibition fades */
        if (refrac > 0) { refrac--; v = v_rest; continue; }
        double inhib = g_aut * (e_gaba - v);   /* the cell braking itself */
        v += dt * ((v_rest - v) + drive + inhib) / tau_m;
        if (v >= v_thresh) {
            spikes++;
            v = v_rest;
            g_aut += g_aut_step;
            refrac = (int)(1.0 / dt);          /* 1 ms absolute refractory */
        }
    }
    printf("spikes in 400 ms: %d (%.1f Hz)\n", spikes, spikes / 0.4);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Look for a smooth-dendrite multipolar cell whose axon forms tight cups of boutons around its neighbours' cell bodies, which fires at 150 spikes per second without tiring, whose spikes are half as wide as anyone else's, and which sits inside a visible mesh cage of perineuronal net.

Nothing else in the cortex combines a basket-shaped terminal field, parvalbumin, and non-adapting fast spiking.

CHAPTER 20. CHANDELIER CELLS, ALSO CALLED AXO-AXONIC CELLS (COG)

The chandelier cell hangs vertical strings of transmitter-releasing beads through the cortex like candlesticks on a light fitting, and every string clamps the one spot on another neuron where its spikes are born.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A chandelier cell is an inhibitory cortical neuron releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's principal braking chemical.

It is defined by one fact: it contacts only the axon initial segment of its targets, the short starting stretch of the output cable where an action potential is actually triggered, which is why it is also called an axo-axonic cell.

Holding that single spot, it can license or forbid a pyramidal cell's spike without touching anything else about that cell's computation.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The soma is small to medium and often sits at the top of layer 2, with dendrites climbing into layer 1 and descending into layer 3.

Its axon divides into vertically oriented strings of boutons called cartridges, each running alongside one target's axon initial segment.

The parallel array of cartridges looks exactly like the candle holders of a chandelier, which is how the cell was named in the 1970s.

SIZE:

The cell body measures 10 to 20 micrometres.

A cartridge is 10 to 40 micrometres long, a single labelled chandelier cell contributes about two to three boutons per target initial segment, one cell forms several hundred cartridges, and in monkey prefrontal cortex bouton density peaks near 750 per square millimetre.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Superficial chandelier cells with somata at the layer 1 to layer 2 border, the commonest form in human cortex.

• Deep chandelier cells in layers 5 and 6 with shorter, denser cartridges.

• A population enriched at the layer 3 to layer 4 border in human temporal cortex, matching the transcriptomic cluster labelled inhibitory layer 2 to 5 PVALB SCUBE3, which expresses the chandelier marker genes UNC5B, NOG and COL15A1.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Chandelier cells occupy layers 2 through 6 of the whole neocortex, densest in layer 2 and upper layer 3, and are sparse or absent from layer 4 in rodents.

They are found in prefrontal, temporal, parietal, occipital, motor and cingulate cortex, with equivalent cells in hippocampus and amygdala that fall outside this section's budget.

The interface they occupy is not between two brain regions but between two compartments of one neuron: the boundary where a pyramidal cell's body ends and its axon begins.

NUMBER:

Chandelier cells are consistently described as fewer than 5 percent of cortical interneurons.

Against 3.2 billion inhibitory neocortical neurons that gives about 100 million, range 60 to 160 million: roughly 0.6 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons, about 3 percent of cortical inhibitory neurons, and about 0.12 percent of all neurons in the nervous system.

Confidence is low to moderate, because chandelier cells are hard to sample and were explicitly under-sampled even in the largest human patch-sequencing study.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They are fast-spiking but measurably unlike basket cells, with higher input resistance of 150 to 300 megaohms, a more depolarised resting potential near minus 65 millivolts, spike half-widths of 0.3 to 0.5 milliseconds, more adaptation, a tendency to stutter, and lower maximum rates of 50 to 150 hertz.

They often fire spontaneously between stimuli, which matters because the clamp on the initial segment is therefore applied by default rather than on request.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive on dendrites in layers 1 to 3 from local pyramidal cells, long-range cortical axons and neuromodulatory fibres.

Output goes exclusively to axon initial segments: each chandelier cell contacts 35 to 50 percent of the pyramidal neurons in its axonal field, and each pyramidal neuron is contacted by roughly four different chandelier cells.

The receiving GABA type A receptors there are enriched in the alpha-2 subunit, a signature distinguishing these synapses from perisomatic ones.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is fine, largely unmyelinated in its terminal arbor, and organised vertically into cartridges rather than spread horizontally.

Its total length is less than a large basket cell's but its placement precision is far greater, since each bouton must land within a few micrometres, and cartridge development is guided by neuregulin acting on the ErbB4 receptor with the intracellular partner DOCK7 over a narrow window running in mice from about postnatal day 12 to day 18.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter is GABA and the cells carry parvalbumin.

The twist is that GABA at the axon initial segment is not reliably inhibitory: that compartment lacks much of the potassium-chloride cotransporter KCC2 that pumps chloride out, so local chloride is high and the GABA reversal potential sits near minus 55 millivolts instead of the usual minus 75.

The synapse therefore depolarises a resting cell toward minus 55 millivolts while shunting a cell that has climbed above it, making the chandelier cell a voltage clamp rather than a simple brake.

MYELINATION:

The terminal cartridges are unmyelinated, necessarily, since myelin would physically block boutons from reaching the target membrane.

The proximal axon may carry short myelin patches as in other parvalbumin cells, though this is less documented; the relevant myelin is on the other side of the synapse, because the target's initial segment ends where its own myelin begins and the cartridge occupies the bare stretch before it.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High but below basket cells, because these cells fire fast yet adapt and stutter instead of sustaining maximal rates.

They depend on oxidative phosphorylation, the oxygen-burning route to cellular energy, and their burden is concentrated in a terminal arbor whose thousands of release sites must be kept loaded.

PLASTICITY:

Axo-axonic synapses are strikingly plastic in structure.

Raising the activity of either the pyramidal cell or the chandelier cell during the developmental window causes a reversible loss of axo-axonic connections, a homeostatic rule matching inhibition to the target's excitability, and in adult visual cortex experience continues to reshape chandelier function and cartridge structure.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes near the axon initial segment face an unusual task: they must keep extracellular potassium and chloride stable around a compartment that deliberately runs a non-standard chloride gradient.

Perineuronal nets around chandelier somata are present but generally lighter than around basket cells, and it is honest to say the specialisation here is structural rather than glial, since it is the ankyrin-G scaffold inside the target's initial segment, not any glial cell, that defines where a cartridge may attach.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove chandelier cells and the cortex loses its veto.

Pyramidal cells would still be inhibited on their bodies and dendrites, so activity would not explode, but the power to cancel an already-decided output at the last possible moment would vanish, along with fine control of spike timing at the start of a cortical volley.

Layers 2 and 3, where they are densest, would send leakier, less crisp output to the rest of the brain.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The headline non-classical feature is compartment-specific chloride physiology, in which the same transmitter depolarises or hyperpolarises depending on which micron of membrane it lands on.

Their effect is state dependent, flipping with arousal and with the target's membrane potential, and they are gap-junction coupled to other parvalbumin cells.

They perform structural homeostasis by adding and removing whole cartridges, and their targets can fight back by relocating the initial segment along the axon, sliding the trigger zone out from under the cartridge.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: local glutamatergic excitation onto layer 1 to 3 dendrites (0 to 12 nanosiemens); long-range cortico-cortical input (0 to 5 nanosiemens); cholinergic and serotonergic modulation (0 to 1 normalised); arousal state (0 to 1).

• OUTPUTS: GABA type A conductance onto the axon initial segment of 200 to 600 pyramidal neurons, 0.5 to 3 nanosiemens per target, local reversal minus 60 to minus 50 millivolts.

• STATE: membrane potential, adaptation current, stutter phase, per-target cartridge count, target initial segment chloride concentration.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 150 to 300 megaohms; resting potential about minus 65 millivolts; sustained firing 50 to 150 hertz; boutons per target 2 to 10; fraction of local pyramidal cells contacted 0.35 to 0.50.

• TIME CONSTANTS: inhibitory decay 5 to 12 milliseconds; chloride accumulation and recovery at the initial segment 0.1 to 1 second; cartridge structural turnover, days.

• FAILURE MODE: in schizophrenia the density of cartridges detectable by the GABA transporter GAT-1 falls about 40 percent in prefrontal cortex while the alpha-2 receptor subunit on initial segments rises, read as failed compensation; chandelier numbers are reduced and boutons smaller in prefrontal cortex in autism; in epilepsy, sustained firing with chloride loading can turn the veto into a trigger.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to work out whether a chandelier cell input helps or hinders a pyramidal cell, given the high chloride level at the axon initial segment.
Create a number variable called target voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called driving force with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called net current with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called chandelier active with initial value true.
Repeat the following steps exactly 500 times.
    Calculate the difference of -55 and target voltage.
    Set driving force to the result.
    If chandelier active is not true, then perform the following actions.
        Set driving force to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of 0.8 and driving force.
    Set net current to the result.
    Calculate the sum of net current and 22.
    Set net current to the result.
    Calculate the difference of -70 and target voltage.
    Calculate the sum of net current and the result.
    Set net current to the result.
    Calculate the product of net current and 0.08.
    Calculate the sum of target voltage and the result.
    Set target voltage to the result.
    If target voltage is greater than or equal to -50, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to the result.
        Set target voltage to -70.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole point is one line of arithmetic about chloride, and Python makes that line impossible to misread.

DT = 0.05          # milliseconds per step
E_LEAK = -70.0     # resting potential, mV
TAU = 12.0         # pyramidal membrane time constant, ms
V_THRESH = -50.0   # spike threshold, mV
E_CL_AIS = -55.0   # chloride reversal AT the axon initial segment, mV
G_CHC = 0.8        # chandelier conductance, normalised

def run(drive, chandelier_on, ms=500.0):
    """Return spike count and mean voltage of one pyramidal target."""
    v, spikes, v_sum = E_LEAK, 0, 0.0
    steps = int(ms / DT)
    for _ in range(steps):
        g = G_CHC if chandelier_on else 0.0
        # The sign is set by (E_CL_AIS - v), not by the word "inhibition".
        dv = (E_LEAK - v) + drive + g * (E_CL_AIS - v)
        v += DT * dv / TAU
        if v >= V_THRESH:
            spikes += 1
            v = E_LEAK
        v_sum += v
    return spikes, v_sum / steps

for drive in (8.0, 22.0):
    for on in (False, True):
        s, mv = run(drive, on)
        print(f"drive={drive:4.1f} chandelier={'on ' if on else 'off'} "
              f"spikes={s:4d} mean V={mv:7.2f} mV")

# Quiet cell: the chandelier DEPOLARISES it, from about -62 to about -59 mV.
# Driven cell: the same synapse CLAMPS it below threshold and abolishes firing.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Find a parvalbumin-positive cell whose axon forms vertical rows of beads, each row hugging the start of another cell's axon and nothing else.

The cartridge is the fingerprint: no other neuron in the human brain builds parallel candlestick arrays aimed at a single micron-scale target on hundreds of partners.

CHAPTER 21. TRANSLAMINAR CELLS (All-Layers Blanket-Damping Neuron) (COG)

Most cortical inhibitory cells work sideways within their own floor of the building; the translaminar cell drops its axon down the stairwell and switches off three floors at once.

Translaminar is an address in disguise, stating only that the axon crosses horizontal cortical layers.

All-Layers names the anatomy that matters functionally: these inhibitory cells sit mostly in the deep layers and send axons through the entire cortical thickness, from layer 6 up to layer 1, contacting pyramidal cells in every layer they pass.

Blanket-Damping names the work - using gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main inhibitory chemical, these cells provide general gain control over the whole cortical column rather than a targeted veto of one layer.

Neuron marks it as a principal inhibitory cortical cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A translaminar cell is an inhibitory cortical neuron, releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), whose axon deliberately crosses the boundaries between cortical layers.

Laminar means layered, so translaminar simply means across the layers, and the name describes wiring geometry rather than chemistry; reviews of cortical parvalbumin neurons now treat these cells as the third named morphological class of fast-spiking interneuron alongside basket and chandelier cells.

Its job is vertical binding, making the six layers of one small patch of cortex reach a single decision instead of arguing floor by floor.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is multipolar with smooth, spine-free dendrites, like other fast-spiking cells.

The distinguishing feature is an axon that turns vertically after leaving the soma, running perpendicular to the cortical surface and shedding branches in each layer it passes.

In human tissue this pattern was recovered in a parvalbumin type labelled layer 4 to 5 MEPE, whose axons spanned layer 3 into layer 4 and were described as resembling mouse interlaminar or translaminar basket cells; the trunk may ascend, descend, or both.

SIZE:

Somata are 12 to 22 micrometres across.

Vertical axonal reach is the point, 400 to more than 1200 micrometres, enough to cross from layer 2 to layer 5 in the roughly 2.5 to 3 millimetre thickness of human neocortex, while horizontal spread stays narrow at 200 to 500 micrometres, giving a tall column-shaped envelope.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Descending parvalbumin translaminar cells, somata in layers 2 and 3, axons reaching layers 4 and 5.

• Ascending parvalbumin translaminar cells, somata in layers 5 and 6, axons climbing into layers 4 and 3.

• Somatostatin translaminar cells, a separate chemical family whose long vertical axons also cross layers but target dendrites rather than cell bodies.

• Translaminar basket variants, whose vertical axon still ends in perisomatic baskets in the destination layer.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Somata occur in layers 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the neocortex, with the axon by definition present in at least two layers.

The interfaces they cross are the ones that matter most: the layer 4 to layer 3 boundary where thalamic input is handed upward, the layer 3 to layer 5 boundary where the cortex commits to an output, and the layer 5 to layer 6 boundary where feedback to the thalamus is assembled.

They are reported in sensory, motor and association cortex, including human middle temporal gyrus, mouse visual cortex and mouse barrel cortex.

NUMBER:

No direct count exists.

Treating translaminar cells as a minority of parvalbumin and somatostatin interneurons gives an estimate of about 80 million in the human neocortex, with a wide range of 30 to 160 million, roughly 0.5 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons and about 2.5 percent of the 3.2 billion cortical inhibitory neurons.

Confidence is low and the reason must be stated plainly: the category is defined by axon geometry visible only in fully reconstructed cells, and full human reconstructions still number in the low hundreds.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The parvalbumin members are fast-spiking, 80 to 180 hertz, with spike half-widths of 0.25 to 0.45 milliseconds and membrane time constants of 6 to 12 milliseconds.

The somatostatin members are low-threshold spiking, with higher input resistance of 200 to 400 megaohms, a rebound burst on release from hyperpolarisation, and clear adaptation.

Both share one consequence of their geometry: the same spike arrives in different layers at different times, spread over one to five milliseconds of conduction delay.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input is dominated by the home layer, so the cell samples what its own floor is doing.

Output is distributed across layers, and the strongest documented case runs downward from layer 5, where activating layer 5 recruits fast-spiking neurons in the superficial layers about three times more strongly than excitatory ones, so translaminar recurrence from layer 5 suppresses the layers above.

A caution matters for any simulation: anatomy overstates function here, because layer 2 and 3 parvalbumin cells have abundant descending collaterals into layer 5 yet make very few working synapses there, so a model must never assume that a branch passing through a layer inhibits it.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, 0.2 to 0.6 micrometres, and unusually straight over its vertical run before branching, depositing boutons in layer-specific bands rather than uniformly along the trunk.

Conduction delays of one to five milliseconds across the depth of the cortex are the functionally important number, because they set the phase relationship between layers during an oscillation.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA in every case.

Parvalbumin translaminar cells carry parvalbumin; somatostatin translaminar cells carry the peptide somatostatin, which is itself released and acts slowly on receptors away from the synapse, and neither group is known to release a fast excitatory transmitter.

MYELINATION:

A long vertical trunk is the part of any interneuron axon most likely to be myelinated, and patchy myelination of parvalbumin interneuron axons is documented, with conduction velocity rising in step with the amount of myelin present.

Terminal branches within each target layer are bare, and direct measurements on identified human translaminar cells have not been published, so this must be treated as an inference from the wider parvalbumin literature.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High for the fast-spiking members, comparable to basket cells, with abundant mitochondria and heavy dependence on oxygen-based energy production.

There is one added cost basket cells do not carry, maintaining a long axon trunk that requires continuous transport of proteins and mitochondria over a millimetre or more, while the slower somatostatin members are cheaper to run.

PLASTICITY:

Vertical inhibition is shaped by sensory experience during development, and the columnar organisation of cortex depends on it forming correctly.

Because the axon must find and stop in the correct layer, guidance and pruning errors appear as mislaminated inhibition rather than simple weakness; in adults, individual synapses change strength normally but layer targeting appears fixed.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Cortical astrocytes are themselves organised into layer-specific varieties, so a translaminar axon passes through several distinct glial environments in one run, and its branches in layer 1 meet astrocytes chemically unlike those meeting its branches in layer 5.

That is genuinely unusual, since most cortical neurons keep their entire axonal arbor inside one glial neighbourhood; otherwise oligodendrocyte and microglial support is not known to be special, and it is honest to say so.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take translaminar cells away and the cortical column stops being a column.

Layer 4 would still receive sensory input, layer 2 and 3 would still process it and layer 5 would still issue commands, but the three would drift out of register in time and the vertical alignment that makes a column respond to one stimulus as one unit would blur.

Concretely, the suppression layer 5 imposes on the superficial layers after it fires would vanish, and cortical activity would ring on instead of resetting.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The defining non-classical property is that a single spike produces a different result in each layer because of conduction delay, so the cell is a spatial delay line rather than a point inhibitor.

Parvalbumin members are gap-junction coupled to partners within their home layer, so a vertical message can be launched by a horizontally synchronised group.

Somatostatin members release a peptide by volume transmission, meaning it diffuses to receptors on cells they never touch, so their influence on a distant layer is part wiring and part chemistry, and their axons help instruct where oligodendrocytes place myelin along the trunk.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamatergic excitation from the home layer (0 to 15 nanosiemens); weaker excitation from other layers (0 to 4 nanosiemens); neuromodulatory tone (0 to 1 normalised); gap junction current from same-layer partners.

• OUTPUTS: GABA type A conductance delivered to two or more named layers, 0.5 to 3 nanosiemens per connection, each with its own conduction delay; somatostatin peptide for the somatostatin members.

• STATE: membrane potential, adaptation current, one delay queue per target layer, per-layer short-term depression factors.

• PARAMETERS: vertical axon length 400 to 1200 micrometres; conduction velocity 0.2 to 0.8 metres per second; targets per layer 50 to 400; connection probability into a passed-through layer, which may be near zero and must therefore be a free parameter, never assumed.

• TIME CONSTANTS: conduction delay 1 to 5 milliseconds; inhibitory decay 5 to 12 milliseconds for parvalbumin members and 15 to 40 milliseconds for somatostatin members; adaptation 50 to 200 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of vertical inhibition lets activity in one layer recruit the others unchecked, the classic starting condition for a focal cortical seizure, and in schizophrenia weakened parvalbumin function is thought to desynchronise layers as well as cells.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to let one translaminar interneuron spread inhibition from its home layer to the layers above and below, each after its own conduction delay.
Create a number variable called cell voltage with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called layer delays with initial value empty list.
Add 3 to the end of layer delays.
Add 1 to the end of layer delays.
Add 5 to the end of layer delays.
Create a list variable called pending arrivals with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called step number with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 200 times.
    Calculate the sum of step number and 1.
    Set step number to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of cell voltage divided by 6.
    Calculate the difference of 0.25 and the result.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.5.
    Calculate the sum of cell voltage and the result.
    Set cell voltage to the result.
    If cell voltage is greater than or equal to 1, then perform the following actions.
        Set cell voltage to 0.
        For each delay in layer delays, perform the following operations.
            Calculate the sum of step number and delay.
            Add the result to the end of pending arrivals.
        End the loop.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in pending arrivals.
Display the result to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because the essential idea is a set of per-layer delay queues, and JavaScript arrays express a queue clearly without any library.

const DT = 0.5;                        // milliseconds per step
const STEPS = 200;                     // 100 ms of simulated time
const LAYERS = ["L2/3", "L4", "L5"];
const DELAY_MS = [1.5, 0.5, 2.5];      // conduction delay from the L4 soma
const TAU_I = 8.0;                     // decay of delivered inhibition, ms
const DRIVE = 0.25;                    // excitation in the home layer

const queues = LAYERS.map(() => []);   // pending arrivals, one queue per layer
const inhib = LAYERS.map(() => 0);     // inhibition present in each layer
let v = 0, spikes = 0;                 // normalised potential, threshold 1

for (let step = 0; step < STEPS; step++) {
  const t = step * DT;
  v += DT * (-v / 6.0 + DRIVE);        // fast-spiking membrane, tau = 6 ms
  if (v >= 1.0) {
    v = 0;
    spikes++;
    LAYERS.forEach((_, i) => queues[i].push(t + DELAY_MS[i]));  // one spike, three futures
  }
  LAYERS.forEach((_, i) => {
    inhib[i] *= Math.exp(-DT / TAU_I);
    while (queues[i].length > 0 && queues[i][0] <= t) {
      queues[i].shift();
      inhib[i] += 1.0;                 // the spike finally lands here
    }
  });
}
LAYERS.forEach((name, i) =>
  console.log(name.padEnd(5), "delay", DELAY_MS[i], "ms  residual inhibition",
              inhib[i].toFixed(3)));
console.log("translaminar spikes fired:", spikes);

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Reconstruct the whole cell and look at the shape of the axon cloud: if it is taller than it is wide, and deposits boutons in two or more named layers while the dendrites stay in one, it is translaminar.

A basket cell's arbor is a horizontal disc, a chandelier cell's is a forest of short candlesticks, and a translaminar cell's is a narrow vertical column punched through the cortical sheet.

CHAPTER 22. MARTINOTTI CELLS (COG)

Carlo Martinotti drew this cell in 1889 as a neuron that sends its axon the wrong way - upward toward the brain's surface. A century later, we learned it climbs up there to switch off the antennae of every excited cell nearby.

The cell that silences a pyramidal neuron's own dendrites when it fires fast.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A Martinotti cell is an inhibitory cortical neuron releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) together with the peptide somatostatin.

Its signature is an ascending axon that climbs to layer 1, the thin outermost layer of the cortex, and spreads horizontally there, which is where pyramidal cells park their apical tufts, the fine upper branches that collect feedback and context from the rest of the brain.

Its best-known behaviour is lateral inhibition on demand: when one pyramidal cell fires a fast burst, the Martinotti cell it excites turns around and dampens the neighbouring pyramidal cells, an effect called frequency-dependent disynaptic inhibition.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The soma is small to medium and often bitufted, meaning two dendritic bundles emerge from opposite poles like the tufts on an ear of wheat.

The axon ascends as a trunk through the layers above, then branches profusely into a broad horizontal plexus in layer 1 that spreads into neighbouring cortical columns.

Along the way it also leaves collaterals in the layers it passes, so it inhibits nearer dendrites as well as distant tufts.

SIZE:

Somata measure 10 to 20 micrometres across.

The ascending axon runs 500 to 1500 micrometres vertically in human cortex and the layer 1 plexus can extend 500 to over 1000 micrometres horizontally, reaching beyond the parent column, for a total axonal length of several centimetres, much of it spent simply climbing.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• T-shaped Martinotti cells, typically in layer 5, whose axon rises as one bare trunk and only branches on arrival in layer 1, giving the letter T.

• Fanning-out Martinotti cells, marked by the calcium-binding protein calretinin and corresponding to the somatostatin CALB2 transcriptomic type, branching on the way up and arborising in layers 2 and 3 as well as layer 1.

• Deep-layer Martinotti cells in layers 5b and 6, associated with the somatostatin MYH8 type.

• In human cortex, classic Martinotti shapes were found at the layer 2 to layer 3 border and within layer 3, alongside a sparse variant with unusually few axon branches and a strong descending component.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Somata sit in layers 2, 3, 5 and 6 of the neocortex, most abundantly in layers 2 and 3 and in layer 5, with the axon terminating in layer 1.

They are present throughout the neocortex, including primary visual, auditory and somatosensory cortex, motor cortex, and prefrontal and temporal association areas.

The interface they own is the layer 1 boundary, the meeting point between cortex and the incoming feedback fibres from other cortical areas and from higher-order thalamus, and they are the only inhibitory cell whose job is defined by delivering local inhibition into that foreign territory.

NUMBER:

Somatostatin cells are consistently reported as about 30 percent of cortical GABAergic neurons, and Martinotti cells are the most abundant somatostatin subtype.

Against 3.2 billion cortical inhibitory neurons that gives about 450 million Martinotti cells, range 320 to 640 million, roughly 2.8 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons and about 14 percent of cortical inhibitory neurons.

Confidence is moderate for the somatostatin total and lower for the Martinotti share of it, because the Martinotti label is morphological and human sampling has been biased toward the upper layers.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Martinotti cells are low-threshold spiking, beginning to fire at unusually negative voltages because of low-threshold calcium channels of the T type.

Input resistance is high at 200 to 500 megaohms, so small currents move them a long way, and the membrane time constant is long at 20 to 40 milliseconds, making them patient integrators rather than coincidence detectors.

They adapt strongly, show a voltage sag during hyperpolarisation caused by the current known as Ih, rebound with a burst when released from inhibition, and rest near minus 60 millivolts, close enough to threshold to be recruited easily.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The input synapse from pyramidal cells is the most distinctive in the cortex: it starts extremely weak and strengthens several-fold within a burst, a property called strong short-term facilitation.

The mechanism is a protein handshake across the synapse, in which Elfn1 on the Martinotti cell's surface grabs and constitutively switches on the presynaptic receptor mGluR7, holding initial release probability very low.

Output reaches the apical tufts and apical dendrites of pyramidal cells across several columns and also other interneurons, while the Martinotti cell is itself inhibited by vasoactive intestinal peptide cells and by parvalbumin cells to differing degrees.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, 0.1 to 0.4 micrometres, with a long unbranched ascending stretch and a dense terminal plexus of small boutons contacting fine dendritic shafts rather than cell bodies.

Conduction is slow, roughly 0.1 to 0.5 metres per second, adding several milliseconds between the Martinotti spike and the arrival of inhibition in layer 1.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA is the fast transmitter and somatostatin the co-released peptide, acting on slow receptors that can sit far from the release site.

Group I metabotropic glutamate receptors, especially mGluR1a, are almost completely co-localised with somatostatin in human temporal cortex, and switching them on makes Martinotti cells fire and inhibit the local circuit.

Acetylcholine, the transmitter of attention and arousal, also depolarises these cells and facilitates their lateral inhibition in both human and mouse neocortex.

MYELINATION:

Martinotti cell axons are essentially unmyelinated.

This is a design consequence rather than an oversight, because the cell's usefulness depends on being slow and integrative, and the absence of myelin explains the multi-millisecond delay between a pyramidal burst and the arrival of tuft inhibition.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate, and much lower than a parvalbumin basket cell's, because firing rates are lower, action potentials are broader and cheaper per unit of signalling, and the huge mitochondrial load of fast-spiking cells is absent.

The one specialised cost is peptide manufacture, since somatostatin must be made in the cell body, packed into large dense-core vesicles and shipped up the axon, and cannot be replenished locally the way GABA can.

PLASTICITY:

The facilitating input synapse is itself very fast plasticity, changing strength within tens of milliseconds and resetting within a second.

Over longer times, Martinotti inhibition of apical dendrites gates whether a pyramidal cell can generate the dendritic calcium spikes that let its own synapses strengthen, so this cell is a gatekeeper for plasticity elsewhere, and its layer 1 arbor remodels during learning.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia that matter here are layer 1 astrocytes, morphologically and molecularly distinct from deeper ones, which surround the Martinotti terminal plexus.

Because somatostatin acts by volume transmission, diffusing through the extracellular space, the peptide-degrading enzymes these astrocytes carry set how far the signal spreads, a role glia do not play for fast GABA synapses.

Martinotti somata are not enwrapped in perineuronal nets and the axon is not myelinated, so oligodendrocytes play essentially no part in this cell's life.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove Martinotti cells and the cortex loses its brake on runaway excitement and its sense of context.

A pyramidal cell that fired a burst would no longer quieten its neighbours, so a small local excitation would recruit an ever-widening group instead of standing out against a suppressed background, and sharp receptive field tuning would soften.

Layer 1 would become a place where feedback arrives with no local editing, so top-down expectation would be applied to every cell equally rather than selectively.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Martinotti cells control dendritic computation in others, vetoing the calcium and NMDA-receptor spikes that pyramidal tufts use to fuse top-down with bottom-up information.

They are recruited by a trans-synaptic protein interaction rather than by voltage alone, they release a peptide by volume transmission, and they answer to metabotropic glutamate receptors that report accumulated rather than instantaneous glutamate.

They are gap-junction coupled to other somatostatin cells, receive cholinergic gating that makes their lateral inhibition state-dependent, and by suppressing dendritic spikes they decide which synapses in the neighbourhood may undergo long-term change.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: facilitating glutamatergic synapses from local pyramidal cells (initial release probability 0.03 to 0.10, facilitating five to tenfold in a burst); cholinergic input (0 to 1 normalised); inhibition from vasoactive intestinal peptide and parvalbumin cells (0 to 6 nanosiemens); group I metabotropic glutamate receptor activation (0 to 1).

• OUTPUTS: GABA type A conductance onto pyramidal apical dendrites and tufts in layer 1 and layers 2 to 3, 0.2 to 1.5 nanosiemens per contact, 200 to 800 targets across several columns; somatostatin peptide into the extracellular space.

• STATE: membrane potential, T-type calcium inactivation, Ih activation, adaptation current, per-synapse facilitation variable, peptide vesicle pool.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 200 to 500 megaohms; membrane time constant 20 to 40 milliseconds; resting potential about minus 60 millivolts; threshold about minus 45 millivolts; maximum firing 20 to 60 hertz; conduction delay 3 to 10 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: facilitation recovery 150 to 300 milliseconds; inhibitory decay 15 to 40 milliseconds; peptide action, seconds; adaptation 100 to 300 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of somatostatin and of somatostatin neurons is one of the best-replicated findings in Alzheimer's disease and tracks cognitive decline, with somatostatin subtypes prominently affected in single-cell atlases of Alzheimer's middle temporal gyrus; reduced somatostatin expression in prefrontal cortex is also robust in major depression, and losing this dendritic brake is a route into epilepsy.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a Martinotti cell is recruited by a neighbouring pyramidal cell, using a synapse whose strength grows with every spike in a burst.
Create a number variable called release probability with initial value 0.05.
Create a number variable called conductance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called cell voltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called step number with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 4000 times.
    Calculate the sum of step number and 1.
    Set step number to the result.
    Calculate the product of release probability and 0.9995.
    Set release probability to the result.
    Calculate the product of conductance and 0.9933.
    Set conductance to the result.
    Calculate the remainder of step number divided by 200.
    If both the result is equal to 0 and step number is less than or equal to 1600 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of 1 and release probability.
        Calculate the product of 0.05 and the result.
        Calculate the sum of release probability and the result.
        Set release probability to the result.
        Calculate the product of 120 and release probability.
        Calculate the sum of conductance and the result.
        Set conductance to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of -60 and cell voltage.
    Calculate the sum of the result and conductance.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.00333.
    Calculate the sum of cell voltage and the result.
    Set cell voltage to the result.
End the loop.
Display cell voltage to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the facilitating synapse needs a few lines of clear arithmetic run at three different input rates, and readability matters more than speed for a single cell.

DT = 0.1          # ms per step
U0 = 0.05         # very low initial release probability, set by Elfn1 and mGluR7
TAU_F = 200.0     # facilitation relaxes to baseline over ~200 ms
TAU_SYN = 15.0    # excitatory conductance decay on the Martinotti cell, ms
TAU_M = 30.0      # Martinotti membrane time constant, ms
V_REST, V_TH = -60.0, -45.0
W = 120.0         # synaptic weight scale, mV per unit release

def run(rate_hz, n_spikes=8, total_ms=400.0):
    """Drive one Martinotti cell with a burst of pyramidal spikes."""
    u, g, v, out, peak = U0, 0.0, V_REST, 0, V_REST
    arrivals = [i * (1000.0 / rate_hz) for i in range(n_spikes)]
    nxt = 0
    for step in range(int(total_ms / DT)):
        t = step * DT
        u += DT * (U0 - u) / TAU_F
        g -= DT * g / TAU_SYN
        while nxt < len(arrivals) and arrivals[nxt] <= t:
            u += U0 * (1.0 - u)       # each spike makes the next one stronger
            g += W * u
            nxt += 1
        v += DT * ((V_REST - v) + g) / TAU_M
        peak = max(peak, v)
        if v >= V_TH:
            out += 1
            v = V_REST
    return out, peak

for rate in (5.0, 20.0, 50.0):
    spikes, peak = run(rate)
    print(f"burst at {rate:5.1f} Hz -> Martinotti spikes {spikes}, peak {peak:6.2f} mV")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Look for a bitufted cell whose axon ignores its neighbours' cell bodies entirely, climbs to the very top of the cortex and fans out under the surface.

Then test it: a single spike in the pyramidal cell next door does nothing, a burst makes the Martinotti cell fire and silence the neighbourhood, and no other cortical neuron combines an axon that ends in layer 1 with a synapse that must be earned by a burst.

CHAPTER 23. NON-MARTINOTTI CELLS (Sentry-Freeing Entry-Layer Neuron) (COG)

This cell carries the same peptide as the Martinotti cell and does the opposite job: instead of climbing to the roof to silence the cortex, it stays downstairs and switches off the guards, letting incoming sensation through.

Non-Martinotti defines a cell only by what it is not, which teaches a student nothing.

Sentry-Freeing names the target and the effect: these cells preferentially inhibit the fast-spiking parvalbumin basket cells that stand guard over layer 4 cell bodies, releasing the entry layer from inhibition rather than muting it.

Entry-Layer names where the axon goes: unlike Martinotti cells, whose axons climb to layer 1, these cells send their axons into layer 4 - the layer where signals from the thalamus first enter the cortical sheet.

Neuron marks it as a functional cortical cell, warning of the classic error where its own quasi-fast spikes lead to it being mistaken for the very sentries it inhibits.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A non-Martinotti cell is an inhibitory cortical neuron releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and carrying the peptide somatostatin, exactly like a Martinotti cell, but whose axon never reaches layer 1.

The name is honestly negative, defining the cell by what it does not do; its axon stays in the middle and lower layers and, in sensory cortex, aims especially at layer 4, the layer that receives raw input from the thalamus, the brain's sensory relay.

Its most surprising job is disinhibition: it preferentially inhibits the fast-spiking parvalbumin interneurons of layer 4, and because those were holding layer 4 down, silencing them lets layer 4 speak louder.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is small to medium, multipolar or bitufted, with sparsely spiny dendrites.

The axon branches locally into a compact, roughly spherical or basket-like arbor with a strong horizontal component, and in the layer 5 population a prominent ascending branch that stops in layer 4 instead of continuing to the surface.

Beside a Martinotti cell the difference is immediate: one arbor is a tall lollipop reaching the surface, the other a dense ball sitting on the thalamic input layer.

SIZE:

Somata are 10 to 18 micrometres across.

The arbor spans 200 to 500 micrometres horizontally and rarely exceeds 400 micrometres vertically, keeping the cell inside two or three layers, for a total axonal length of one to three centimetres, shorter than a Martinotti cell's because none is spent climbing.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Layer 4 targeting non-Martinotti cells, captured by the X94 mouse line and matching the somatostatin HPSE transcriptomic type, with somata in layer 4 and upper layer 5.

• Deep-layer non-Martinotti cells associated with the somatostatin MYH8 type, in layer 5b and layer 6 with local arbors.

• Basket-like somatostatin cells whose terminals cluster near target cell bodies rather than on dendrites.

• A human counterpart is likely but not yet firmly named, the closest published match being a somatostatin variant with a sparse, sparsely branching axon and a strong descending component.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Somata sit in layers 4, 5a, 5b and 6 of the neocortex, with the layer 4 targeting form concentrated at the boundary between layer 4 and layer 5a.

The population is strikingly area-dependent: in mouse barrel cortex the somatostatin cells of layer 4 are non-Martinotti, whereas in mouse visual cortex the layer 4 somatostatin cells are Martinotti cells, so the same layer is wired differently in two sensory areas.

The interface it occupies is therefore the thalamic input interface, where signals arriving from outside the cortex are first inspected.

NUMBER:

There is no direct human count.

Taking non-Martinotti cells as roughly a quarter to a third of cortical somatostatin cells, and somatostatin cells as about 30 percent of the 3.2 billion cortical inhibitory neurons, gives about 190 million, range 100 to 320 million, which is about 1.2 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons and roughly 6 percent of cortical inhibitory neurons.

Confidence is low for a specific reason: the split between Martinotti and non-Martinotti somatostatin cells varies by cortical area, so any single global fraction is a rough average rather than a constant.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These cells are described as quasi-fast-spiking, firing narrow action potentials at high rates but with a distinctive stuttering pattern in which bursts are separated by irregular silent gaps.

Input resistance is lower than a Martinotti cell's at 100 to 250 megaohms, the membrane time constant is shorter at 8 to 20 milliseconds, and the low-threshold calcium rebound that defines Martinotti cells is weak or absent.

Maximum sustained rates of 50 to 120 hertz place them between true fast-spiking parvalbumin cells and slow, adapting Martinotti cells.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input arrives from local excitatory cells in layers 4 and 5 and, importantly, directly from thalamic fibres, so the cell hears sensory input at first hand.

Like other somatostatin cells its excitatory inputs facilitate during a train, though less dramatically than at Martinotti synapses.

Output is aimed disproportionately at parvalbumin fast-spiking interneurons within layer 4, and also at layer 4 excitatory cells and layer 5 pyramidal dendrites, so the net effect on layer 4 is a mixture of direct inhibition and indirect release.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, 0.1 to 0.4 micrometres, densely branched over a short distance, with numerous small boutons, a substantial fraction landing on the somata and proximal dendrites of interneurons rather than on distal pyramidal dendrites.

Conduction delays are well under a millisecond within the local arbor, so unlike the Martinotti cell this type delivers its inhibition promptly.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA plus somatostatin, the same pairing as the Martinotti cell.

Some members co-express neuropeptide Y, and the layer 4 targeting type is marked by the gene HPSE, encoding the enzyme heparanase, which acts on the sugary scaffolding outside the cell; metabotropic glutamate signalling is present but the extreme Elfn1-driven facilitation of Martinotti synapses is weaker here.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated, with no specialised myelin arrangement described.

That absence is itself informative rather than a gap in the record, because the arbor is local and delays are already short, so insulation would buy nothing, and a modeller should therefore use pure cable delays well under one millisecond.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Intermediate: firing rates approach those of fast-spiking cells, but stuttering keeps the average rate over a second far lower, so the sodium and potassium pumping bill falls between a Martinotti and a basket cell.

Peptide synthesis and axonal transport of dense-core vesicles add a modest fixed cost, as for all somatostatin cells.

PLASTICITY:

Because these cells sit on the thalamic input layer, their strength is adjusted whenever sensory input changes, and depriving an animal of a sensory input alters somatostatin inhibition in the corresponding layer 4 within days.

They also gate the plasticity of others, since by controlling the parvalbumin cells that enforce critical period timing they influence when a cortical area can be rewired, while their own synapses strengthen and weaken in the ordinary way.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Layer 4 astrocytes are unusually dense and unusually good at clearing glutamate, because layer 4 receives the fastest and strongest excitatory barrages in the cortex, and these are the astrocytes surrounding non-Martinotti cells.

The heparanase carried by the layer 4 targeting type acts directly on the extracellular sugar matrix that astrocytes help build, suggesting this neuron actively renovates its own glial surroundings, an unusual arrangement; oligodendrocyte and microglial support otherwise appears ordinary.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove non-Martinotti cells and layer 4 loses its volume control.

The fast-spiking cells of layer 4 would run unopposed, so incoming sensory signals would be clamped at a fixed low gain and the cortex could no longer open the gate wider when a stimulus deserved attention or narrow it when the input was noise.

The flavour lost is adaptive sensitivity at the front door: sensation would still arrive, but the cortex would stop deciding how much to let in.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The characteristic non-classical feature is that this cell's main output is a double negative, a sign inversion no single synapse can express.

Stuttering firing makes it an intermittent gate rather than a rate coder, so the gaps carry as much information as the bursts.

It releases somatostatin and sometimes neuropeptide Y by volume transmission, reaching receptors on cells it never contacts, it is gap-junction coupled to other somatostatin cells, and its heparanase lets it remodel the extracellular matrix around it, which is structural engineering rather than signalling.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: thalamocortical excitation (0 to 10 nanosiemens, latency 1 to 3 milliseconds); local layer 4 and layer 5 excitation with moderate facilitation (0 to 12 nanosiemens); inhibition from vasoactive intestinal peptide cells (0 to 5 nanosiemens); acetylcholine (0 to 1 normalised).

• OUTPUTS: GABA type A conductance onto layer 4 parvalbumin interneurons, weighted 2 to 4 times higher than onto excitatory cells, 0.5 to 3 nanosiemens per contact across 50 to 300 targets; weaker conductance onto layer 4 excitatory cells and layer 5 pyramidal dendrites; somatostatin peptide release.

• STATE: membrane potential, adaptation current, stutter phase variable, per-synapse facilitation variable, peptide pool.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 100 to 250 megaohms; membrane time constant 8 to 20 milliseconds; maximum rate 50 to 120 hertz; fraction of output onto parvalbumin cells 0.5 to 0.8; area-dependent abundance, from near zero in some visual cortex layer 4 to dominant in barrel cortex layer 4.

• TIME CONSTANTS: inhibitory decay 10 to 25 milliseconds; stutter interval 20 to 200 milliseconds; facilitation recovery 100 to 300 milliseconds; deprivation-driven change, days.

• FAILURE MODE: if this cell fails, layer 4 fast-spiking inhibition becomes unregulated and sensory gain locks at a fixed value, a plausible substrate for the sensory over-responsivity and under-responsivity reported in autism and fragile X syndrome, and somatostatin subtypes are among the populations prominently affected in single-cell atlases of Alzheimer's disease cortex.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show how a non-Martinotti cell raises the output of layer four by inhibiting the fast-spiking cells that were holding layer four down.
Create a number variable called non martinotti rate with initial value 8.
Create a number variable called fast spiking rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called layer four rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called scratch with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 600 times.
    Calculate the product of non martinotti rate and 1.6.
    Calculate the difference of 12 and the result.
    Set scratch to the result.
    If scratch is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set scratch to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of scratch and fast spiking rate.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.0625.
    Calculate the sum of fast spiking rate and the result.
    Set fast spiking rate to the result.
    Calculate the product of fast spiking rate and 1.2.
    Calculate the difference of 12 and the result.
    Set scratch to the result.
    If scratch is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set scratch to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of scratch and layer four rate.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.0333.
    Calculate the sum of layer four rate and the result.
    Set layer four rate to the result.
End the loop.
Display fast spiking rate to the console.
Display layer four rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the disinhibition motif is three coupled rate equations, and Python lets the three lines sit next to each other where a reader can compare them.

DT = 0.5                       # milliseconds per step
TAU_NMC, TAU_PV, TAU_L4 = 10.0, 8.0, 15.0    # rate time constants, ms
W_NMC_PV = 1.6                 # non-Martinotti cell inhibits the PV interneuron
W_PV_L4 = 1.2                  # PV interneuron inhibits the layer 4 principal cell
THALAMIC = 12.0                # sensory drive reaching PV and principal cells

def relu(x):
    """Firing rates cannot go below zero."""
    return x if x > 0.0 else 0.0

def run(drive_nmc, ms=300.0):
    nmc = pv = l4 = 0.0
    for _ in range(int(ms / DT)):
        nmc += DT * (-nmc + relu(drive_nmc)) / TAU_NMC
        pv  += DT * (-pv + relu(THALAMIC - W_NMC_PV * nmc)) / TAU_PV
        l4  += DT * (-l4 + relu(THALAMIC - W_PV_L4 * pv)) / TAU_L4
    return nmc, pv, l4

for drive in (0.0, 4.0, 8.0):
    nmc, pv, l4 = run(drive)
    print(f"nMC drive {drive:4.1f} -> nMC {nmc:5.2f}  PV {pv:5.2f}  layer 4 {l4:5.2f}")

# Driving an INHIBITORY cell harder makes layer 4 louder, not quieter.
# That sign inversion is the whole point of the non-Martinotti cell.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Stain for somatostatin, then follow the axon: if it carries the peptide but never reaches layer 1, building a dense ball of terminals on the thalamic input layer instead, it is a non-Martinotti cell.

Confirm it electrically by the stuttering, quasi-fast-spiking discharge, and functionally by the paradox that exciting it makes its region more active.

CHAPTER 24. SST-CHODL CELLS (Far-Hushing Slow-Wave Neuron) (COG) (PUC)

This neuron does not whisper to one partner - it exhales a cloud of silence across a patch of cortex the width of a grain of rice, and it does so about once a second all night long.

Far-Hushing records its extraordinary long-range reach: its axon spans millimetres across neocortex, allowing a single cell to coordinate quietude across distant columns.

Slow-Wave describes its timing: it fires rhythmically during deep, non-REM sleep, driving cortical networks into the slow-wave oscillations that define deep restful sleep.

Neuron marks it as the specialized cortical interneuron that enforces global sleep-state synchronization.


This chapter merges the two entries that previously described this same cell, and the alternative name proposed for it, Wide-Travelling Sleep-Onset Neuron, is recorded here as a synonym rather than as a second type.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a Previously Unnamed Construct: a wide-field, volume-transmitting inhibitory neuron of layer 1 whose firing locks to the slow oscillation of deep sleep.

It is assembled from three documented facts that have never been given one name.

First, layer 1 is the richest home of neurogliaform cells, small inhibitory neurons that release gamma-aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical, usually written GABA, into the extracellular space rather than a tidy cleft.

Second, layer 1 cells expressing neuron-derived neurotrophic factor, abbreviated NDNF, produce both fast inhibition through GABA type A receptors and unusually slow inhibition through GABA type B receptors, and they control pyramidal cells in every layer.

Third, these layer 1 cells fall into subpopulations whose activity tracks particular sleep stages and rides with the hippocampal sharp-wave ripples that replay memories.

Together that is a cell whose job is to hush the top of the cortex, broadly and slowly, in time with the sleeping brain's slowest rhythm.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The soma is small and round, with short dendrites radiating in all directions like a sea urchin's spines.

From that small centre grows an enormous, extremely fine axon plexus that looks under a microscope like a ball of spider silk.

The axon carries a bouton, a swelling holding transmitter, roughly every 4 micrometres, and unusually many of those boutons face no postsynaptic partner at all.

That is the anatomical signature of volume transmission: the cell aims at a volume, not a target.

SIZE:

Soma diameter is about 10 to 15 micrometres and the dendritic tree is compact, generally under 200 micrometres across.

The defining feature is the axon plexus, estimated here at 400 to 900 micrometres across, wider than one cortical column.

That figure is an inference, because the best-measured human layer 1 relative, the compact rosehip cell, reaches only about 288 micrometres horizontally, so confidence in the wide-field number is moderate at best.

Total axon length likely exceeds 15 millimetres packed into that small ball.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Human layer 1 has a far richer interneuron repertoire than the mouse, with at least four physiological types: canopy cells, neurogliaform cells, alpha-7 cells and cells expressing vasoactive intestinal peptide.

The far-hushing type sits at the neurogliaform and canopy end of that spectrum, in the transcriptomic groups marked by the gene LAMP5.

A compact relative, the rosehip cell, makes up 10 to 15 percent of layer 1 inhibitory neurons and has boutons of 0.37 cubic micrometres, about four times a neurogliaform cell's.

Human layer 1 also holds neurogliaform cells expressing the transcription factor LHX6, rare in rodents and plentiful in primates.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer 1 of the neocortex, concentrated in its deeper part where apical tufts are thickest, in every cortical area.

It straddles two interfaces a simulation must represent: the layer 1 to layer 2 boundary, where its axon cloud meets pyramidal tufts, and the boundary between neighbouring columns, which its cloud simply ignores.

Relatives occur in all cortical layers, in the hippocampus as ivy cells, and in the amygdala, but the far-hushing form is a layer 1 resident.

NUMBER:

My best estimate is 25 million across both hemispheres, plausible range 15 to 35 million, and confidence is moderate to low.

That is about 0.15 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons and about 0.8 percent of the roughly 3.2 billion inhibitory neurons of the neocortex.

The estimate is anchored on layer 1 holding some 150 to 250 million neurons, essentially all inhibitory, with the wide-field volume-transmitting group taking a modest slice.

Layer 1 cells have been reported as about 8.3 percent of all cortical GABA-releasing cells, which is consistent.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The classic signature is late spiking: inject a steady current and the cell rides a slow ramp for tens or hundreds of milliseconds before its first action potential.

Input resistance is high at roughly 150 to 350 megaohms, and the membrane time constant is 10 to 20 milliseconds.

Resting potential is near minus 65 millivolts, spikes are broad, and firing accelerates through a long current step instead of adapting away.

In deep sleep the cell fires in bursts locked to the up state, the depolarised, active half of the slow oscillation.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from thalamic matrix axons, long-range cortico-cortical feedback fibres in layer 1, cholinergic fibres of the nucleus basalis and local pyramidal collaterals.

Outputs go onto apical tuft dendrites of pyramidal neurons in layers 2, 3 and 5, onto other layer 1 interneurons, and onto the presynaptic terminals of incoming axons, because GABA type B receptors sit there too and switch off transmitter release before it happens.

One action potential is enough to give a partner a two-part response: a slow GABA type A component rising in about 4 milliseconds and decaying with a time constant near 36 milliseconds, then a much slower GABA type B component.

These cells also form gap junctions with each other, so a local group behaves partly as one unit.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Very fine, well under 0.5 micrometres, unmyelinated, branching every 60 to 70 micrometres.

Conduction is slow at roughly 0.1 to 0.3 metres per second, but distances are short so the delay is a fraction of a millisecond.

The axon never leaves layer 1, which is why this cell's influence is broad but shallow.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA is the only fast transmitter, released by volume transmission so that micromolar concentrations linger for tens of milliseconds.

That slow, dilute GABA transient is the mechanistic reason the responses are slow, and it is what recruits GABA type B receptors, which most inhibitory cells cannot do alone.

The cells also secrete NDNF, and many express neuropeptide Y and nitric oxide synthase.

MYELINATION:

None, and layer 1 is nearly free of myelin.

A bare fine axon suits a design where speed is irrelevant and spread is everything.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and unevenly spread.

Spiking is infrequent, but maintaining tens of thousands of boutons and refilling a large releasable GABA pool across a wide plexus is costly.

Because the released GABA must be cleared from a whole volume, this cell externalises part of its energy bill to astrocytes.

PLASTICITY:

The strength of the GABA type B component shifts with sleep pressure and with cholinergic tone, so the inhibition itself is plastic.

Slow inhibition of the apical tuft decides whether inputs arriving at the top of a pyramidal cell can trigger the dendritic calcium spikes that permit long-term potentiation, so this cell is a switch controlling when other synapses may learn.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here do a job they do nowhere else in the cortex: they set the range of a chemical broadcast.

The GABA transporter GAT-3 on astrocyte membranes decides how far the cloud spreads and how long it lasts, making astrocytes the volume control on the signal rather than passive housekeepers.

Layer 1 also holds the primate-specific interlaminar astrocytes whose processes reach a millimetre down into layers 2 to 4, laying a vertical glial scaffold over this cell's horizontal chemical one.

Microglia prune tuft synapses during sleep, so the same patch sees chemical hushing and physical remodelling in the same window.

Oligodendrocyte involvement is negligible.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and layer 1 loses its brake and its clock at once.

Pyramidal tufts would become permanently permissive, so any weak input arriving at the top of the cortex could fire a dendritic calcium spike and be treated as important.

The cortex would lose the deep silent troughs between up states, and the slow wave of deep sleep would flatten into a smear.

The concrete loss is discrimination during sleep, the ability to hold most of the cortex quiet while one memory trace is replayed.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Almost everything interesting here happens outside the classical synapse.

The cell writes to a shared chemical field, so its output is a concentration in a volume, and a faithful simulation needs a diffusion term, not just a connection list.

It acts on presynaptic terminals, changing other cells' release probability without touching their membrane potential.

Its GABA type B action runs through a G protein cascade, a chain of internal messengers, so the effect peaks 150 to 250 milliseconds after the spike that caused it, far later than any axon delay could explain.

Gap junctions synchronise the local group.

By shaping the dendritic calcium spike it edits the pyramidal cell's own nonlinear computation rather than merely subtracting from it.

It also secretes NDNF, a growth-factor-like protein, so it speaks the slow trophic language as well as the fast chemical one.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamatergic drive from thalamic matrix and cortico-cortical feedback axons in layer 1, 0 to 300 picoamps; acetylcholine from nucleus basalis as a gain and burst-threshold modulator; a slow oscillation phase signal from 0 to 2 pi radians at 0.5 to 1.0 hertz; local pyramidal collateral input.

• OUTPUTS: an extracellular GABA field of 0 to 5 micromolar over a radius of 200 to 450 micrometres; GABA type A conductance of 0 to 2 nanosiemens per target; GABA type B potassium conductance of 0 to 60 nanosiemens per target; presynaptic release probability scaled from 1.0 down to 0.3.

• STATE: membrane voltage; slow ramp variable producing late spiking; extracellular GABA concentration; bound GABA type B receptor fraction; activated G protein concentration; coupled neighbour voltage.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 150 to 350 megaohms; GABA added per spike about 0.6 millimolar inside the plexus; Hill coefficient 4 for G protein to channel coupling; half activation at 100 G protein units; maximum potassium conductance about 60 nanosiemens.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; GABA cloud decay about 60 milliseconds; GABA type A slow decay about 36 milliseconds; GABA type B peak at 150 to 250 milliseconds; slow oscillation cycle 1000 to 2000 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: losing this slow, wide inhibition removes the brake on dendritic tufts and is a plausible route into epileptic runaway excitation, since layer 1 is where synchronising feedback arrives; weakened slow-wave sleep and impaired memory consolidation follow, a pattern seen in Alzheimer's disease; excessive activity would instead flatten cortical responsiveness and blunt attention.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a short burst of spikes from a far hushing slow wave neuron into a slow, delayed potassium brake on distant pyramidal tufts.
Create a number variable called cloud with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called bound receptor with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called active g protein with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called peak brake with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called step counter with initial value zero.
While step counter is less than three thousand, repeat the following steps.
    Create a boolean variable called fired with initial value false.
    Calculate the remainder of step counter divided by ten.
    Check if both step counter is greater than or equal to one thousand and step counter is less than one thousand one hundred is true.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Check if that remainder is equal to zero.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set fired to true.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    If fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set cloud to the sum of cloud and six tenths.
    End the conditional block.
    Set cloud to the product of cloud and nine hundred and eighty four thousandths.
    Calculate the difference of one and bound receptor.
    Set bound receptor to the sum of bound receptor and the product of nine hundredths and the product of cloud and that difference.
    Set active g protein to the sum of active g protein and the difference of the product of eighteen hundredths and bound receptor and the product of thirty four thousandths and active g protein.
    Create a number variable called g squared with initial value zero.
    Set g squared to the product of active g protein and active g protein.
    Create a number variable called g fourth with initial value zero.
    Set g fourth to the product of g squared and g squared.
    Create a number variable called brake with initial value zero.
    Set brake to the quotient of g fourth divided by the sum of g fourth and one hundred.
    Check if brake is greater than peak brake.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set peak brake to brake.
    End the conditional block.
    Set step counter to the sum of step counter and one.
End the loop.
Display peak brake to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the computation of interest is a slow chemical cascade measured in hundreds of milliseconds, not microsecond spike timing, so a readable millisecond loop is exactly right.

# Python model of volume-transmitted GABA and the slow GABA-B brake it creates.
DT = 1.0                     # time step, milliseconds
K1, K2 = 0.09, 0.0012        # GABA-B binding and unbinding, per ms
K3, K4 = 0.18, 0.034         # G protein made and destroyed, per ms
KD, N = 100.0, 4.0           # four G proteins must gather to open one channel
G_KMAX, E_K = 0.06, -95.0    # potassium channel: microsiemens, mV
TAU_CLOUD = 60.0             # the GABA cloud drains in ~60 ms
PER_SPIKE = 0.6              # millimolar added to the cloud by one spike

def run(spike_steps, n_steps):
    gaba = r = g = 0.0       # cloud, bound receptor fraction, active G protein
    v_post, peak_gk, peak_t = -70.0, 0.0, 0
    for k in range(n_steps):
        if k in spike_steps:
            gaba += PER_SPIKE
        gaba += DT * (-gaba / TAU_CLOUD)             # diffusion plus uptake
        r += DT * (K1 * gaba * (1.0 - r) - K2 * r)   # slow binding, slower release
        g += DT * (K3 * r - K4 * g)
        gn = pow(g, N)                               # four G proteins per channel
        gk = G_KMAX * gn / (gn + KD)                 # the hush: potassium opens
        if gk > peak_gk:
            peak_gk, peak_t = gk, k
    return peak_gk, peak_t, peak_gk * (v_post - E_K)  # conductance, time, nanoamps

burst = set(1000 + 10 * i for i in range(10))        # ten spikes at 100 Hz at t = 1 s
gk, when, i_k = run(burst, 3000)
print("peak potassium conductance %.4f uS at %d ms (%d ms after the burst), %.3f nA"
      % (gk, when, when - 1000, i_k))

Run, it prints a peak potassium conductance of 0.0529 microsiemens arriving 172 milliseconds after the burst ends, worth 1.322 nanoamps of outward current.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Fire one cell once and a hush spreads over half a millimetre of cortex, arriving a fifth of a second late and lasting a quarter of a second.

No other cortical neuron produces a GABA type B response from a single spike, and none combines a tiny body, a spider-silk axon ball confined to layer 1, and a firing pattern that ticks with the slow wave of sleep.

CHAPTER 25. BIPOLAR CELLS (COG)

A bipolar cell is the brain's permission slip: a thin upright cell whose whole job is to switch off other switch-off cells, so that a patch of cortex can suddenly listen harder.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A bipolar cell is a small nerve cell in the cerebral cortex, the folded outer sheet of the brain that carries out perception, language and thought.

It is inhibitory, which means it releases gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the chemical the brain uses to make other cells less likely to fire.

Most cortical bipolar cells also carry vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), a short chain of amino acids used as a slow chemical message.

In humans and other primates these same cells almost always carry calretinin, a protein that mops up calcium and is used by anatomists as a stain-visible label.

Here is the surprise: a bipolar cell mostly inhibits other inhibitory cells rather than the excitatory pyramidal cells that do the region's main work.

Its favourite target is the somatostatin-expressing interneuron, a cell that clamps down on the far branches of pyramidal cells.

So when a bipolar cell fires, it takes the brakes off those branches, an effect called disinhibition.

The practical consequence is attention: when you notice something, bipolar cells across the relevant cortical area are firing, and the pyramidal cells there are briefly allowed to listen to inputs they had been ignoring.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The name says it: two poles.

One thin bundle of dendrites, the branches that collect input, runs straight up towards the brain surface, and another runs straight down.

The result is a tall, narrow, spindle-shaped cell that occupies a column of tissue barely wider than a human hair is thick.

The upward dendrite usually reaches layer 1, the almost cell-free surface layer where long-range feedback axons from other brain areas arrive.

The axon, the output cable, leaves the cell body and descends, branching sparsely across many layers rather than densely in one.

A subpopulation carries dendritic spines, small mushroom-shaped protrusions that receive excitatory contacts, and these spines are unusually mobile, appearing and vanishing over hours.

SIZE:

The cell body is small, roughly 8 to 12 micrometres across, which is about one tenth the width of a human hair.

The dendritic field is narrow, typically 50 to 100 micrometres wide, but tall, often 400 to 800 micrometres from top to bottom.

The axon runs vertically through most of the cortical depth, with a total branch length in the low millimetres.

These figures come mainly from rodent and monkey reconstructions; matched human measurements exist but are sparse, so treat them as approximate.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Classical bipolar cells with two tight dendritic tufts and a descending, translaminar axon.

• Bitufted or modified bipolar cells, which are the same plan with a slightly wider spread at each pole.

• Spiny bipolar cells, a minority whose dendrites carry highly dynamic spines.

• Interneuron-selective bipolar cells, which contact almost nothing but other interneurons and are the purest disinhibitory form.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies concentrate in layer 2 and upper layer 3 of the neocortex, with a smaller population in layers 4, 5 and 6.

They are found in every neocortical area, including primary visual cortex, primary auditory cortex, primary somatosensory cortex, motor cortex and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.

The dendritic tuft sits at an interface that matters: the boundary between layer 1 and layer 2, where feedback axons from higher cortical areas and from the thalamus, the brain's central relay station, terminate.

The descending axon crosses the layer 3 to layer 5 interface, so a single cell samples the surface and speaks to the depths.

NUMBER:

This batch of six types is allocated about 1.0 billion of the 3.2 billion inhibitory neurons in the 16.34 billion neuron neocortex, which is about 31 percent of cortical inhibitory cells and about 6.2 percent of all neocortical neurons.

For bipolar cells specifically I allocate about 300 million, with a defensible range of 250 to 450 million.

That is roughly 9 percent of cortical inhibitory neurons, about 1.8 percent of all neocortical neurons, and about 0.35 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole human nervous system.

Confidence is moderate, not high.

The reason is a genuine tension in the literature: calretinin-positive cells have been reported at about 8 percent of all neurons in human cortical areas, and up to half of them are bipolar, which would push the figure above 600 million, but that clashes with the widely used estimate that calretinin cells are 10 to 30 percent of cortical GABA cells.

I have taken the conservative figure and flag the higher one as an upper bound rather than invent false precision.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting membrane voltage is about minus 60 to minus 65 millivolts.

Input resistance is high, commonly 200 to 500 megohms, meaning a small current makes a large voltage change, so these cells are easy to excite.

The membrane time constant is slow for an interneuron, around 15 to 25 milliseconds.

Firing is irregular spiking or bursting rather than fast spiking, with action potentials that broaden and slow during a train, a pattern called accommodation.

Typical rates in an awake animal are a few spikes per second at rest, rising to 20 to 60 spikes per second during arousal, reward or punishment.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from three main places: long-range excitatory axons from other cortical areas, thalamic axons, and neuromodulatory axons from the basal forebrain and brainstem.

Serotonin and acetylcholine both excite these cells directly, through the ionotropic serotonin receptor 5HT3a and through nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, which is why they respond within tens of milliseconds to a change in behavioural state.

Outputs go preferentially onto somatostatin-expressing interneurons, especially Martinotti cells, and secondarily onto parvalbumin-expressing basket cells and onto pyramidal dendritic shafts and spines.

The synapse onto a somatostatin cell is small but reliable and strongly facilitating, meaning it grows stronger during a burst.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, typically 0.2 to 0.4 micrometres in diameter, and conducts slowly, on the order of 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second.

It descends as a narrow vertical stalk with widely spaced boutons, the swellings where transmitter is released, rather than forming a dense local basket.

Total bouton count per cell is modest for an interneuron, in the high hundreds to low thousands.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The fast transmitter is GABA, acting on GABA-A receptors, which are chloride channels that open in about a millisecond.

The co-transmitter is vasoactive intestinal peptide, released from dense-core vesicles only when the cell fires in bursts, and acting on VPAC1 and VPAC2 receptors over seconds.

Many of these cells also express calretinin, which is not released but buffers internal calcium and shapes how transmitter release adapts.

A minority co-express cholecystokinin, a second peptide, and a smaller minority express choline acetyltransferase, the enzyme that makes acetylcholine.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated.

Myelin is the fatty insulation that speeds conduction, and these thin local axons do not receive it, which is one reason they are slow.

The absence is functional, not accidental: a slow, spatially spread signal suits a modulatory gate.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest compared with a fast-spiking cell, because the firing rate is low and the axon is short.

Estimated energy use is on the order of 10 to 20 percent of that of a parvalbumin basket cell of similar volume.

Peptide production is the expensive part: making, packaging and transporting VIP-filled dense-core vesicles requires sustained protein synthesis and axonal transport, so the cell keeps a well-developed Golgi apparatus, the organelle that packages proteins for export.

PLASTICITY:

Excitatory synapses onto these cells undergo long-term potentiation, a lasting strengthening, and in layer 2 and 3 the induction is postsynaptic while the expression is presynaptic, meaning the change is triggered in the bipolar cell but ends up as more transmitter released onto it.

Their dendritic spines turn over unusually fast, on a timescale of hours, so the map of who talks to them is rewritten continuously.

Their output synapses onto somatostatin cells are subject to short-term facilitation, giving burst-dependent gain.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes, the star-shaped support cells, do something specific here: they express VPAC receptors, so the peptide this neuron releases acts on the glia as well as on neurons, raising astrocytic cyclic adenosine monophosphate and promoting glycogen breakdown to fuel local activity.

The same astrocytes relay the vasodilator signal onto nearby capillaries, so this cell type has a privileged line to the blood supply.

Microglia, the brain's resident immune cells, prune the fast-turning-over spines of these cells during development, and the perineuronal net, the lattice of sugar-protein that armours parvalbumin cells, is absent here, leaving these cells structurally plastic into adulthood.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove bipolar cells and the cortex keeps working but loses its volume knob.

Sensory responses become flat and stimulus-locked: the region would respond the same way whether the animal was attending, rewarded, punished, running or still.

Feedback from higher areas would arrive in layer 1 and fail to change anything, because the somatostatin brake on distal dendrites would never lift.

The flavour that disappears is context: the ability of the same input to mean something different depending on what the animal is doing.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Vasoactive intestinal peptide released from this cell is a potent vasodilator, and stimulating a single VIP interneuron in a cortical slice widens nearby microvessels, so this neuron literally opens its own blood supply.

Peptide release is volume transmission: the molecule diffuses tens of micrometres and acts on any cell carrying the receptor, with no synapse required.

Back-propagating action potentials, spikes that travel backwards from the cell body into the dendrites, license calcium entry at the spines and gate spine turnover.

Calretinin buffering means intracellular calcium transients are brief, which shortens the window for calcium-dependent plasticity.

Local protein synthesis in the dendrites supports the rapid spine remodelling, and nicotinic receptor activation triggers gene transcription through calcium-responsive pathways, coupling arousal to lasting change.

These cells are electrically coupled to each other by gap junctions, protein channels that let current pass directly between cells, in early life more than in adulthood.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Long-range cortico-cortical excitation onto the dendritic tuft, 0 to 40 spikes per second per afferent, glutamatergic.

◦ Thalamic excitation onto proximal dendrites, 0 to 60 spikes per second, glutamatergic.

◦ Acetylcholine from the nucleus basalis of Meynert acting on nicotinic receptors, treated as a 0 to 1 normalised drive.

◦ Serotonin from the dorsal raphe nucleus acting on 5HT3a receptors, 0 to 1 normalised drive.

◦ Inhibition from other interneurons, 0 to 5 nanosiemens peak conductance.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA onto somatostatin interneurons, peak conductance 0.3 to 1.5 nanosiemens per connection, facilitating.

◦ GABA onto parvalbumin basket cells and onto pyramidal dendrites, 0.1 to 0.6 nanosiemens.

◦ Vasoactive intestinal peptide into the extracellular space, effective radius 20 to 50 micrometres, released only above about 15 spikes per second.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, refractory timer, spike-frequency adaptation variable, internal calcium concentration, dense-core vesicle pool level, and per-synapse facilitation variables.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting voltage minus 62 millivolts, threshold minus 40 millivolts, input resistance 200 to 500 megohms, membrane time constant 15 to 25 milliseconds, refractory period 2 to 4 milliseconds, peptide release threshold about 15 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ GABA-A synaptic decay 6 to 12 milliseconds, membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds, facilitation 100 to 300 milliseconds, peptide action 1 to 30 seconds, spine turnover hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of the gene MECP2 from these cells alone reproduces much of Rett syndrome in mice, including social and behavioural deficits, so failure here weakens inhibition overall, blocks experience-dependent plasticity and derails cortical maturation.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide at each time step whether a bipolar cell fires, and how strongly it lifts somatostatin inhibition off a pyramidal dendrite.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value negative sixty two.
Create a number variable called firing_threshold with initial value negative forty.
Create a number variable called peptide_release_threshold with initial value fifteen.
Create a number variable called recent_spike_rate with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called somatostatin_brake with initial value one.
Create a list variable called spike_times with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called current_time with initial value zero.
While current_time is less than three hundred, repeat the following steps.
    Set long_range_drive to the excitation arriving from other cortical areas.
    Set acetylcholine_drive to the arousal signal arriving from the basal forebrain.
    Calculate the sum of long_range_drive and acetylcholine_drive.
    Set total_drive to the result.
    Calculate the difference of total_drive and membrane_voltage.
    Set voltage_change to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of voltage_change divided by twenty.
    Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and the result.
    If membrane_voltage is greater than or equal to firing_threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Add current_time to the end of spike_times.
        Set membrane_voltage to negative fifty five.
        Set somatostatin_brake to the product of somatostatin_brake and zero point six five.
    End the conditional block.
    Get the total number of items in spike_times.
    Set recent_spike_rate to the result.
    If recent_spike_rate is greater than peptide_release_threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Display "release vasoactive intestinal peptide and dilate the local vessel" to the console.
    End the conditional block.
    Set somatostatin_brake to the sum of somatostatin_brake and zero point zero one.
    Set current_time to the sum of current_time and one.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the model is small, the arithmetic is plain, and readability matters most here.
DT = 0.5  # milliseconds per step

class Unit:
    """A leaky integrator that turns input current into a firing rate."""
    def __init__(self, tau, gain, thresh):
        self.tau, self.gain, self.thresh, self.v = tau, gain, thresh, 0.0
    def step(self, drive):
        self.v += DT * (-self.v + drive) / self.tau
        return max(0.0, self.gain * (self.v - self.thresh))  # rate, arbitrary units

vip = Unit(tau=18.0, gain=2.0, thresh=0.20)   # high input resistance, slow membrane
sst = Unit(tau=25.0, gain=1.5, thresh=0.10)   # dendrite-targeting partner cell
pyr = Unit(tau=12.0, gain=1.0, thresh=0.00)   # one pyramidal apical dendrite

r_vip = r_sst = 0.0
for step in range(600):                        # 300 ms of simulated time
    ms = step * DT
    attending = 100.0 <= ms < 200.0
    acetylcholine = 0.8 if attending else 0.0  # burst from the basal forebrain
    long_range = 0.6 if attending else 0.2     # axon arriving from another area
    r_vip = vip.step(long_range + acetylcholine)
    r_sst = sst.step(0.50 - 0.35 * r_vip)      # the bipolar cell silences SST
    r_pyr = pyr.step(0.70 - 0.30 * r_sst)      # the dendrite is released from inhibition
    if step % 100 == 0:
        print("t=%6.1f ms  VIP=%5.2f  SST=%5.2f  PYR=%5.2f" % (ms, r_vip, r_sst, r_pyr))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A tall narrow two-poled cell in layer 2 or 3, stained by calretinin and by vasoactive intestinal peptide, firing irregularly, and wiring almost exclusively onto other inhibitory cells.

If you find an inhibitory cell whose main effect on a pyramidal neuron is to excite it, you have found a bipolar cell.

CHAPTER 26. DOUBLE BOUQUET CELLS (COG)

Stain a slice of human cortex for one protein and a forest appears: thousands of thin vertical tassels, hanging down in near-perfect ranks about 30 micrometres apart, like the warp threads of a loom.

Double Bouquet is a shape name that describes the axon's tight vertical horsetail bundle, which hangs through the cortical layers to inhibit the dendrites of pyramidal cells within an extremely narrow column.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A double bouquet cell is an inhibitory cortical neuron whose axon collapses into a single narrow vertical rope called a horsetail.

Inhibitory again means it releases gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main calming transmitter.

The horsetail descends through several cortical layers and releases GABA almost exclusively onto the dendrites and dendritic spines of pyramidal cells inside one very narrow vertical cylinder of tissue.

It does not touch cell bodies, which is the opposite of a basket cell.

Functionally it is a vertical privacy screen: it isolates one microcolumn, a strip of cortex only a few tens of micrometres wide, from the excitatory drive spilling in from its neighbours.

It is also close to a primate speciality.

Classic horsetail bundles are prominent in monkey and human cortex, and have been very hard to find in rats and mice, which is one reason rodent-based models of cortex may be missing a layer of structure that human cortex has.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Two tufts of dendrites, one going up and one going down, give the cell its name.

From the lower pole the axon emerges and immediately turns into a tight vertical bundle of thin, wavy, densely beaded branches.

The bundle looks like a horse's tail, hence the anatomical nickname.

In human temporal neocortex these bundles were measured at a mean diameter of 12.10 plus or minus 0.63 micrometres, with a mean centre-to-centre spacing of 29.8 plus or minus 0.91 micrometres, and a density of 11.65 plus or minus 0.44 bundles per 10,000 square micrometres.

Those bundles line up one-to-one with the bundles of myelinated axons that also run vertically, so the inhibitory scaffold and the output scaffold of the microcolumn share an address.

SIZE:

The cell body is small to medium, roughly 10 to 15 micrometres across.

The dendritic tufts each extend 150 to 300 micrometres vertically and stay within about 100 micrometres horizontally.

The horsetail descends 800 to 1500 micrometres, from layer 2 down through layers 3, 4 and into layer 5, while staying inside a cylinder about 12 micrometres wide.

Total axonal length is estimated in the several millimetres, carrying on the order of 2000 to 5000 boutons, with the bouton density highest in layer 3.

The morphometric numbers above are directly measured in human tissue and are among the more solid figures in this chapter; the bouton counts are estimates.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Calbindin-dominant double bouquet cells, the classic form, with a long horsetail through layers 2 to 5.

• Calretinin-co-expressing double bouquet cells, which in human temporal cortex are the vast majority, since most calbindin-positive horsetails are also calretinin-positive.

• Short-horsetail variants confined to layers 2 and 3.

• Somatostatin-expressing forms, reflecting the finding that more than 40 percent of calbindin cells in human cortex carry somatostatin and more than 80 percent of somatostatin cells carry calbindin.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in layer 2 and upper layer 3 of the neocortex.

The horsetails are found across the cortical mantle, and have been documented in primary visual cortex (area 17), secondary visual cortex (area 18), temporal neocortex, and prefrontal areas, with regional differences in bundle density.

The critical interface is vertical rather than horizontal: the cell straddles the layer 2 to layer 3 boundary with its soma and crosses the layer 4 to layer 5 boundary with its axon.

Because the axon bundle sits inside a bundle of myelinated pyramidal axons, the cell also lives at the interface between the inhibitory network and the cortical output cable tract.

NUMBER:

I allocate about 170 million double bouquet cells, with a defensible range of 120 to 250 million.

That is roughly 5.3 percent of cortical inhibitory neurons, about 1.0 percent of all neocortical neurons, and about 0.2 percent of the whole nervous system.

Confidence is moderate.

The anchor is good for once: at about 11.65 bundles per 10,000 square micrometres of cortical surface, and a human neocortical surface area of roughly 2000 square centimetres for both hemispheres, the horsetail count comes out in the hundreds of millions, which is consistent with the allocation above.

The uncertainty is whether every bundle corresponds to exactly one cell, which is not established.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting membrane voltage around minus 65 millivolts.

Input resistance moderate to high, roughly 150 to 350 megohms.

Firing is adapting and non-fast-spiking, with a clear delay to the first spike in some cells, and typical steady rates of 5 to 30 spikes per second.

Human recordings show that spine-innervating double bouquet cells receive spontaneous inhibitory currents that are modulated differently from those of parvalbumin dendrite-targeting cells by group three metabotropic glutamate receptors, a class of slow glutamate sensor, so their input tuning is pharmacologically distinct.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input comes from local pyramidal cells within the same or adjacent microcolumn and from thalamic afferents.

Output is startlingly selective: in monkey cortex about 48 percent of calbindin-positive double bouquet cell synapses are onto dendritic spines, most of the rest onto dendritic shafts, and essentially none onto somata.

The postsynaptic partners include both pyramidal cells and non-pyramidal cells.

Because spines are where excitatory synapses live, this cell places its inhibition exactly where excitation arrives, one spine at a time.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, in the range 0.1 to 0.3 micrometres, unmyelinated, slow, with conduction velocities well under 0.5 metres per second.

Boutons are packed closely along wavy collaterals, giving the beaded appearance under the microscope.

The defining feature is geometric: the arbor is one to two orders of magnitude narrower horizontally than that of any basket cell.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA is the transmitter, acting mainly on GABA-A receptors on spine heads and dendritic shafts.

Calbindin D-28k and calretinin are the calcium-binding markers; they are not released.

A substantial minority co-release somatostatin, a peptide that acts on somatostatin receptors over seconds and suppresses local excitability, and some carry neuropeptide Y.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated, but with a twist that matters for simulation: the horsetail runs inside a bundle of heavily myelinated pyramidal axons.

That means this unmyelinated inhibitory axon is packed among insulated cables, in a geometry that favours ephaptic effects, where the electric field of one axon nudges its neighbours without any synapse.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate.

Thousands of boutons must be supplied with vesicles and mitochondria over a long thin axon, so axonal transport is a continuous cost, but the low firing rate keeps sodium pumping modest.

PLASTICITY:

Spine-targeted inhibition can be gated on and off spine by spine, and the number of inhibitory synapses on any given spine changes with experience.

The cell's own excitatory inputs show long-term plasticity, and group three metabotropic glutamate receptors provide a slow presynaptic control that shifts its inhibitory input over minutes.

Because the cell defines microcolumn boundaries, its structural plasticity is one plausible substrate for the sharpening of cortical maps during learning.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here have an unusual job: they must clear GABA from a very confined vertical cylinder without letting it spill sideways, and astrocytic processes are correspondingly aligned along the bundle.

Oligodendrocytes, the cells that make myelin, are abundant in the same bundle because of the myelinated pyramidal axons, and their processes physically bound the horsetail, which may be what keeps it so narrow.

Microglia are unremarkable here.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete double bouquet cells and the cortex loses its vertical grain.

Activity that should stay in one microcolumn would bleed sideways into its neighbours, so fine discriminations that depend on adjacent columns representing slightly different things - two nearby orientations, two neighbouring fingertips, two similar speech sounds - would blur together.

The region would still respond, but with lower spatial resolution and less crisp tuning.

In a human brain this would also erase one of the few architectural features that visibly distinguishes primate cortex from rodent cortex.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Inhibition placed on a spine head does not merely subtract; it divides, because the open chloride channel short-circuits the excitatory current arriving at that spine, a mechanism called shunting inhibition.

That makes this cell a multiplier, not an adder.

Somatostatin released from a subset of these cells acts by volume transmission down the same narrow cylinder, giving a slow, spatially confined suppression.

The tight packing of the horsetail inside a myelinated bundle permits ephaptic coupling and constrains the extracellular potassium and GABA concentration inside the column.

Local dendritic protein synthesis supports the maintenance of the long, thin, bouton-dense axon, and the cell instructs the placement of inhibitory synapses onto spines through cell-adhesion signalling.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Local pyramidal excitation, 0 to 40 spikes per second per afferent, glutamatergic, mainly onto proximal dendrites.

◦ Thalamic excitation, 0 to 50 spikes per second.

◦ Inhibition from other interneurons, modulated by group three metabotropic glutamate receptors.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA onto pyramidal dendritic spines, about 48 percent of contacts, peak conductance 0.2 to 0.8 nanosiemens per contact.

◦ GABA onto dendritic shafts, most of the remainder.

◦ Somatostatin by volume transmission in a subset, effective radius under 20 micrometres.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, adaptation current, per-bouton vesicle pool, per-spine chloride conductance, and the column identity index that determines which targets are reachable.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Bundle radius about 6 micrometres, bundle spacing 29.8 micrometres, bouton count 2000 to 5000, spine-targeting fraction 0.48, resting voltage minus 65 millivolts.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ GABA-A decay 6 to 10 milliseconds, membrane 12 to 20 milliseconds, adaptation 100 to 400 milliseconds, somatostatin action 1 to 10 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss or thinning of calbindin-positive interneurons is reported in schizophrenia and in some epilepsies, and in simulation the predicted consequence is loss of microcolumnar separation, with excitation spreading laterally and cortical tuning becoming coarse.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to apply the shunting inhibition of one double bouquet cell to the dendritic spines inside its own microcolumn and to no others.
Create a number variable called bundle_radius with initial value six.
Create a number variable called spine_index with initial value zero.
Create a list variable called spine_conductances with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called spikes_delivered with initial value zero.
For each spine in the local tissue volume, perform the following operations.
    Set horizontal_distance to the distance from the spine to the centre of the horsetail.
    If horizontal_distance is less than or equal to bundle_radius, then perform the following actions.
        Set bouton_density to the bouton density of the horsetail at the depth of this spine.
        Calculate the product of bouton_density and zero point zero zero one.
        Set added_conductance to the result.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set added_conductance to zero.
    End the conditional block.
    Add added_conductance to the end of spine_conductances.
    Set spine_index to the sum of spine_index and one.
End the loop.
Repeat the following steps exactly twenty times.
    For each conductance in spine_conductances, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the product of conductance and zero point eight eight.
        Set conductance to the result.
        Calculate the product of conductance and sixty.
        Set shunt_factor to the sum of one and the result.
        Calculate the quotient of one divided by shunt_factor.
        Set spine_gain to the result.
        Display spine_gain to the console.
    End the loop.
    Set spikes_delivered to the sum of spikes_delivered and one.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the computation is geometric bookkeeping over a column, not timing critical.
import math

BUNDLE_RADIUS = 15.0        # micrometres; bundles sit about 30 um apart in human cortex
TAU_GABA_A = 8.0            # milliseconds, decay of the inhibitory conductance

def bouton_density(depth_um):
    """Boutons per 100 um of horsetail axon, densest in layer 3."""
    return 12.0 * math.exp(-((depth_um - 700.0) ** 2) / (2.0 * 400.0 ** 2))

class Spine:
    def __init__(self, x_um, depth_um):
        self.x, self.depth, self.g, self.gain = x_um, depth_um, 0.0, 1.0

spines = [Spine(x, d) for x in (2.0, 9.0, 22.0, 40.0)
                      for d in (300.0, 700.0, 1100.0, 1600.0)]

def horsetail_spike(spines, dt=1.0):
    """One action potential in the double bouquet cell, then dt milliseconds of decay."""
    for s in spines:
        if abs(s.x) <= BUNDLE_RADIUS:                     # only inside its own bundle
            s.g += 0.0010 * bouton_density(s.depth)       # nanosiemens added per spike
        s.g *= math.exp(-dt / TAU_GABA_A)
        s.gain = 1.0 / (1.0 + 60.0 * s.g)                 # shunting divides the spine gain

for _ in range(20):                                       # a 20 Hz-equivalent train
    horsetail_spike(spines)

for s in spines:
    if s.x in (2.0, 40.0):
        print("x=%5.1f um  depth=%6.1f um  g=%7.5f nS  spine gain=%5.3f"
              % (s.x, s.depth, s.g, s.gain))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else in the cortex makes a pencil-thin vertical rope of axon a dozen micrometres wide and more than a millimetre long, spaced at regular 30 micrometre intervals across the whole sheet, targeting spines and never somata.

If you see the horsetail, you have seen a double bouquet cell.

CHAPTER 27. SMALL BASKET CELLS OF THE VIP TYPE (Slim-Column Soma-Targeting Neuron) (COG)

This is the cortex's dimmer switch: a small cell that grips the body of its neighbour, then lets that neighbour tell it to loosen its grip.

The existing label welds a shape word onto a peptide barcode (VIP, or vasoactive intestinal polypeptide), which tells a reader nothing about the cell's function.

Slim-Column names the reach: the axons run vertically in a narrow columnar plume rather than spreading sideways like large basket cells, confining restraint to a thin vertical slice of cortex.

Soma-Targeting describes the precise target: these cells throw terminals around the cell bodies (soma) and proximal dendrites of their targets, right where a neuron's output decision is made.

Neuron marks it as a functional cortical interneuron, whose specific behavioral role within the vasoactive intestinal polypeptide population remains an active area of study.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This small inhibitory neuron of the cerebral cortex quietens other cells rather than exciting them.

It is a basket cell because its output fibre weaves a loose basket around its neighbours' cell bodies, and the VIP type because it makes vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), a small messenger first found in the gut.

It sets how hard inhibition presses at the exact point where a target neuron decides whether to fire.

The target can push back with fatty messengers that switch this cell off for seconds, so this is inhibition the recipient can negotiate with.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is small and round with three to five branches leaving in different directions, a shape called multipolar.

Its receiving branches, the dendrites, are smooth rather than studded, and its output fibre, the axon, coils into a dense local tangle whose swellings cluster around neighbouring cell bodies.

SIZE:

• Cell body diameter is 10 to 15 micrometres, one seventh the width of a human hair.

• The dendritic field spans 150 to 300 micrometres and the axon tangle 200 to 400 micrometres.

• Total axon length is a few millimetres, carrying roughly 800 to 2000 release sites.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Compact small basket cells of layers two and three, with the tightest tangle.

• Looser nest basket variants forming open cradles rather than baskets.

• Sparser deep variants in layers five and six with wider axon fields.

• A human-enriched form with more elaborate dendrites than its rodent equivalent.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It occupies the whole neocortex, the six-layered sheet covering each hemisphere, commonest in layers two and three and sparser in layers five and six.

Many sit exactly at the layer one and layer two boundary, sending dendrites into layer one, so they read surface feedback and act one layer below it.

NUMBER:

The best estimate is roughly 120 million in both hemispheres, range 80 to 200 million, with low to moderate confidence because nobody has counted this type directly in a human brain.

That is about 4 percent of the roughly 3.2 billion inhibitory neurons of the neocortex, 0.7 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons counted by Azevedo and colleagues in 2009, and 0.14 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is minus 60 to minus 65 millivolts and input resistance is high at 200 to 400 megaohms, so small inputs move it easily.

Its spike is broad at 0.6 to 1.0 milliseconds, firing is irregular and slows during steady input, and top sustained rates are only 20 to 60 spikes per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from nearby excitatory pyramidal cells and from long-range fibres carrying acetylcholine from the basal forebrain and serotonin from the brainstem raphe nuclei.

Outputs land on pyramidal cell bodies and first dendritic segments, reaching roughly 10 to 25 percent of pyramidal cells within 150 micrometres.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres thick and conducts at 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second.

Release depends on N-type calcium channels built from the Cav2.2 protein, sitting far from the release machinery, which makes release unreliable, jittery and prone to continuing after the spike.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The fast transmitter is gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main inhibitory chemical, co-packaged with vasoactive intestinal peptide and usually cholecystokinin (CCK).

Its terminals carry the cannabinoid type one receptor (CB1), the receptor that responds to the active ingredient of cannabis.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none, since myelin is fatty insulation that speeds conduction and these thin local axons run bare.

Short patches are reported on the first stretch of some human interneuron axons, but they are the exception.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest, because slow firing and a short axon keep the pumping bill far below a fast-spiking basket cell's.

Staining for cytochrome oxidase, an enzyme of the cell's power plants, is low to moderate.

PLASTICITY:

Its defining plasticity runs backwards: an active target makes endocannabinoid molecules, chiefly 2-arachidonoylglycerol, that drift back onto this cell's CB1 receptors.

The result, depolarisation-induced suppression of inhibition, silences output for seconds to tens of seconds, and repeated pairing locks it in for hours.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Unlike parvalbumin basket cells this one wears no perineuronal net, the lattice that stiffens its faster cousins, so it stays structurally flexible for life.

Its astrocytes carry monoacylglycerol lipase, the enzyme that destroys the endocannabinoid signal, so these support cells set how far and how long that retrograde message spreads.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the cortex keeps its clock but loses its volume knob.

Metronomic inhibition would continue, but nothing could soften it according to what the target was doing, so activity would stop swinging with attention, arousal and reward.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Release keeps dribbling for hundreds of milliseconds after a burst, because leftover calcium keeps triggering vesicles, turning a spike train into a smear.

Peptides leave by volume transmission, diffusing through the fluid between cells to many targets at once, and receptors on the axon itself let the output change without the cell body knowing.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: pyramidal glutamate synapses at 0 to 40 events per second; acetylcholine at 0 to 10; serotonin through the fast type three receptor; endocannabinoid level from 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto pyramidal cell bodies and proximal dendrites as a synchronous quantum plus an asynchronous tail; peptides into the extracellular space during bursts.

• STATE: membrane voltage; adaptation current; residual terminal calcium; CB1 occupancy; releasable vesicle pool.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 200 to 400 megaohms; threshold minus 42 millivolts; release probability 0.2 to 0.4; maximum cannabinoid suppression 60 to 90 percent.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; asynchronous tail 50 to 300 milliseconds; cannabinoid suppression 5 to 20 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: adolescent cannabis exposure clamps CB1 receptors and, in animal models, permanently weakens this inhibition, and loss of the type disrupts theta rhythms and the cortical rhythm abnormalities reported in schizophrenia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to produce the two-wave output of a vasoactive intestinal peptide small basket cell whose target has recently answered back with a cannabinoid signal.
Create a number variable called depolarisation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called endocannabinoid level with initial value 0.6.
Create a number variable called release strength with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called release times with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
While clock is less than 400, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the sum of depolarisation and 3.
    Set depolarisation to the result.
    Check if depolarisation is greater than 21.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of 1 and endocannabinoid level.
        Set release strength to the result.
        Add clock to the end of release times.
        Calculate the sum of clock and 15.
        Add the result to the end of release times.
        Set depolarisation to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of clock and 1.
    Set clock to the result.
End the loop.
Display release strength to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this is bookkeeping of release events over time, where readability matters more than speed.

# VIP small basket cell: cannabinoid damping plus a delayed second wave.
DT, V_REST, V_THRESH, TAU_M = 1.0, -63.0, -42.0, 12.0
ASYNC_DELAY, EC_RISE, EC_DECAY = 15, 0.01, 0.98

def run(drive, target_active):
    v, ec, events = V_REST, 0.0, []     # ec is endocannabinoid level, 0 to 1
    for t, i_in in enumerate(drive):
        v += DT * (-(v - V_REST) + 40.0 * i_in) / TAU_M
        if v > V_THRESH:
            s = max(0.0, 1.0 - ec)
            events.append((t, 0.7 * s))                # synchronous quantum
            events.append((t + ASYNC_DELAY, 0.3 * s))  # asynchronous tail
            v = V_REST
        if target_active[t]:
            ec = min(1.0, ec + EC_RISE)
        ec *= EC_DECAY
    return events

if __name__ == "__main__":
    ev = run([1.0] * 300, [False] * 150 + [True] * 150)
    print("before %.2f, after %.2f" % (sum(s for t, s in ev if t < 150),
                                       sum(s for t, s in ev if t >= 150)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small cortical cell with a broad spike, a tight axon that baskets its neighbours' cell bodies, vasoactive intestinal peptide inside it, and a terminal that falls silent for ten seconds after the target gets busy.

CHAPTER 28. LARGE AND SMALL BASKET CELLS EXPRESSING CHOLECYSTOKININ (Feeling-Coloured Loose-Timing Neuron) (COG)

Cannabis works on your mind largely by talking to this one cell, which carries more receptors for the drug than almost any other neuron in the brain.

The existing title is a committee minute naming size and a peptide, cholecystokinin, in one unspeakable phrase.

Feeling-Coloured records that about eighty-six percent of these cells carry the type 1 cannabinoid receptor, making them the perisomatic channel through which the brain's own cannabis-like messengers and emotional states dial inhibition.

Loose-Timing states the defining physiological contrast with parvalbumin basket cells: these terminals use N-type calcium channels loosely coupled to the release sensor, making their gamma-aminobutyric acid release asynchronous and smeared in time rather than clock-precise.

Neuron marks it as a principal perisomatic interneuron whose modulation directly influences the power of cortical gamma rhythms.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This family of inhibitory cortical neurons wraps its output fibres around the cell bodies of excitatory neurons and makes cholecystokinin (CCK), a peptide messenger named for its first known job of contracting the gallbladder.

Like every basket cell it inhibits at the target's decision point, but where fast parvalbumin baskets act as a metronome, this family is a mood-sensitive brake whose release is slow, imprecise and easily fatigued.

The working summary is that parvalbumin cells set the clock and cholecystokinin cells set the emotional tone of inhibition.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is oval to pear shaped, with smooth dendrites that in the large form climb from the middle layers to layer one.

The axon often leaves from a dendrite rather than the cell body, then curls into branches bearing large, well-spaced swellings that cradle target cell bodies loosely.

SIZE:

• Small form: cell body 10 to 15 micrometres, axon field 200 to 400 micrometres wide.

• Large form: cell body 15 to 25 micrometres, axon field 500 to 900 micrometres wide across two or three layers.

• Total axon length is 3 to 15 millimetres, with 1000 release sites in the small form and over 5000 in the large.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Small cholecystokinin basket cells with a compact single-layer axon field.

• Large cholecystokinin basket cells crossing layers and column boundaries.

• A subgroup carrying vesicular glutamate transporter type three, releasing a little glutamate alongside GABA.

• A subgroup co-expressing vasoactive intestinal peptide, overlapping the previous entry.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies occupy the whole neocortex, concentrated in layers two, three and five and present in layers four and six.

The large form sits in layer three or upper layer five with dendrites reaching the layer one and layer two interface, sampling feedback from other cortical areas and the thalamus, and the same family populates the hippocampus and amygdala.

NUMBER:

The best estimate is roughly 230 million in both hemispheres, range 150 to 350 million, counting only cells not already counted as the vasoactive intestinal peptide small basket type, with low to moderate confidence.

That is about 7 percent of the roughly 3.2 billion cortical inhibitory neurons, 1.4 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons, and 0.27 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is minus 60 to minus 68 millivolts and input resistance is 120 to 300 megaohms.

The spike is broad at 0.7 to 1.2 milliseconds because these cells lack the fast potassium channels of parvalbumin cells, firing accommodates from an opening burst down to 10 to 50 spikes per second, and many fire irregularly under constant input.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory inputs facilitate, meaning each spike in a train produces a larger response, so this cell is recruited by sustained activity rather than single events.

Outputs target pyramidal cell bodies and proximal dendrites, a third of boutons land on other inhibitory cells, and connection probability onto neighbours is 20 to 40 percent for the small form.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axon diameter is 0.2 to 0.6 micrometres and conduction runs at 0.2 to 0.6 metres per second.

Release depends on N-type Cav2.2 channels rather than the P/Q-type Cav2.1 channels of parvalbumin cells, and that difference, with loose coupling to the release sensor, explains the unreliability, jitter and long trailing release.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The fast transmitter is gamma aminobutyric acid, co-packaged with cholecystokinin, which is released during bursts and acts on the cholecystokinin type two receptor.

The terminals carry the densest cannabinoid type one receptors in the cortex, plus mu-opioid and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, all of which throttle release.

MYELINATION:

Almost entirely absent, with short patchy segments reported on the thicker proximal axons of some large basket cells.

The bouton-bearing branches are always bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and far below a parvalbumin basket cell, because firing rates are low.

Terminals still hold healthy mitochondria, since trailing release for hundreds of milliseconds demands continuous calcium pumping.

PLASTICITY:

Depolarisation-induced suppression of inhibition is stronger here than at any other cortical synapse, cutting release by 60 to 90 percent for five to twenty seconds.

A constant background cannabinoid tone also holds baseline release below maximum, and pairing target activity with firing gives long-term depression lasting hours.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

No perineuronal net surrounds these cells, in contrast with the parvalbumin baskets beside them, so they stay plastic into adulthood.

Their astrocytes are part of the signalling loop rather than bystanders, holding the enzyme that clears the endocannabinoid signal and carrying cannabinoid receptors themselves.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and cortical inhibition becomes emotionally deaf.

The region keeps precise gamma-band inhibition but loses the slow brake that reports arousal, stress, satiety and reward, and loses all perisomatic tuning by cannabinoids, opioids, serotonin and acetylcholine.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Asynchronous release is the headline feature: after a burst this terminal keeps dribbling GABA for two hundred to five hundred milliseconds, turning a spike train into a lasting blanket.

Cholecystokinin leaves by volume transmission and excites neighbouring parvalbumin basket cells, so this cell chemically hands control to its faster cousin.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: facilitating glutamate synapses at 0 to 50 events per second; acetylcholine and serotonin at 0 to 10; endocannabinoid and opioid levels from 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: synchronous and asynchronous GABA onto pyramidal cell bodies and proximal dendrites; cholecystokinin into the extracellular space.

• STATE: membrane voltage; adaptation current; residual presynaptic calcium; vesicle pool occupancy; cannabinoid receptor occupancy.

• PARAMETERS: spike half-width 0.7 to 1.2 milliseconds; input resistance 120 to 300 megaohms; synchronous release probability 0.15 to 0.35; maximum cannabinoid suppression 0.6 to 0.9.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 12 to 25 milliseconds; residual calcium decay 40 to 100 milliseconds; asynchronous tail 200 to 500 milliseconds; cannabinoid suppression 5 to 20 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: adolescent cannabinoid overstimulation permanently weakens this synapse and reduces prefrontal gamma power, a finding repeatedly linked to schizophrenia risk, and abnormal wiring of these cells disrupts spatial coding.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to model the two waves of inhibition from a cholecystokinin basket terminal, one locked to the spike and one trailing behind it on leftover calcium.
Create a number variable called residual calcium with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called cannabinoid occupancy with initial value 0.5.
Create a number variable called channel gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called synchronous output with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called asynchronous output with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called late release with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Calculate the difference of 1 and cannabinoid occupancy.
Set channel gain to the result.
While clock is less than 400, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the remainder of clock divided by 25.
    Check if the result is equal to 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of residual calcium and channel gain.
        Set residual calcium to the result.
        Calculate the sum of synchronous output and channel gain.
        Set synchronous output to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of residual calcium and residual calcium.
    Set late release to the result.
    Calculate the sum of asynchronous output and late release.
    Set asynchronous output to the result.
    Calculate the product of residual calcium and 0.98.
    Set residual calcium to the result.
    Calculate the sum of clock and 1.
    Set clock to the result.
End the loop.
Display asynchronous output to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because this is a tight numerical loop over a fine time step, the case where a compiled kernel belongs inside a simulation engine.

/* CCK basket terminal: N-type calcium channels that CB1 throttles.
   Compile with: cc file.c -lm                                     */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>

int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.1, tau_ca = 60.0;   /* milliseconds */
    double ca = 0.0, cb1 = 0.0;             /* calcium, CB1 occupancy */
    double sync = 0.0, async_q = 0.0;
    int step;
    for (step = 0; step < 4000; step++) {   /* 400 milliseconds */
        double t = step * dt;
        if (step % 250 == 0) {              /* presynaptic spike at 40 Hz */
            double gain = 1.0 - 0.8 * cb1;  /* CB1 closes N-type channels */
            ca += gain;
            sync += 0.9 * gain;
        }
        if (t > 200.0) cb1 = 1.0;           /* target releases 2-AG */
        async_q += dt * 0.0001 * pow(ca, 4.0);
        ca -= dt * ca / tau_ca;
    }
    printf("synchronous %.2f, asynchronous %.2f\n", sync, async_q);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A basket cell with a broad accommodating spike, boutons that keep leaking inhibition for half a second after the burst ends, and a terminal so thick with cannabinoid receptors that a puff of cannabis silences it.

CHAPTER 29. CORTICAL NEUROGLIAFORM CELLS (COG)

Most neurons whisper into a single ear; this one opens a valve and floods the neighbourhood, inhibiting hundreds of cells it has never formally met.

Neurogliaform describes the cell's dense, spiderweb-like bush of fine processes. This unique geometry allows it to release a cloud of gamma-aminobutyric acid that floods the local tissue, inhibiting nearby neurons through volume transmission without requiring direct synapses.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This small inhibitory neuron grows the densest, finest, most nearly spherical ball of output fibre in the brain, and it was named because it looks more like a glial support cell than a neuron.

It does not aim its transmitter at a partner but releases gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main inhibitory chemical, into the fluid between cells, where it diffuses and quietens everything inside the cloud.

That mode is called volume transmission, and one spike produces a slow, long inhibitory wave in most of its neighbours at once.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is small and round with seven to twelve short dendrites radiating out like a dandelion clock, branching once or twice and stopping.

The axon splinters immediately into hundreds of hair-thin branches, and its release sites are tiny, extremely numerous, and mostly face no receiving structure, which is the fingerprint of volume transmission.

SIZE:

• Cell body diameter is 8 to 15 micrometres, among the smallest in the cortex.

• The dendritic ball spans 200 to 250 micrometres and the axonal plexus 300 to 400 micrometres.

• Total axon length can exceed 20 millimetres, packing 5000 to 15000 release sites, the highest density of any cortical neuron.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Round neurogliaform cells of layers two to six with the classic spherical plexus.

• Elongated neurogliaform cells of layer one, whose plexus is flattened into a horizontal sheet.

• Ivy cells, a looser-plexus relative found mainly in the hippocampus.

• A primate-enriched group carrying the LHX6 gene, rare in rodents but plentiful in humans.

• The human rosehip cell, a compact relative of human layer one with no mouse counterpart.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They occupy every layer and area of the neocortex, densest in layer one, where the elongated form dominates, and in layer two and upper layer three, and they also populate the hippocampus, amygdala, striatum and parts of the thalamus.

Because so many sit at the layer one and layer two interface, they form an inhibitory curtain where long-range feedback fibres meet the tips of pyramidal dendrites.

NUMBER:

The best estimate is roughly 350 million across both hemispheres, range 250 to 450 million, with moderate confidence in the proportion and low confidence in the absolute figure, since gene surveys place the LAMP5 group that contains them at 10 to 20 percent of human cortical inhibitory neurons.

That is about 11 percent of the roughly 3.2 billion cortical inhibitory neurons, 2.1 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons, and 0.41 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system, of which only about 35 million sit in layer one.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The signature is late spiking: given a current just strong enough to fire it, the voltage creeps up a long slow ramp and the first spike arrives hundreds of milliseconds later.

Resting voltage is minus 62 to minus 70 millivolts, input resistance in mouse layer one is about 173 megaohms, spike width is about 0.7 milliseconds, and voltage sag is small at about 8 percent.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation arrives from local pyramidal cells, from long-range feedback fibres, and in layer one from the higher-order thalamus.

Output reaches everything nearby, including incoming presynaptic terminals, with a connection probability onto layer two pyramidal cells of about 72 percent in mouse layer one, and every target shows a slow GABA type A component followed by a GABA type B component from a single spike.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Branches are the thinnest in the cortex at 0.1 to 0.3 micrometres and conduct at only 0.1 to 0.3 metres per second, though distances are so small that delays stay near a millisecond.

The axon is entirely unmyelinated, as it must be, since myelin would seal the very release sites the cell depends on.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter is gamma aminobutyric acid, released into the extracellular space, co-packaged with neuropeptide Y, which suppresses excitability and protects against seizures.

Most also carry neuronal nitric oxide synthase, the enzyme that makes nitric oxide gas on demand, and identifying markers include reelin, alpha-actinin-2 and LAMP5.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable, for a real biological reason rather than a gap in knowledge.

The cell's whole strategy depends on transmitter escaping from bare membrane, so the insulation that would seal that membrane is absent by design.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low to moderate at rest, because the cell is reluctant to fire at all.

Twenty millimetres of axon and thousands of release sites still impose a large standing cost, and nitric oxide production consumes oxygen, so this type suffers early when oxygen runs short.

PLASTICITY:

The output synapse depresses strongly with use, because so many small release sites empty quickly, and recovery takes seconds.

Longer-term change is dominated by regulation of the GABA transporters that mop up the cloud, since cloud size, not any single synapse, is what matters here.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here do something they do nowhere else: they set the physical size of an inhibitory signal, because their GABA transporter type three decides how far the cloud spreads before clearance.

Block those transporters and one spike inhibits a far larger sphere of tissue, while astrocyte end-feet translate this cell's nitric oxide into local widening of blood vessels.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove neurogliaform cells and the cortex loses its only way to inhibit by place rather than by partnership.

Feedback landing in layer one would go unchecked, the slow braking that follows bursts would vanish, and the region would become locally excitable and prone to synchronised discharge.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

It reliably recruits the slow GABA type B receptors from a single spike, which no other cortical cell does, and it inhibits incoming axon terminals as well as cells, a form of presynaptic gating.

It is electrically coupled by gap junctions not only to its own kind but unusually to other classes of inhibitory neuron, and it widens local blood vessels with nitric oxide while narrowing them with neuropeptide Y.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate synapses from pyramidal cells and long-range feedback at 0 to 30 events per second; higher-order thalamic input in layer one; gap junction current of 0 to 50 picoamperes.

• OUTPUTS: an extracellular GABA cloud peaking at 1 to 10 micromolar within 20 micrometres; slow GABA type A and type B currents in every neuron inside it; nitric oxide and neuropeptide Y onto local arterioles.

• STATE: membrane voltage; the slow ramp variable behind late spiking; extracellular GABA by radius; vesicle depletion; gap junction coupling of 0.03 to 0.15.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 120 to 250 megaohms; effective GABA diffusion 0.3 to 0.5 square micrometres per millisecond; cloud radius 40 to 100 micrometres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 30 milliseconds; delay to first spike 100 to 800 milliseconds; slow GABA type A current 50 to 200 milliseconds; GABA type B current 150 to 1000 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: silencing these cells removes the slow blanket brake and favours seizure spread, and their nitric oxide role makes them a probable weak link in small-vessel disease and the blood flow failures of early Alzheimer's disease.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to work out which neurons a single neurogliaform spike inhibits, given that its transmitter escapes into the space between cells rather than being aimed at a partner.
Create a number variable called cloud radius with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called maximum radius with initial value 60.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called neuron distances with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called inhibited neurons with initial value empty list.
Add 8 to the end of neuron distances.
Add 25 to the end of neuron distances.
Add 90 to the end of neuron distances.
While clock is less than 200, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the product of clock and 0.35.
    Set cloud radius to the result.
    Check if cloud radius is greater than maximum radius.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set cloud radius to maximum radius.
        Break out of the current loop immediately.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of clock and 1.
    Set clock to the result.
End the loop.
For each distance in neuron distances, perform the following operations.
    Check if distance is less than cloud radius.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add distance to the end of inhibited neurons.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in inhibited neurons.
Display the result to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the physics is a short diffusion calculation that the standard mathematics library covers with no external package.

# One neurogliaform spike: point-source diffusion plus transporter clearance.
import math

D_EFF, UPTAKE_TAU = 0.4, 90.0   # um^2 per ms, clearance constant in ms
K_GABAB, N_HILL, SCALE = 4.0, 2.0, 2000.0   # uM, Hill exponent, source scale

def gaba_at(r_um, t_ms):
    spread = 4.0 * math.pi * D_EFF * t_ms
    c = SCALE / (spread ** 1.5) * math.exp(-(r_um * r_um) / spread)
    return c * math.exp(-t_ms / UPTAKE_TAU)

def run(radius_um):
    gabab, peak = 0.0, 0.0
    for t in range(1, 601):                   # 600 milliseconds
        c = gaba_at(radius_um, float(t))
        peak = max(peak, c)
        target = c ** N_HILL / (c ** N_HILL + K_GABAB ** N_HILL)
        gabab += (target - gabab) / 150.0     # slow G protein step
    return peak, gabab

if __name__ == "__main__":
    for r in (5.0, 20.0, 60.0):
        print("radius %4.0f um: peak %6.3f uM, GABA-B %.4f" % ((r,) + run(r)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A tiny cell that takes half a second to decide to fire, then inhibits everything within fifty micrometres whether or not it has synapses on them, while controlling the local blood supply on the side.

CHAPTER 30. SINGLE BOUQUET CELLS (COG)

This cell inhibits only the inhibitors, so when it fires, the cortex below it gets louder, not quieter.

Single Bouquet describes the cell's defining shape - a single descending tuft of axon that drops from layer 1 into layers 2 and 3. Naming this single tuft maintains clarity while keeping it cleanly paired with the double bouquet cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This inhibitory neuron lives in layer one, the thin, almost cell-free skin at the top of the cerebral cortex, and drops its output fibre straight down into layers two and three like the stem of a bouquet.

Its remarkable property is what it inhibits: not excitatory pyramidal cells but the inhibitory cells that hold pyramidal cells down, and silencing a silencer is called disinhibition.

When feedback from a higher brain area says that something matters, this cell lifts the brakes off a small group of deep output neurons.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The small cell body sits in the lower half of layer one, with short dendrites spreading horizontally to sample the feedback fibres running there.

The axon descends as a horsetail, a slim vertical bundle of parallel branches passing through layer two into layer three, and the name records its resemblance to the descending half of the deeper double bouquet cell.

SIZE:

• Cell body diameter is 8 to 14 micrometres.

• The dendritic field is horizontal, 100 to 250 micrometres wide, confined to layer one.

• The descending bundle is 50 to 100 micrometres across and reaches 300 to 500 micrometres down.

• Total axon length is 2 to 6 millimetres with an estimated 1000 to 3000 release sites.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Classic single bouquet cells with a tight horsetail inside one cortical column.

• Broader variants whose bundle splays across two neighbouring columns.

• Cells overlapping the layer one vasoactive intestinal peptide group, whose axons reach layers five and six.

• Cells overlapping the layer one alpha7 group, whose collaterals stop in layer five A.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in neocortical layer one, chiefly its lower half, immediately beneath the pia mater, the delicate membrane covering the brain, and the axon crosses into layers two and three, so the cell straddles the most important boundary for top-down control in the cortex.

They are described in rodent somatosensory, visual and frontal cortex, with comparable cells reported in monkey and human, and the pyramidal cells that ultimately benefit sit in layer five.

NUMBER:

The best estimate is roughly 25 million across both hemispheres, range 15 to 45 million, and confidence is low: layer one holds on the order of 0.5 to 1 percent of cortical neurons and no human count of this type exists.

That is about 0.8 percent of the roughly 3.2 billion cortical inhibitory neurons, 0.15 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons, and 0.03 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system, and because this population partly overlaps the layer one vasoactive intestinal peptide and alpha7 groups it must not simply be added to their totals.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is minus 58 to minus 65 millivolts and input resistance is high at 200 to 400 megaohms, so a small feedback input fires the cell.

It is not late spiking: it answers a current step with a prompt burst of two to five spikes, then adapts strongly and irregularly, with a spike width of 0.5 to 0.8 milliseconds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from long-range feedback axons from higher cortical areas, from higher-order thalamic nuclei such as the posterior medial nucleus, and from cholinergic fibres of the basal forebrain.

Outputs land almost exclusively on inhibitory cells, contacting seven distinguishable subtypes of layer two and three interneuron that between them inhibit the whole length of a layer five pyramidal cell, and the connection is strictly one-way with no return inhibition and no electrical coupling.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The descending axon is 0.2 to 0.4 micrometres thick and unmyelinated, conducting at 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second, so the trip from layer one to layer three takes one to two milliseconds.

Its small boutons sit on the cell bodies and proximal dendrites of the target interneurons.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter is gamma aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical.

Subsets carry vasoactive intestinal peptide or the alpha7 nicotinic receptor, and all are strongly driven by acetylcholine, the attention transmitter, which is how a change of behavioural state throws this switch.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable in practice.

The descending axon is short, thin and locally branching, and is unmyelinated throughout, because insulating three hundred micrometres is not worth the metabolic cost.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low, because the cell is small, fires in brief bursts and maintains only a few millimetres of axon.

Its energy use rises sharply during high acetylcholine states, that is during attention and active exploration, which is exactly when it is working.

PLASTICITY:

Its output synapses onto interneurons depress with use, so a long burst yields diminishing disinhibition and the switch resets itself.

The feedback input onto its dendrites is experience-dependent, and in developing cortex bottom-up sensory input must arrive first for top-down connections onto layer one cells to form correctly.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

This cell sits inside the glia limitans, the astrocyte boundary separating brain tissue from the fluid space beneath the pia mater, so its astrocytes are doing barrier duty at the same time.

In humans it also sits among interlaminar astrocytes, a primate specialisation whose single long fibres dive through the layers beside its own descending axon.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the cortex loses its fast, targeted way of saying yes.

Feedback could still suppress activity through neurogliaform cells but could no longer release a specific column of deep output neurons, so attention-driven boosting would weaken and the cortex would become a system that can only turn things down.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The essential non-classical feature is sign inversion: this cell is inhibitory yet its net effect is excitatory, so any simulation treating inhibition as uniformly suppressive gets the wrong answer.

Its targets are chosen by cell class rather than proximity, so wiring cannot be modelled as a distance rule, and the deliberate absence of reciprocal and electrical coupling keeps the switch one-way.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: long-range cortical feedback glutamate synapses at 0 to 30 events per second; higher-order thalamic synapses at 0 to 20; acetylcholine on nicotinic receptors at 0 to 15.

• OUTPUTS: one-way GABA release onto seven classes of layer two and three interneuron, unitary currents of 20 to 80 picoamperes.

• STATE: membrane voltage; adaptation current; vesicle depletion at each target class; nicotinic receptor desensitisation.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 200 to 400 megaohms; threshold about minus 40 millivolts; 0.4 to 0.8 hertz of target firing lost per hertz of this cell's firing; conduction delay 1 to 2 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds; adaptation 100 to 300 milliseconds; depression recovery 0.5 to 2 seconds; disinhibitory window 50 to 300 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: stuck on, deep output neurons lose inhibitory control and the cortex becomes hyperexcitable; stuck off, top-down attention cannot select a column, consistent with the attentional and sensory gating deficits reported in schizophrenia and autism spectrum conditions.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show how one single bouquet cell in layer one raises the firing rate of a layer five pyramidal cell by silencing the layer two and three interneurons that were holding it down.
Create a list variable called interneuron rates with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called single bouquet rate with initial value 10.
Create a number variable called suppression per hertz with initial value 0.6.
Create a number variable called weight to pyramid with initial value 0.8.
Create a number variable called suppression with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called silenced rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called contribution with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called total inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called pyramid rate with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 7 times.
    Add 8 to the end of interneuron rates.
End the loop.
Calculate the product of single bouquet rate and suppression per hertz.
Set suppression to the result.
For each baseline rate in interneuron rates, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of baseline rate and suppression.
    Set silenced rate to the result.
    Calculate the product of silenced rate and weight to pyramid.
    Set contribution to the result.
    Calculate the sum of total inhibition and contribution.
    Set total inhibition to the result.
End the loop.
Calculate the difference of 20 and total inhibition.
Set pyramid rate to the result.
Display pyramid rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this is named-population bookkeeping across seven interneuron classes, and a dictionary makes the class-specific wiring self-documenting.

# Single bouquet cell inhibits layer 2/3 interneurons, so firing it RAISES
# layer 5 pyramidal output. Inhibition with a plus sign.
IN_TO_PYR = {"basket": 1.2, "chandelier": 1.5, "martinotti": 0.8,
             "bipolar": 0.4, "double_bouquet": 0.5,
             "neurogliaform": 0.7, "bitufted": 0.6}
SBC_WEIGHT, BASELINE_HZ = 0.6, 8.0   # target hertz lost per hertz; resting rate
PYR_DRIVE_HZ, INHIB_GAIN = 20.0, 0.35

def pyramid_rate(sbc_hz):
    total = 0.0
    for name, w in IN_TO_PYR.items():
        rate = BASELINE_HZ - SBC_WEIGHT * sbc_hz
        if rate < 0.0:
            rate = 0.0                   # cannot fire below zero
        total += w * rate
    out = PYR_DRIVE_HZ - INHIB_GAIN * total
    return out if out > 0.0 else 0.0

if __name__ == "__main__":
    for sbc in (0.0, 5.0, 10.0, 15.0):
        print("bouquet %4.1f Hz -> pyramid %5.2f Hz" % (sbc, pyramid_rate(sbc)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A layer one cell with a slim horsetail axon dropping into layers two and three, contacting interneurons and almost nothing else, one way only, with no return connection and no electrical coupling.

CHAPTER 31. CANOPY CELLS (COG)

Spreading a thin horizontal net just under the surface of the brain, this cell touches almost nothing directly beneath it.

Canopy is a plain-English shape name: the axon spreads as a flat horizontal sheet across the upper half of layer 1, lying over the cortical tissue like a protective roof.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This inhibitory neuron lives almost exclusively in layer one, the thin outermost sheet of the cerebral cortex, and stretches its output fibre sideways across the upper half of that layer.

It was named in 2019, when recording and gene profiling showed that the cells previously lumped together in layer one were four separate populations.

Its role appears to be light, wide, purely fast inhibition of incoming feedback fibres and of the tips of pyramidal dendrites, delivered as a brief burst that reports change rather than level.

Honesty matters here: the type is newly recognised and its precise computational role is still being worked out.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body sits in layer one, with dendrites that spread wider than a neurogliaform cell's but branch far less, giving a broad sparse receiving field.

The axon runs horizontally, parallel to the brain surface within the upper half of layer one, and its measured density is roughly 65 percent lower than a neurogliaform cell's, so it is a thin net rather than a dense ball.

SIZE:

• Cell body diameter is 10 to 16 micrometres.

• The dendritic field is flat, 200 to 400 micrometres wide but only 50 to 100 micrometres tall.

• The axon net spans 300 to 600 micrometres horizontally within the top 50 micrometres of layer one.

• Total axon length is a few millimetres with perhaps 1000 to 3000 sparse release sites.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• The canonical form of the upper half of layer one, matching the LAMP5, FAM19A1 and TMEM182 gene signature.

• Variants in prefrontal cortex whose axon dips slightly into layer two.

• Human layer one contains cells of comparable sparse horizontal geometry, though the correspondence between human and mouse layer one types remains an open question.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives in neocortical layer one and essentially nowhere else, which is unusual since most cortical types occupy several layers, and it concentrates immediately beneath the pia mater, the thin membrane covering the brain.

Because its cell body sits above the neurogliaform cells, the two form stacked sheets, and the boundary between them is a real interface inside a layer only a tenth of a millimetre thick in mouse and a few tenths in humans.

NUMBER:

The best estimate is roughly 30 million across both hemispheres, range 15 to 50 million, and confidence is low: canopy cells are about 40 percent of layer one interneurons in mouse barrel cortex, layer one holds on the order of 0.5 to 1 percent of neocortical neurons, and no human count exists.

That is about 0.9 percent of the roughly 3.2 billion cortical inhibitory neurons, 0.18 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons, and 0.035 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is about minus 64 millivolts, input resistance about 142 megaohms, and the spike is narrow at about 0.45 milliseconds.

It is not late spiking but onset spiking, firing promptly at the start of a current step and then adapting fast, and its voltage sag of about 15 percent sits between the neurogliaform cell's 8 percent and the alpha7 cell's 21 percent.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are the classic layer one set: long-range feedback axons from other cortical areas, higher-order thalamic fibres, and fibres carrying acetylcholine and noradrenaline.

Its connection probability onto layer two pyramidal cells is only about 18 percent against roughly 72 percent for neurogliaform cells, its currents are weak and lack any slow GABA type B component, and it forms reciprocal connections with neurogliaform cells so the two sheets inhibit each other.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is 0.2 to 0.4 micrometres thick and unmyelinated, conducting at 0.2 to 0.4 metres per second, so an event at one end of the net reaches the other within about two milliseconds.

Running horizontally for long distances by layer one standards, a single canopy cell influences several adjacent cortical columns.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter is gamma aminobutyric acid, and the cell carries the marker protein NDNF, short for neuron-derived neurotrophic factor, which it shares with neurogliaform cells.

Unlike neurogliaform cells it lacks neuropeptide Y, and that single negative marker is one of the cleanest ways to tell the two apart.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable.

These axons are unmyelinated over their whole length, because distances are short and layer one contains very few oligodendrocytes, the cells that manufacture myelin.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low, since onset spiking with strong adaptation means the cell fires only briefly.

Layer one is thinly supplied with blood vessels compared with deeper layers, and this cell's low duty cycle suits that lean environment.

PLASTICITY:

Layer one is the main landing site for top-down feedback, and the strength of feedback synapses onto layer one interneurons is shaped by experience during development.

Its own output synapses depress moderately with use, and long-term plasticity rules specific to canopy cells have not yet been reported, which it would be wrong to invent.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

This cell sits inside the glia limitans, the astrocyte boundary separating brain tissue from the fluid space beneath the pia mater, so its astrocytes are simultaneously doing barrier duty.

In human cortex it also sits among interlaminar astrocytes, a primate specialisation whose long fibres descend through layers two to four, while microglia here are the first to sense inflammation crossing from the meninges.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the canopy cell and the top of layer one loses its only fast, horizontally spreading brake.

Neurogliaform cells would still deliver slow blanketing inhibition from below, but the crisp wide inhibition that greets the first arrival of a feedback signal would be gone, so feedback would spread with no leading edge to mark where and when it began.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The canopy cell is a spatial integrator, summing feedback across several columns with wide flat dendrites and returning inhibition to the same territory, so it computes an average over horizontal space rather than a local decision.

Onset spiking with strong adaptation makes it a differentiator in time, responding to the rate of change of its input, and the deliberate absence of a GABA type B component divides labour with the neurogliaform sheet below it.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: long-range feedback glutamate synapses spread over 300 to 600 micrometres at 0 to 30 events per second; higher-order thalamic synapses; acetylcholine and noradrenaline; reciprocal GABA from neurogliaform cells.

• OUTPUTS: fast GABA type A currents onto distal pyramidal dendritic tufts and other layer one interneurons, 10 to 40 picoamperes, with no GABA type B component.

• STATE: membrane voltage; adaptation current; pooled horizontal input; vesicle depletion.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance about 142 megaohms; resting potential about minus 64 millivolts; spike half-width about 0.45 milliseconds; sag about 15 percent; connection probability onto layer two pyramidal cells about 0.18.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 12 to 20 milliseconds; adaptation 300 to 700 milliseconds; inhibitory current decay 5 to 15 milliseconds; depression recovery 0.3 to 1 second.

• FAILURE MODE: weakening this population is expected to blur the boundary between externally driven and internally generated activity, a pattern discussed in relation to hallucinations and sensory overload, though direct disease evidence is still thin and provisional.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to pool the feedback signals sweeping horizontally across the top of layer one and turn them into the brief onset burst that identifies a canopy cell.
Create a number variable called pooled drive with initial value 36.
Create a number variable called depolarisation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called net drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
While clock is less than 500, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the difference of pooled drive and adaptation.
    Set net drive to the result.
    Calculate the product of net drive and 0.07.
    Set net drive to the result.
    Calculate the product of depolarisation and 0.93.
    Set depolarisation to the result.
    Calculate the sum of depolarisation and net drive.
    Set depolarisation to the result.
    Check if depolarisation is greater than 24.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set depolarisation to 6.
        Calculate the sum of adaptation and 2.
        Set adaptation to the result.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of clock and 1.
    Set clock to the result.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because this is a fine-grained integrate-and-fire loop with an adaptation current, and megaohms multiplied by nanoamperes gives millivolts directly, keeping the units honest.

/* Canopy cell: pools horizontal feedback, answers with an onset burst. */
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.1, R = 142.0;           /* ms per step, megaohms */
    const double tau_m = 14.0, tau_w = 500.0;   /* milliseconds          */
    const double v_rest = -64.0, v_th = -40.0, v_reset = -58.0;
    const double dw = 0.03, i_in = 0.40;        /* nanoamperes           */
    double v = v_rest, w = 0.0;
    int step, first = 0, last = 0;
    for (step = 0; step < 5000; step++) {       /* 500 milliseconds */
        double drive = R * (i_in - w);          /* millivolts       */
        v += dt * (-(v - v_rest) + drive) / tau_m;
        w -= dt * w / tau_w;
        if (v >= v_th) {
            v = v_reset;
            w += dw;
            if (step < 1000) first++;
            if (step >= 4000) last++;
        }
    }
    printf("spikes first 100 ms: %d, last 100 ms: %d\n", first, last);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A cell found only in the top half of layer one, with a sparse horizontal axon net, a narrow spike, prompt onset firing, the NDNF marker but no neuropeptide Y, and an inhibitory output with no slow tail.

CHAPTER 32. ALPHA7 CELLS, NAMED FOR A NICOTINIC RECEPTOR SUBUNIT (Fast-Alerting Inhibition Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell nicotine reaches first, and the receptor it is named for is missing a copy in some people with schizophrenia and epilepsy.

The old label names a protein subunit (alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor), which tells a student nothing about the cell's actual function.

Fast-Alerting names the speed and signal: the alpha-7 receptor opens and closes in milliseconds - far quicker than other nicotinic receptors - answering a pulse of acetylcholine the instant attention sharpens.

Inhibition names the output: sitting predominantly on layer 1 inhibitory cells, it converts that incoming alerting chemical into a rapid brake applied to the upper dendrites of pyramidal cells.

Neuron marks it as a key cholinergic-responsive interneuron in the upper cortical sheet.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This inhibitory neuron of cortical layer one is named for the alpha7 subunit, a building block of one kind of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, a channel that opens when acetylcholine, the brain's attention transmitter, binds to it, and which nicotine opens too.

The alpha7 version is unusual in three ways: it opens extremely fast, it shuts itself within milliseconds even while acetylcholine is still present, and it admits calcium far more freely than other nicotinic receptors.

Calcium inside a neuron is not merely charge but a chemical command that switches on enzymes and genes, so this cell turns a puff of acetylcholine into a brief electrical event plus a longer chemical instruction, then inhibits inside layer one and down in the deep output layers.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is the largest of the four layer one interneuron populations, with dendrites leaving in several directions, a shape called multipolar.

The axon branches locally and, distinctively, sends collaterals down to layer five A, the upper part of the fifth layer where a major class of cortex-to-cortex output neurons lives.

SIZE:

• Cell body diameter is 12 to 20 micrometres, the largest in layer one.

• The dendritic field spans 150 to 350 micrometres within layer one.

• The local axon field spans 200 to 400 micrometres and the descending collateral reaches 400 to 700 micrometres down.

• Total axon length is 3 to 8 millimetres with perhaps 1500 to 4000 release sites.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• The canonical form of the lower half of layer one, matching the LAMP5 and CHRNA7 gene signature, CHRNA7 being the gene encoding the alpha7 subunit.

• Variants whose descending collateral stops in layer two or three rather than reaching layer five A.

• In humans only, a partially duplicated gene called CHRFAM7A makes a modified subunit that brakes the normal receptor, so the human response differs from the mouse one and varies between individuals.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies occupy the lower half of neocortical layer one and almost nowhere else, making this, with the canopy cell, one of two populations essentially unique to that layer.

Its descending axon crosses layers two, three and four to reach layer five A, so the cell spans the whole sheet and links top-down feedback to cortical output by the shortest anatomical path.

NUMBER:

The best estimate is roughly 16 million across both hemispheres, range 8 to 30 million, with low confidence: alpha7 cells are about 20 percent of layer one interneurons in mouse barrel cortex, layer one holds on the order of 0.5 to 1 percent of neocortical neurons, and there is no human count.

That is about 0.5 percent of the roughly 3.2 billion cortical inhibitory neurons, 0.1 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons, and 0.019 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is about minus 60 millivolts, the most depolarised of the layer one populations, with input resistance about 142 megaohms and a narrow spike of about 0.42 milliseconds.

It shows the largest voltage sag of any layer one cell at about 21.5 percent, produced by hyperpolarisation-activated channels carrying a current called Ih, plus an active depolarising hump just below threshold carried by a calcium conductance.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are dominated by acetylcholine fibres from the basal forebrain acting on its alpha7 receptors, together with long-range cortical feedback and higher-order thalamic synapses arriving in layer one.

Outputs reach other layer one interneurons, the distal dendritic tufts of pyramidal cells, and layer five A neurons through the descending collateral, so its net effect can be inhibitory or disinhibitory depending on which pathway dominates.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres thick and unmyelinated, conducting at 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second, so the trip from layer one to layer five A takes one to three milliseconds.

Boutons on the descending collateral are sparse and spread along its length rather than clustered.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter released is gamma aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical.

The defining receptor received is the alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, built from five copies of the alpha7 subunit, notable for a fractional calcium current of roughly 10 percent, and unlike its layer one neighbours this cell lacks the NDNF marker.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable.

Even the long descending collateral is unmyelinated, as is typical of cortical inhibitory axons, and the cell compensates for slow conduction by resting at an unusually depolarised voltage.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate, because the high resting potential makes the sodium and potassium pumps work harder at rest than in a cell sitting at minus 70 millivolts.

Calcium arriving through alpha7 receptors must be pumped back out, one of the most expensive housekeeping tasks a neuron performs, and the standing Ih current leaks continuously.

PLASTICITY:

Calcium entering through alpha7 receptors is itself a plasticity signal, switching on calcium-dependent enzymes and gene transcription, so acetylcholine here produces changes outlasting the electrical event by minutes to hours.

The receptors desensitise within milliseconds and recover over hundreds of milliseconds, a fast use-dependent plasticity built into the protein, and chronic nicotine changes their number and sensitivity.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes here carry alpha7 receptors too, so acetylcholine arriving in layer one triggers calcium waves in the surrounding glia at the same moment it excites this neuron.

Microglia carry alpha7 receptors as part of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway, so acetylcholine here is simultaneously an attention signal and an immune-calming one, and that triple sensitivity is genuinely unusual.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the alpha7 cell and layer one loses its fastest link between acetylcholine and cortical output.

Other layer one cells answer acetylcholine, but only this one answers in milliseconds and delivers the consequence straight down to layer five A, so the region would keep its attention system but lose its reflexes.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The alpha7 receptor is a genuine second messenger source, admitting enough calcium to trigger release from internal stores and drive gene transcription, and its desensitisation means the cell reports the onset of acetylcholine and ignores a steady background.

The Ih current gives rebound firing after inhibition, so the cell can be recruited by being switched off, and through glial alpha7 receptors it joins metabolic and immune loops with no electrical readout at all.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: acetylcholine transients peaking in the tens of micromolar for a few milliseconds; long-range feedback glutamate synapses at 0 to 30 events per second; higher-order thalamic synapses; GABA from other layer one interneurons.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto other layer one interneurons, onto pyramidal distal dendrites, and onto layer five A neurons through the descending collateral.

• STATE: membrane voltage; alpha7 open fraction; alpha7 available fraction, meaning the part not desensitised; internal calcium; Ih activation.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance about 142 megaohms; resting potential about minus 60 millivolts; spike half-width about 0.42 milliseconds; sag about 21.5 percent; fractional calcium current 0.10 to 0.12; peak conductance 1 to 3 nanosiemens.

• TIME CONSTANTS: alpha7 activation under 1 millisecond; desensitisation 5 to 20 milliseconds; recovery 200 to 800 milliseconds; Ih activation 100 to 500 milliseconds; membrane 12 to 20 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: deleting one copy of CHRNA7, as in the 15q13.3 deletion syndrome, is associated with generalised epilepsy, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia, and reduced receptor levels accompany the failure of P50 sensory gating, the inability to suppress the response to a repeated click.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to model how a brief puff of acetylcholine opens the alpha7 receptors on this cell, admits calcium, then shuts them within milliseconds even though the acetylcholine is still present.
Create a number variable called open fraction with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called available fraction with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called acetylcholine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called calcium entry with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called calcium step with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
While clock is less than 200, repeat the following steps.
    Check if clock is less than 10.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set acetylcholine to 1.
        Calculate the product of available fraction and 0.75.
        Set available fraction to the result.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set acetylcholine to 0.
        Calculate the sum of available fraction and 0.002.
        Set available fraction to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of acetylcholine and available fraction.
    Set open fraction to the result.
    Calculate the product of open fraction and 0.11.
    Set calcium step to the result.
    Calculate the sum of calcium entry and calcium step.
    Set calcium entry to the result.
    Calculate the sum of clock and 1.
    Set clock to the result.
End the loop.
Display calcium entry to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this is a two-state kinetic scheme where readability of the state variables matters more than raw speed.

# Alpha7 receptor: opens in under a millisecond, desensitises in a few,
# and carries an unusually large calcium fraction.
DT, TAU_ON, TAU_DESENS, TAU_RECOVER = 0.1, 0.4, 8.0, 400.0   # milliseconds
G_MAX, E_REV, PCA = 2.0, 0.0, 0.11   # nanosiemens, millivolts, calcium share

def puff(acetylcholine, v_hold=-60.0):
    """acetylcholine is a list of 0 or 1 flags, one per 0.1 ms step."""
    open_p, avail, peak, charge = 0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0
    for ach in acetylcholine:
        drive = 1.0 if ach else 0.0
        open_p += DT * (drive * avail - open_p) / TAU_ON
        avail += DT * ((1.0 - avail) / TAU_RECOVER - drive * avail / TAU_DESENS)
        current = G_MAX * open_p * (v_hold - E_REV)   # picoamperes, inward
        peak = min(peak, current)                     # inward is negative
        charge += current * DT                        # femtocoulombs
    return peak, charge, PCA * charge

if __name__ == "__main__":
    peak, charge, ca = puff([1] * 100 + [0] * 900)    # 10 ms puff, 90 ms after
    print("peak %.1f pA, charge %.0f fC, calcium %.0f fC" % (peak, charge, ca))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The biggest cell body in layer one, resting high at minus 60 millivolts, with the largest sag of any layer one neuron, a calcium hump under threshold, no NDNF marker, an axon dropping to layer five A, and a nicotinic receptor that slams shut milliseconds after it opens.

CHAPTER 33. LAMP5-LHX6 CELLS (Primate-Enriched Diffuse-Inhibition Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that proves your cortex is not simply a large mouse cortex, because it carries a molecular passport stamped in the wrong birthplace.

The old label is a pair of gene symbols (LAMP5 and LHX6), which carries no functional meaning for a reader.

Primate-Enriched records its remarkable evolutionary expansion: while confined to deeper layers in rodents, in primates - including humans, marmosets, and macaques - it represents nearly 4% of all cortical inhibitory neurons and spans across both upper and lower layers.

Diffuse-Inhibition names its physiological mode: its gene profile matches the neurogliaform family, whose members release a slow cloud of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) into the surrounding tissue rather than targeting a single synaptic partner.

Neuron marks it as a key evolutionary interneuron class, recording its verified abundance and inhibitory style while functional recordings continue to map its precise circuit role.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is a small inhibitory nerve cell of the cerebral cortex that quietens its neighbours rather than exciting them.

Its name comes from two genes it switches on together: LAMP5, which stands for lysosomal associated membrane protein family member 5, and LHX6, which stands for LIM homeobox 6 and is a master control gene.

That pairing is the puzzle, because LAMP5 usually marks cells born in a nursery at the base of the embryonic brain called the caudal ganglionic eminence, while LHX6 marks cells born in a different nursery next door called the medial ganglionic eminence.

So this is a neurogliaform cell, meaning a cell with a tiny dense ball of axon, built out of parts from the wrong factory.

Its job is slow, wide, blanket inhibition: it does not aim at one partner but bathes a small ball of tissue in the calming chemical gamma-aminobutyric acid, abbreviated GABA.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is small and round, with five to ten short dendrites, the branches that collect incoming signals, radiating outward in every direction like a sea urchin.

The dendrites carry few or no spines, the tiny mushroom-shaped knobs that receive excitatory contacts on other cells.

The axon, the output cable, is the signature: it is astonishingly fine and branches so many times that it forms a dense grey haze around the cell body, which is why the family is called neurogliaform, meaning glia-shaped, since early anatomists mistook the haze for a support cell.

Some deep-layer members of this transcriptomic group have been reported with chandelier-like axon cartridges instead, and that disagreement is not yet settled.

SIZE:

The cell body measures roughly 10 to 15 micrometres across, about one fifth the width of a human hair.

The dendritic field spans about 200 to 300 micrometres.

The axon cloud fills a sphere of roughly 200 to 400 micrometres, yet the total length of axon crammed into that small sphere is measured in millimetres, typically 5 to 20 millimetres in human tissue.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Single-cell gene readouts split the group into several closely related clusters, commonly labelled Lamp5 Lhx6 and its numbered variants.

Anatomically there are at least two flavours: a deep form sitting in layers 5 and 6 and near the white matter border, and an upper-layer form that primates have expanded and mice largely lack.

The unresolved chandelier-like variant, provisionally called CHC2, is a third possible subtype.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It is found across the neocortex, the six-layered outer sheet of the brain, in the frontal, parietal, temporal, occipital, motor, somatosensory and visual areas.

It is enriched in the deep layers, layer 5 and layer 6, and it clusters at the interface where layer 6 meets the white matter, the cable bundle beneath the cortex.

In macaque, human and marmoset it also spreads upward into layers 2 and 3, unlike in mouse.

Related cells occur in the hippocampus and the amygdala, but those lie outside this chapter.

NUMBER:

In macaque cortex this type made up 3.9 percent of interneurons, that is 467 nuclei out of 12,097, and human and marmoset counts were similar.

Applying that fraction to the roughly 3.2 billion inhibitory neurons of the human neocortex gives about 125 million cells, with a plausible range of 90 to 160 million.

That is roughly 0.8 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons counted by Azevedo and colleagues in 2009, and roughly 0.15 percent of the 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

Confidence in the fraction is moderate because it rests on several independent single-cell surveys; confidence in the absolute count is lower because it inherits every uncertainty in the total.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Inject a steady current and the cell does not fire at once; instead the voltage crawls upward for tens to hundreds of milliseconds before the first spike, a behaviour called late spiking.

The delay comes from a potassium current that opens quickly and fades slowly, acting like a handbrake that must wear off.

Input resistance is high, commonly 150 to 400 megaohms, so small currents move the voltage a long way.

Primate neurogliaform cells, unlike rodent ones, often show a sag, a slow rebound when the voltage is pushed downward.

More than 80 percent of neurogliaform-family cells can be driven into persistent firing, continuing to spike for tens of seconds after the stimulus stops.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives excitatory contacts from nearby pyramidal cells, from the thalamus, the brain's central relay station, and from long-range cortical fibres.

It sends its output onto the dendritic shafts and spines of pyramidal cells and onto many other interneurons, including cells of its own kind.

Crucially it also forms gap junctions, direct electrical tunnels between cells, with an unusually wide range of interneuron partners rather than only its own type.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, generally under 0.2 micrometres in diameter, and conducts slowly.

Boutons, the swellings where transmitter is released, occur roughly every 3 to 4 micrometres and are small.

Many boutons face no classical partner membrane at all, which is the anatomical basis of releasing into the space between cells.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter is GABA, the brain's main calming chemical.

The cell also carries neuropeptide Y, a slow-acting signalling peptide, and members of the wider family carry neuronal nitric oxide synthase, the enzyme that makes the gas nitric oxide.

It is strongly silenced by mu-opioid receptors, the same receptors that morphine acts on, and it is excited through alpha-7 nicotinic receptors, which respond to the brain's own acetylcholine.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none.

The axon is unmyelinated, meaning it has no fatty insulating sleeve, because insulation would defeat the purpose of releasing transmitter continuously along the whole cable.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Far cheaper to run than a fast-spiking cell, because it fires slowly and lacks the expensive high-speed sodium and potassium machinery.

Against that, it must maintain millimetres of ultrafine membrane, so the housekeeping cost of transporting proteins and mitochondria along the axon is high relative to the cell's small volume.

PLASTICITY:

The slow inhibitory response it produces can be weakened for minutes by prior activity, largely through GABA-B autoreceptors on its own terminals sensing the transmitter it just released.

Opioids, whether the body's own or a drug, can switch its output off almost completely, which is a fast and reversible form of plasticity.

Persistent firing shows the axon itself can hold a memory of recent activity.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here are not bystanders but part of the computation.

Their GABA transporters, especially GAT-3, set how far the released GABA cloud spreads and how long it lasts, so astrocyte density around this cell effectively tunes the radius of its influence.

Nitric oxide made by neighbouring family members diffuses freely through glia and can widen local blood vessels, coupling this cell type to blood flow in a way most interneurons are not.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the deep cortex loses its slow, wide brake.

Layer 5 and layer 6 pyramidal cells would keep their fast point-to-point inhibition but lose the diffuse hush that follows a burst of activity, so runaway excitation would build more easily and the deep layers would drift toward the rodent pattern.

The distinctive primate expansion of this cell is one of the few concrete cellular differences that separates a human deep cortex from a mouse one.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its central trick is volume transmission: GABA is released into the extracellular space and reaches receptors that are not at any synapse.

A single action potential can activate GABA-B receptors, the slow metabotropic kind that normally need a burst, because the transmitter lingers.

The cell is electrically coupled to other interneurons through gap junctions, so a group of them behaves partly as one sheet.

It can fire persistently for tens of seconds, meaning the axon stores state.

Nitric oxide from the family acts as a retrograde messenger and a vasodilator, letting the cell speak to blood vessels and to the terminals that contact it.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: excitatory glutamate currents from local layer 5 and layer 6 pyramidal cells, thalamic afferents and long-range cortical fibres, in the range 0 to 300 picoamperes.

• INPUTS: acetylcholine acting on alpha-7 nicotinic receptors, modelled as a 0 to 1 gain on excitability.

• INPUTS: mu-opioid receptor occupancy, 0 to 1, which multiplies output strength by a factor from 1 down to about 0.1.

• OUTPUTS: an extracellular GABA concentration field centred on the cell, peaking near 100 micromolar inside the plexus and falling to under 1 micromolar by 60 micrometres.

• OUTPUTS: slow GABA-A currents with a decay time constant near 50 to 70 milliseconds and GABA-B currents onto pyramidal dendrites and neighbouring interneurons.

• STATE: membrane voltage, availability of the slow potassium brake, GABA-B autoreceptor occupancy, persistent-firing flag, local GABA concentration.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 150 to 400 megaohms, membrane time constant 10 to 25 milliseconds, resting potential near minus 65 to minus 70 millivolts, threshold near minus 42 millivolts, bouton spacing 3 to 4 micrometres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: brake decay 50 to 150 milliseconds, GABA-A slow decay 50 to 70 milliseconds, GABA-B response 150 to 500 milliseconds, persistent firing seconds to tens of seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of LAMP5-positive interneurons is seen in Alzheimer's disease, and reducing LAMP5 in mice worsens network hypersynchrony in both amyloid-driven and tau-driven models, so the simulated failure is removal of the slow blanket brake followed by runaway synchronous discharge.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to drive a Lamp5-Lhx6 cell to its delayed first spike by letting a slow potassium brake wear off.
Create a number variable called depolarisation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called brake with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called change with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called elapsed with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
While elapsed is less than 600 remains true, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the product of brake and 26.
    Set change to the result.
    Calculate the sum of change and depolarisation.
    Set change to the result.
    Calculate the difference of 30 and change.
    Set change to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of change divided by 150.
    Set change to the result.
    Calculate the sum of depolarisation and change.
    Set depolarisation to the result.
    Calculate the product of brake and 0.99875.
    Set brake to the result.
    If depolarisation is greater than 26, then perform the following actions.
        Add elapsed to the end of spike times.
        Set depolarisation to 0.
        Set brake to 0.5.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of elapsed and 0.1.
    Set elapsed to the result.
End the loop.
Display spike times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python was chosen because the delayed-spike logic is short and every number stays readable.
DT = 0.1           # milliseconds per step
TAU_M = 15.0       # membrane time constant, milliseconds
TAU_BRAKE = 60.0   # milliseconds for the slow potassium brake to fade
DRIVE = 30.0       # steady drive, millivolts above rest
THRESH = 26.0      # spike threshold, millivolts above rest
G_BRAKE = 26.0     # brake strength in millivolts when fully available
def run(duration=600.0):
    v = 0.0        # depolarisation above resting potential, millivolts
    brake = 1.0    # availability of the delaying potassium current, 0 to 1
    spikes = []
    for i in range(int(duration / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        # the brake subtracts from the drive, so threshold is out of reach at first
        dv = (DRIVE - v - G_BRAKE * brake) / TAU_M
        v += dv * DT
        brake -= (brake / TAU_BRAKE) * DT
        if v >= THRESH:
            spikes.append(round(t, 1))
            v = 0.0
            brake = min(1.0, brake + 0.25)   # each spike partly re-arms the brake
    return spikes
train = run()
print("first spike at", train[0], "ms")
print("spikes in 600 ms:", len(train))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the cell holding two contradictory birth certificates at once, LAMP5 from one embryonic nursery and LHX6 from the other, and it is about eight times more common in primate cortex than in mouse cortex.

CHAPTER 34. ROSEHIP CELLS (COG)

Under the microscope, its axon terminals bulge like the fat red berries of a wild rose - and nobody has ever found this cell in a mouse.

Rosehip is a shape name that teaches: the compact, bushy axon studded with large, round boutons genuinely looks like a rosehip, providing the exact visual fingerprint used to identify the cell under a microscope.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is an inhibitory nerve cell of the top layer of the human cerebral cortex, described for the first time in 2018 by Boldog and colleagues.

It releases gamma-aminobutyric acid, abbreviated GABA, the brain's main calming chemical.

Its speciality is precision at a distance: it places its brakes on the thin dendritic shafts of pyramidal cells far above their cell bodies, and by doing so it can veto a spike that is travelling backwards up into the dendritic tree.

That backward-travelling spike is the signal a pyramidal cell uses to tell its own dendrites that it has just fired, which is central to how the cortex decides what to learn.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is small and sits in layer 1, the thin, nearly cell-free skin at the very surface of the cortex.

It has about five or six main dendrites, on average 5.5, that stay within layer 1 and only occasionally dip into layer 2.

The axon forms a compact, bushy, almost shrub-like tangle directly around the cell, studded with unusually large boutons, the swellings that release transmitter, which give the cell its name.

SIZE:

Total dendritic length averages 1.96 millimetres, plus or minus 0.90.

Total axonal length averages 11.13 millimetres, plus or minus 1.99, packed into a bush measuring about 288 micrometres across and 263 micrometres tall.

Boutons average 0.37 cubic micrometres in volume, roughly four times larger than those of an ordinary neurogliaform cell, and sit about 3.97 micrometres apart along the axon.

The active zone, the small patch where transmitter is actually released, averages 0.11 square micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No formal subtypes have been established.

The cell maps onto a single gene-expression cluster, originally labelled i5, so present evidence suggests one coherent type rather than a family, although human layer 1 as a whole holds at least four interneuron groups and the boundaries between rosehip cells and their neighbours are still being redrawn.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer 1 of the human neocortex, documented in temporal and frontal cortex from surgical and postmortem tissue.

It sits at two interfaces at once: the pial surface above, where the brain meets its membranes and cerebrospinal fluid, and the layer 1 to layer 2 border below.

Functionally it also straddles an interface, because its cell body is in layer 1 while its targets are the dendrites of pyramidal cells whose bodies lie down in layer 3.

NUMBER:

Rosehip cells make up 10 to 15 percent of the GABA-releasing neurons of layer 1.

Layer 1 is very sparsely populated, holding on the order of 1 percent of neocortical neurons, which would be about 160 million cells, nearly all of them inhibitory.

That yields roughly 16 to 25 million rosehip cells, and honesty demands a wider stated range of 10 to 35 million.

That is about 0.1 to 0.2 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons and about 0.02 percent of the 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

Confidence is low, because the layer 1 fraction is an estimate rather than a direct count; the 10 to 15 percent figure itself is well measured.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting membrane potential averages minus 61.34 millivolts, plus or minus 5.8.

Input resistance averages 139.6 megaohms, plus or minus 54.1, and the membrane time constant averages 7.3 milliseconds, plus or minus 3.7.

The cell shows a sag of 1.73 and a resonance peak at 4.17 hertz, meaning it responds best to inputs arriving at about four times a second, in the theta rhythm band.

Its firing is irregular and stuttering: the variation in the gap between spikes averages 87 milliseconds, plus or minus 64.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Other layer 1 interneurons connect onto rosehip cells in about 45 percent of tested pairs, producing inhibitory potentials of 0.9 to 1.5 millivolts that get weaker with repetition.

Rosehip cells connect onto layer 3 pyramidal cells in about 46 percent of tested pairs.

Every one of 31 sampled boutons contacted a dendritic shaft, not a spine and not a cell body, which is an unusually pure targeting rule.

Those contacts sit 290 micrometres from the pyramidal cell body on average, with a range of 94 to 455 micrometres.

Rosehip cells also form gap junctions, direct electrical tunnels, with other rosehip cells in about 57 percent of pairs, with a coupling coefficient near 0.05.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, unmyelinated, and heavily branched, with 1.52 branch points per 100 micrometres.

The distinguishing feature is the bouton, four times the usual volume, which allows a small number of contacts to deliver a reliable brake.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA, made by the enzyme glutamate decarboxylase 1, abbreviated GAD1.

The cell also carries cholecystokinin, a signalling peptide, and it lacks the cannabinoid receptor CNR1, somatostatin, calretinin and parvalbumin, a negative fingerprint that distinguishes it from every other known cortical interneuron.

Its gene signature includes TRPC3, SV2C, CPLX3, LAMP5, EYA4, PRSS12, NTNG1 and SSTR2.

MYELINATION:

None.

The axon is bare, which suits a cell whose entire output is delivered within a few hundred micrometres of its own cell body.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest.

Firing is slow and irregular, so the sodium and potassium pumping bill is small, but the large boutons hold big pools of vesicles that must be refilled, and 11 millimetres of axon must be supplied with mitochondria.

PLASTICITY:

Inputs onto the cell depress with repeated use, with paired-pulse ratios of 0.27 to 0.71, meaning the second of two closely spaced inputs is much weaker.

Because it controls backpropagating spikes, it sits upstream of learning itself: by suppressing dendritic calcium signals, from 18.8 percent to 12.8 percent change in fluorescence in the original measurements, it gates whether nearby synapses strengthen.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Layer 1 is dense in astrocyte processes and in the endfeet that wrap the surface blood vessels, and it lies directly beneath the glia limitans, the astrocyte wall that seals the brain from its coverings.

Astrocytic GABA transporters here must clear transmitter from a compartment with unusually little neuronal membrane, so the same amount of released GABA travels further than it would in a crowded deep layer.

Nothing uniquely specialised has been reported about the microglia around this cell.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove rosehip cells and layer 1 keeps its incoming long-range fibres but loses its finest brake on the apical dendrites below.

Pyramidal cells in layer 3 would still be inhibited near their cell bodies, but the microdomain veto that stops a single stretch of dendrite from confirming a spike would vanish.

The cortex would become blunter: less able to say no to one branch while saying yes to another.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The rosehip cell is a dendritic computation device that happens to be a separate neuron.

Its inhibition is placed in microdomains, small patches of the dendritic tuft, so it edits the dendrite's local arithmetic rather than the cell's overall firing rate.

It is electrically coupled to its own kind by gap junctions, so a small network of rosehip cells can act together.

Its large boutons and slow rising inhibitory potential, 7.3 milliseconds to rise, plus or minus 2.4, mean it works by lingering rather than by striking fast.

It is a genuine case of human cortical specialisation, with only weak transcriptomic similarity, a correlation of 0.34, to the nearest mouse candidate.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: inhibitory potentials from other layer 1 interneurons, 0.9 to 1.5 millivolts, depressing with paired-pulse ratios of 0.27 to 0.71.

• INPUTS: excitatory drive from long-range and thalamic fibres arriving in layer 1, plus gap junction current from neighbouring rosehip cells with a coupling coefficient near 0.05.

• OUTPUTS: inhibitory potentials of about 0.087 millivolts, plus or minus 0.059, delivered exclusively onto dendritic shafts of layer 3 pyramidal cells at 94 to 455 micrometres from the cell body.

• STATE: membrane voltage, sag current activation, inhibitory conductance rise and decay variables, gap junction voltage of coupled partners.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential minus 61.34 millivolts, input resistance 139.6 megaohms, membrane time constant 7.3 milliseconds, resonance peak 4.17 hertz, sag ratio 1.73, connection probability to layer 3 pyramidal cells 0.46.

• TIME CONSTANTS: inhibitory rise 7.3 milliseconds, slow GABA-A decay of order 50 milliseconds, interspike interval variability 87 milliseconds, resonance period about 240 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: because the cell vetoes backpropagating spikes in the dendritic tuft, its loss predicts unchecked dendritic calcium entry, indiscriminate strengthening of synapses, and increased seizure risk in the superficial cortex; direct human disease evidence is still lacking and the simulation should flag this as an inference, not a measurement.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to place a rosehip cell's slow shunt on one dendritic shaft and measure how much of a backpropagating spike survives.
Create a number variable called shunt with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called elapsed with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called surviving with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called record with initial value empty list.
While elapsed is less than 300 remains true, repeat the following steps.
    If elapsed is equal to 90, then perform the following actions.
        Set shunt to 0.7.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of shunt and 0.9802.
    Set shunt to the result.
    Calculate the sum of shunt and 1.
    Set surviving to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of 40 divided by surviving.
    Set surviving to the result.
    If elapsed is greater than or equal to 100, then perform the following actions.
        If elapsed is less than or equal to 105, then perform the following actions.
            Add surviving to the end of record.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of elapsed and 1.
    Set elapsed to the result.
End the loop.
Display record to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C was chosen because a whole-cortex simulator runs millions of these compartments and C keeps the inner loop tiny. */
/* Build with: cc rosehip.c -lm */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#define DT      0.05   /* milliseconds per step */
#define EL    -70.0    /* leak reversal, millivolts */
#define EGABA -75.0    /* chloride reversal at the shaft, millivolts */
#define GL      0.05   /* leak conductance, microsiemens */
#define CM      0.10   /* compartment capacitance, nanofarads */
#define TAUR    7.3    /* rosehip inhibitory rise, milliseconds */
#define TAUD   50.0    /* slow GABA-A decay, milliseconds */
#define GMAX    0.06   /* peak rosehip conductance, microsiemens */
static double bap(double t) {
    double s = t - 100.0;          /* backpropagating spike arrives at 100 ms */
    if (s < 0.0) return 0.0;
    return 40.0 * exp(-s / 2.0);   /* millivolt drive, brief and large */
}
int main(void) {
    double v = EL, r = 0.0, d = 0.0, peak = EL;
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i < 6000; i++) {
        double t = i * DT;
        if (fabs(t - 90.0) < DT / 2.0) { r = 1.0; d = 1.0; }  /* rosehip fires first */
        r -= (r / TAUR) * DT;
        d -= (d / TAUD) * DT;
        double g = GMAX * (d - r);   /* slow rise, much slower decay */
        v += DT * (bap(t) * GL - g * (v - EGABA) - GL * (v - EL)) / CM;
        if (v > peak) peak = v;
    }
    printf("peak tuft depolarisation %.2f mV (rest %.1f mV)\n", peak, EL);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Boutons four times the normal size, arranged in a compact bush in layer 1, contacting dendritic shafts and nothing else, on a cell that is GAD1 and cholecystokinin positive but negative for CNR1, somatostatin, calretinin and parvalbumin, with no known counterpart in any rodent.

CHAPTER 35. BITUFTED CELLS (Repeat-Firing Feedback Damping Neuron) (COG)

It looks like a tiny tree with two crowns - one reaching up toward the surface and one reaching down toward the white matter - and that shape lets one small cell listen to every layer of the cortex at once.

Bitufted uses a Latin prefix to describe two dendritic tufts, which is an anatomical footnote that hides an unusually well-understood job.

Repeat-Firing names the condition under which the cell wakes up: the excitatory synapses made onto it grow stronger with each successive spike, so a single isolated spike barely moves it while a run of spikes recruits it powerfully.

Feedback names the loop: the cell is driven by the very same pyramidal cells it projects back onto, often forming a reciprocal pair.

Damping names the consequence: a rising dendritic inhibition that acts as a brake when local excitation becomes repetitive, keeping sustained activity from running away.

Neuron marks it as a key feedback-inhibitory cortical interneuron.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is an inhibitory nerve cell named for its shape rather than its chemistry: two tufts of dendrites, the input branches, leaving opposite poles of the cell body and running vertically.

Most bitufted cells release gamma-aminobutyric acid, abbreviated GABA, the brain's main calming chemical, and most also carry somatostatin, a signalling peptide.

Their job is to act as a learned, frequency-sensitive brake on the dendrites of excitatory pyramidal cells: the harder the pyramidal cells work, the stronger the bitufted cell's input becomes, so it switches on late in a burst and clamps the dendrites down.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is oval and vertically elongated.

Two dendritic tufts leave the top and bottom poles and extend vertically, often spanning most of the cortical depth, so the cell samples input from layer 1 down to layer 6.

The axon usually descends and ascends within a narrow vertical column, contacting dendrites rather than cell bodies.

SIZE:

Cell body about 10 to 20 micrometres across.

The dendritic span is the striking part: several hundred micrometres to more than a millimetre vertically, in a horizontal footprint often narrower than 150 micrometres.

Total axon length is typically a few millimetres, distributed along a vertical column.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Because bitufted is a shape and not a gene, the class cuts across molecular families.

The largest group is somatostatin positive, overlapping with Martinotti cells, which send an axon up into layer 1.

A second group is calretinin or vasoactive intestinal peptide positive, generally smaller, and often specialised to inhibit other interneurons rather than pyramidal cells, which disinhibits the network.

A third group carries neuropeptide Y and sometimes cholecystokinin.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Predominantly layers 2 and 3 and layer 4 of the neocortex, with a further population in layer 5 and layer 6, across frontal, motor, somatosensory, visual, parietal and temporal areas.

The dendritic tufts cross every laminar interface in the cortex, and the upward tuft characteristically reaches the layer 1 to layer 2 border where long-range and thalamic fibres arrive.

NUMBER:

Bitufted morphology accounts for a substantial slice of cortical interneurons, and taking a conservative 8 to 12 percent of the roughly 3.2 billion neocortical inhibitory neurons gives about 250 to 400 million cells, with a working value near 320 million.

That is roughly 1.5 to 2.5 percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons and about 0.37 percent of the 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

Confidence is moderate for the order of magnitude and low for the precise value, because the class is defined by shape and different laboratories draw its boundary in different places.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Typically regular spiking or low-threshold spiking, meaning the cell fires readily from a hyperpolarised state, with clear adaptation, so the spike train slows during a maintained input.

Spikes are broader than those of fast-spiking cells, input resistance is moderate to high, and the cell often shows a burst at the start of a depolarisation.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The signature property, shown by Reyes and colleagues in 1998, is target-cell-specific facilitation: excitatory contacts from a layer 2 or 3 pyramidal cell onto a bitufted cell grow stronger with each successive presynaptic spike, while contacts from the same pyramidal cell onto a multipolar interneuron grow weaker.

The consequence is that bitufted cells are recruited by sustained, high-frequency pyramidal firing and stay quiet during sparse activity.

Their output goes onto pyramidal dendrites, and in the calretinin and vasoactive intestinal peptide subgroup onto other interneurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin and mostly unmyelinated, running vertically, with boutons distributed along dendritic targets rather than concentrated on cell bodies.

Conduction is slow, in the range of a fraction of a metre per second, which suits a cell that acts on the timescale of hundreds of milliseconds rather than microseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA is the fast transmitter.

Somatostatin is the commonest co-transmitter, and subsets carry neuropeptide Y, calbindin, calretinin, vasoactive intestinal peptide, cholecystokinin or nitric oxide synthase.

Uniquely among cortical interneurons, this cell can also release GABA from its dendrites, acting backwards onto the terminals that excite it.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none on the fine collaterals, though sparse myelin has been reported on proximal segments of some cortical interneuron axons.

The functional consequence is slow conduction, which is acceptable because the cell's role is integrative rather than time-critical.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate.

Firing rates are lower than in fast-spiking cells, but the enormous vertical dendritic tree is expensive to maintain, and peptide transmitters such as somatostatin must be manufactured in the cell body and shipped the full length of the axon, which no small-molecule transmitter requires.

PLASTICITY:

Its defining plasticity is short term and presynaptic: facilitation with a time constant of roughly 100 to 300 milliseconds makes the cell a detector of sustained activity.

Its second form of plasticity is retrograde: bursts of backpropagating spikes raise calcium in the bitufted cell's dendrite, which triggers GABA release from that dendrite, which activates GABA-B receptors on the incoming pyramidal terminal and depresses the very input that drove it.

Somatostatin cells are also central to long-term changes in dendritic excitability during learning.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes around the vertical dendrites must clear glutamate along an unusually long, thin structure, and their transporters help keep the dendritic calcium signal local.

Because dendritic GABA release happens outside classical synapses, astrocytic GABA transporters set how far that retrograde signal travels.

Otherwise the glial environment is not reported to be special.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove bitufted cells and the cortex loses its use-dependent dendritic brake.

Brief, sparse activity would look normal, but sustained bursts would no longer recruit inhibition onto the apical dendrites, so pyramidal cells would keep amplifying their own input without limit.

Concretely, the region would lose the ability to stop a strong signal from spreading into every neighbouring column, and the crisp boundary between an attended feature and its surround would blur.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell is a textbook case of computation happening outside the cell body.

Backpropagating action potentials invade its dendrites and raise calcium there.

That calcium triggers exocytotic release of GABA from the dendrite itself, which acts as a retrograde messenger on GABA-B receptors on the presynaptic pyramidal terminal, depressing the excitatory input, as Zilberter and colleagues showed in 2000.

Somatostatin is released by volume transmission and acts slowly over a wide area.

The vertical dendritic tree performs its own integration across layers before the cell body ever sees a summed input.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: facilitating glutamate synapses from local pyramidal cells, initial release probability near 0.09, facilitation increment near 0.15 per spike.

• INPUTS: long-range and thalamic excitation onto the upper dendritic tuft in layer 1, and cholinergic and serotonergic modulation setting a gain of roughly 0.5 to 2.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto the apical and basal dendrites of pyramidal cells, and in the calretinin and vasoactive intestinal peptide subgroup onto other interneurons.

• OUTPUTS: somatostatin by volume transmission, and dendritic GABA acting retrogradely on presynaptic GABA-B receptors.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation current, synaptic facilitation variable, dendritic calcium concentration, retrograde depression level, somatostatin store.

• PARAMETERS: baseline release probability 0.09, facilitation increment 0.15, spike threshold about 15 millivolts above rest, adaptation strength moderate, vertical dendritic span 400 to 1200 micrometres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: facilitation decay 100 to 300 milliseconds, excitatory potential decay 5 to 15 milliseconds, dendritic calcium decay about 100 to 200 milliseconds, retrograde GABA-B depression 300 to 600 milliseconds, somatostatin action seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: somatostatin messenger ribonucleic acid falls by about 38 percent in women and about 27 percent in men with major depressive disorder, with protein down about 19 percent in both, and reduced somatostatin interneuron function is linked to depression, anxiety and impaired dendritic gating; in simulation this appears as loss of the late, use-dependent dendritic brake.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run a burst of pyramidal spikes into a bitufted cell so that each input grows stronger, until the cell's own dendrite releases gamma-aminobutyric acid backwards and shuts that input down.
Create a number variable called release probability with initial value 0.09.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called calcium with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called working with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called amplitudes with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 12 times.
    Calculate the product of release probability and gain.
    Set working to the result.
    Calculate the product of working and 6.
    Set working to the result.
    Add working to the end of amplitudes.
    If working is greater than 3, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of calcium and 1.
        Set calcium to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    If calcium is greater than 2, then perform the following actions.
        Set gain to 0.2.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of 1 and release probability.
    Set working to the result.
    Calculate the product of working and 0.15.
    Set working to the result.
    Calculate the sum of release probability and working.
    Set release probability to the result.
End the loop.
Display amplitudes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

// JavaScript was chosen because this is a short state machine that runs in any browser or in Node with no setup.
const DT = 0.1;           // milliseconds per step
const U0 = 0.09;          // baseline release probability, pyramidal to bitufted
const DF = 0.15;          // facilitation added by each presynaptic spike
const TAU_F = 200.0;      // milliseconds for facilitation to fade
const TAU_E = 8.0;        // milliseconds, decay of the excitatory potential
const TAU_CA = 120.0;     // milliseconds, decay of dendritic calcium
const TAU_RETRO = 400.0;  // milliseconds, decay of the retrograde GABA-B brake
const VTH = 3.0;          // millivolts, spike threshold of the bitufted cell
const SCALE = 6.0;        // millivolts at a release probability of one
function run(spikeTimes, duration) {
  let u = U0, epsp = 0, ca = 0, retro = 0;
  const amps = [];
  for (let t = 0; t < duration; t += DT) {
    u -= ((u - U0) / TAU_F) * DT;
    epsp -= (epsp / TAU_E) * DT;
    ca -= (ca / TAU_CA) * DT;
    retro -= (retro / TAU_RETRO) * DT;
    if (spikeTimes.some(s => Math.abs(t - s) < DT / 2)) {
      const amp = SCALE * u * (1 - 0.8 * retro);  // facilitating, then retro-gated
      epsp += amp;
      u += DF * (1 - u);
      amps.push(Number(amp.toFixed(2)));
    }
    if (epsp > VTH) { ca += 1; epsp = 0; }        // the bitufted cell fires
    if (ca > 2) { retro = 1; ca = 0; }            // dendritic GABA travels backwards
  }
  return amps;
}
const burst = [];
for (let k = 0; k < 12; k++) burst.push(50 + k * 25);  // a 40 hertz pyramidal burst
console.log("input amplitudes in millivolts:", run(burst, 600).join(", "));

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Two vertical dendritic tufts spanning the whole cortical depth, an input that gets stronger with every pyramidal spike while the neighbouring multipolar cell's input gets weaker, and the rare ability to release GABA backwards out of its own dendrite.

CHAPTER 36. HORIZONTAL CELLS OF LAYER 1 (Next-Column Tuft-Quietening Neuron) (COG)

At the very roof of your brain, in a skin of tissue almost empty of cell bodies, a few ancient neurons lie flat on their sides like surveyors who pegged out the site and never left.

The old label is half a shape word and half an address, combining a spatial orientation with a layer number without teaching purpose.

Next-Column names the reach that makes this cell unusual: its axon runs sideways rather than up and down, possessing the longest horizontal collaterals of any cell in the top sheet and carrying its influence past its own column into adjacent ones.

Tuft-Quietening names the target and effect: the top sheet is where the apical tufts of pyramidal cells gather to receive feedback, and inhibition delivered here determines whether those incoming expectations can influence the cell body.

Neuron marks it as a specialized upper-layer interneuron, enabling one patch of cortex to quieten the incoming feedback of neighboring columns.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a neuron whose body and dendrites lie parallel to the brain's surface instead of pointing into it.

It lives in layer 1, also called the molecular layer, the outermost of the six sheets of the neocortex.

The famous members are the Cajal-Retzius cells, among the first neurons born in the human cortex, appearing five to seven weeks after conception.

Their main output is chemical, not electrical: they secrete reelin, a giant protein of 3461 amino acids and about 388 kilodaltons, which tells later-born neurons where the top of the cortex is.

Because of reelin the cortex builds itself inside out, each new wave climbing past the older cells and stopping just below the surface.

In adults a smaller population persists and works as a slow horizontal binder, spreading excitation sideways across the dendritic tufts of many different columns.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is a spindle, tapered at both ends, lying with its long axis parallel to the pia mater, the thin membrane wrapping the brain.

One or two long, sparsely branched dendrites run out horizontally from the poles.

Unlike almost every other cortical neuron there is no apical dendrite reaching up and no skirt of basal dendrites reaching down.

The axon runs tangentially in a flat plexus that stays inside layer 1.

SIZE:

The soma is roughly 10 to 30 micrometres along its long axis and 6 to 12 micrometres across.

Horizontal dendrites commonly reach 300 to 900 micrometres, which is remarkable for a cell this small.

The tangential axon plexus can span one to two millimetres, crossing several cortical columns.

Layer 1 itself is only about 0.2 to 0.3 millimetres thick, roughly a tenth of the cortical thickness.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Three shapes are described in adult human cortex: horizontal, triangular and multipolar, and their numbers do not fall with age.

Developmentally there are two waves, transient Cajal-Retzius neurons that vanish and persisting ones that appear around 30 weeks of gestation and stay for life.

The persisting cells express reelin, the transcription factor Tbr1, p73, calretinin, the chemokine receptor CXCR4 and nitric oxide synthase.

A related calretinin-positive form in primate prefrontal layer 1 is called the subpial fan cell.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The address is neocortical layer 1, specifically its upper part, pressed against the glia limitans.

The glia limitans is the felt of astrocyte end-feet forming the brain's outer wall, so this neuron sits at the exact interface between brain tissue and the cerebrospinal fluid of the subarachnoid space.

They occur in every neocortical area, and equivalents sit in the hippocampal molecular layer near the hippocampal fissure, the outer molecular layer of the dentate gyrus, layer 1 of entorhinal cortex, the subiculum and layer 1 of piriform cortex.

The second interface that matters is the layer 1 to layer 2 boundary, where their axons meet apical tufts arriving from below.

NUMBER:

Layer 1 as a whole holds roughly 150 to 250 million neurons across both hemispheres, about one to one and a half percent of the 16.34 billion neocortical neurons.

That comes from layer 1 being about a tenth of cortical thickness with a measured density in human primary visual cortex of 11,900 neurons per cubic millimetre against a whole-cortex mean of 79,200.

Horizontal cells are a small minority of that.

My best estimate is 3 million, range 1 to 8 million, and confidence is low because nobody has counted them directly in whole human brains.

That is about 0.02 percent of neocortical neurons and about 0.003 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

The three types counted in this batch are horizontal cells at 3 million, the Far-Hushing Slow-Wave Neuron at 25 million and the Cortex-To-Cortex Linking Neuron at 200 million, some 228 million in total, about 1.4 percent of the regional budget.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Most measurements come from developing rodent cortex, so treat them as indicative.

Input resistance is high, 300 to 800 megaohms, so a tiny current makes a large voltage swing.

Resting potential sits depolarised at about minus 60 to minus 50 millivolts, close to firing.

A hyperpolarisation-activated current, written Ih, produces a slow rebound sag whenever the cell is pushed down, giving it a springy, self-righting feel.

Spikes are broad, adaptation is strong, and firing rates stay under about 10 per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from the thalamic matrix, the diffuse calbindin-positive projection that spreads across layer 1 rather than targeting one column.

More arrive from cortico-cortical feedback axons running horizontally in layer 1, from cholinergic fibres of the nucleus basalis of Meynert, from serotonergic dorsal raphe fibres and from noradrenergic locus coeruleus fibres.

Outputs go onto the apical tufts of pyramidal neurons in layers 2, 3 and 5, and onto other layer 1 interneurons.

In development these cells are coupled to each other by gap junctions, protein channels that let current pass directly between cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, under half a micrometre, unmyelinated, running tangentially for one to two millimetres.

Conduction is slow, roughly 0.1 to 0.5 metres per second, so a signal needs several milliseconds to cross one cortical area.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The fast transmitter is glutamate, the brain's main excitatory chemical.

The signature product is reelin, released into the extracellular space rather than a synaptic cleft.

Reelin binds apolipoprotein E receptor 2 and the very low density lipoprotein receptor, which then phosphorylate an inner adaptor called Disabled-1 through Src family kinases.

Some cells also make nitric oxide, a gas that diffuses freely and widens nearby blood vessels.

Calretinin, used to stain these cells, is not a transmitter but a calcium-binding buffer.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none, and layer 1 is the least myelinated layer of the cortex.

Bare axons are one reason conduction here is so slow.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Electrically cheap, because the cell fires rarely and drives few synapses.

Chemically expensive, because building and exporting a 388 kilodalton glycoprotein loads the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, the cell's protein factory and packing depot.

Expect an unusually high ratio of manufacturing cost to spiking cost.

PLASTICITY:

Reelin does not stop working when development ends.

In adults it strengthens the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, a glutamate receptor that acts as a coincidence detector, and it supports long-term potentiation, the lasting strengthening of synapses that underlies memory.

It also controls the maturation of dendritic spines, the small knobs where excitatory synapses land.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here are genuinely unusual and have no parallel deeper in the cortex.

Layer 1 holds interlaminar astrocytes, found only in primates, with a soma about 10 micrometres across and one or two tortuous processes diving up to a millimetre through layers 2 to 4.

Glia limitans end-feet separate these neurons from cerebrospinal fluid by a single cellular sheet, so they are unusually exposed to whatever that fluid carries.

Microglia, the brain's resident immune cells, clear most Cajal-Retzius cells by programmed cell death in early life, so microglial restraint is a condition of this cell's survival.

Oligodendrocyte support is minimal because there is almost nothing here to myelinate.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take these cells out during development and the cortex inverts: neurons pile up in the wrong order and the six-sheet architecture collapses into a disordered slab.

Take them out of the adult and layer 1 loses its horizontal binder, the sideways excitation that lets tufts from widely separated columns be nudged together.

The region would keep its columns and lose its cross-column glue, along with the standing reelin tone that keeps distal dendrites willing to change.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The main output is not a spike but a protein poured into the extracellular space, a pure case of volume transmission where the message reaches whoever holds the receptor.

Reelin is then cut by extracellular proteases of the ADAMTS family, so its range and lifetime are set outside the cell that made it.

Gap junctions let a population depolarise together in development.

Immature cells release glutamate from dendrites as well as axons, so the whole surface can be an output surface.

Nitric oxide synthase lets them widen local capillaries, coupling their own activity to blood flow.

Sitting against the cerebrospinal fluid and carrying CXCR4, they read chemical gradients in that fluid as a positional signal.

Housekeeping is dominated by the secretory pathway, and failure of secretion, not failure of firing, is the plausible way this cell breaks.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamatergic drive from thalamic matrix and cortico-cortical feedback axons in layer 1, 0 to 200 picoamps; neuromodulation by acetylcholine, serotonin and noradrenaline as a gain term of 0.8 to 1.5; ambient gamma-aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical, at 0.1 to 1.0 micromolar.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto apical tufts of pyramidal neurons in layers 2, 3 and 5 within about 1 millimetre; reelin as a scalar concentration field in layer 1; nitric oxide as a vasodilator field over about 100 micrometres.

• STATE: membrane voltage; sag activation variable; intracellular calcium; reelin pool; recent spike count.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 300 to 800 megaohms; resting potential minus 60 to minus 50 millivolts; threshold about minus 42 millivolts; maximum sag conductance about 4 nanosiemens.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds; sag activation about 180 milliseconds; reelin clearance about 2 minutes; developmental reelin gradient, weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: reelin messenger RNA and protein fall by roughly half in the cortex of people with schizophrenia, alongside hypermethylation of the RELN promoter, a chemical tag that silences a gene; altered Cajal-Retzius density is used to classify focal cortical dysplasia, a malformation causing drug-resistant epilepsy; total loss of reelin signalling gives lissencephaly, a smooth brain with grossly disordered layers.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide how much reelin a horizontal cell of layer one releases beneath the pia, given the input arriving along its long flat dendrites.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative sixty five.
Create a number variable called sag current with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called reelin pool with initial value one.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called step counter with initial value zero.
While step counter is less than eight thousand, repeat the following steps.
    Create a number variable called input current with initial value sixty.
    Calculate the difference of membrane voltage and negative eighty two.
    Set sag current to the quotient of that difference divided by negative two hundred.
    Calculate the sum of input current and sag current.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of that sum divided by fifty.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative forty two.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to negative fifty eight.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and one.
        Set reelin pool to the sum of reelin pool and two hundredths.
    End the conditional block.
    Set reelin pool to the product of reelin pool and nine hundred and ninety nine thousandths.
    Set step counter to the sum of step counter and one.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
Display reelin pool to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the behaviour of interest is a slow secretory process sitting on top of slow spiking, so clarity beats speed and no numerical library is needed.

# Python model of a layer 1 horizontal cell: slow spiking plus reelin release.
import math

DT = 0.5                                   # time step, milliseconds
E_LEAK, R_IN, TAU_M = -65.0, 400.0, 25.0   # mV, megaohms, ms (leaky and slow)
V_THRESH, V_RESET = -42.0, -58.0           # mV
E_H, G_H_MAX, TAU_H = -30.0, 0.004, 180.0  # sag current: mV, microsiemens, ms
TAU_REELIN = 120000.0                      # reelin pool empties over ~2 minutes

def step(v, h, reelin, i_pA):
    """Advance one 0.5 ms step. i_pA is tuft input in picoamps."""
    h_inf = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 82.0) / 7.0))   # sag opens when hyperpolarised
    h += DT * (h_inf - h) / TAU_H
    i_h = G_H_MAX * h * (v - E_H) * 1000.0             # microsiemens x mV = nA -> pA
    v += DT * (-(v - E_LEAK) - (i_h - i_pA) * R_IN / 1000.0) / TAU_M
    spike = v >= V_THRESH
    if spike:
        v = V_RESET
    # Reelin is made slowly, dumped under the pia on each spike, cleared slowly,
    # so the cell reports its recent history rather than this instant.
    reelin += DT * (-reelin / TAU_REELIN) + (0.02 if spike else 0.0)
    return v, h, reelin, spike

v, h, reelin, count = -65.0, 0.0, 1.0, 0
for k in range(int(4000 / DT)):                        # simulate 4 seconds
    drive = 60.0 if 1000.0 <= k * DT < 3000.0 else 0.0 # 60 pA tuft input for 2 s
    v, h, reelin, s = step(v, h, reelin, drive)
    count += 1 if s else 0
print("spikes in 4 s: %d   reelin pool: %.3f   resting Vm: %.1f mV" % (count, reelin, v))

Run, it prints 30 spikes in 4 seconds, a reelin pool of 1.557 and a resting potential of minus 62.2 millivolts.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cortical neuron that lies down.

Find a spindle soma flat against the pia, long horizontal dendrites, no apical dendrite, calretinin inside and reelin pouring out, and you have found a horizontal cell of layer 1.


PART THREE: HIPPOCAMPAL FORMATION - MEMORY AND NAVIGATION

CHAPTER 37. DENTATE GRANULE CELLS (COG)

Fifteen million tight-lipped little cells stand at the front door of your memory system, and almost all of them stay silent almost all of the time.

Dentate names their home: the tooth-like, serrated layer of the hippocampus where these cells sit packed side by side.

Granule Cell describes their shape and size: tiny, densely packed grains of neurons whose sparse firing creates distinct, non-overlapping codes for every memory entering the brain.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The dentate granule cell is a small excitatory neuron, a nerve cell that makes its targets fire, and its job is pattern separation: giving two nearly identical experiences two very different codes.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

One fan of dendrites, the branches that collect incoming signals, rises from a small oval cell body, with none below it in the healthy adult.

Dendritic length totals 2,800 to 3,500 micrometres at 1.3 to 1.6 spines per micrometre, giving 3,600 to 5,600 excitatory contacts.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 10 micrometres across, a seventh the width of a human hair, and the dendritic fan reaches 300 to 400 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Suprapyramidal cells of the upper blade are larger and spinier than infrapyramidal cells below, and adult-born cells spend weeks in an immature stage far more excitable than their neighbours.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies pack four to eight deep in the granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus, dendrites occupy the inner, middle and outer molecular layer, and axons cross the hilus into stratum lucidum of CA3.

The defining interface is the subgranular zone, where granule cell layer meets hilus and new granule cells are born.

NUMBER:

Unbiased stereology, a counting method that avoids guessing from thin slices, gives about 15 million per hemisphere and 30 million in total, roughly 0.035 percent of the nervous system's 86 billion neurons.

Confidence is good, with published values of 9 to 17 million per side.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is unusually low at minus 75 to minus 85 millivolts, input resistance is only 100 to 300 megaohms, the membrane time constant is 20 to 40 milliseconds, and most cells never fire at all.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The perforant path from entorhinal layer two brings objects and smells to the outer molecular layer and space to the middle, mossy cells supply the inner molecular layer, and each granule cell reaches only 11 to 18 CA3 pyramidal cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The mossy fibre axon is 0.2 micrometres thick and 3 to 5 millimetres long, bearing a giant bouton 4 to 10 micrometres wide with up to 35 release sites every 150 micrometres, plus thin branches onto ten times more interneurons.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the standard excitatory messenger, is packaged with free zinc by the transporter ZnT3, and the same terminals release the opioid dynorphin.

MYELINATION:

Mossy fibres carry no fatty insulating sheath, so conduction is slow at 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

A cell that almost never fires has among the lowest running costs of any principal neuron, and most of that goes to mitochondria inside its terminals.

PLASTICITY:

Strengthening the perforant path needs dendritic spikes and the NMDA receptor, a glutamate receptor that opens only in an already depolarised cell, while the mossy fibre strengthens presynaptically without the target's help.

This layer may also add roughly 700 new neurons a day, a disputed figure.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The subgranular zone stem cells are astrocytes that kept the power to divide, astrocytes wrap the giant boutons incompletely so glutamate deliberately spills, and microglia eat newborn cells that fail.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete granule cells and the dentate gyrus becomes a plain wire: entorhinal traffic pours into CA3 undiluted, similar days collide, and the region loses its zinc and its new neurons.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Dendrites fire their own sodium and calcium spikes, without which the perforant path cannot be strengthened.

Zinc diffuses from the terminal as volume transmission, acting on a neighbourhood rather than a partner, and newborn cells are excited rather than inhibited by GABA because their chloride is high.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: 4,000 perforant path synapses from entorhinal layer two at 0 to 40 hertz, mossy cell input, inhibition to 60 hertz.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate and zinc onto 11 to 18 CA3 pyramidal cells, ten times as many interneurons, 7 to 12 mossy cells.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation current, synaptic weights, terminal facilitation, cell age.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 80 millivolts, threshold minus 45 millivolts, resistance 200 megaohms, sparseness 1 to 3 percent.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 40 milliseconds, facilitation 100 milliseconds to seconds, maturation 4 to 8 weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: in epilepsy the axons sprout onto other granule cells and build a self-exciting loop; in Alzheimer's disease the input layer thins.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire only the most strongly driven granule cells, so that similar inputs produce different codes.
Create a number variable called firing_threshold with initial value -45.
Create a number variable called allowed_winners with initial value 20.
Create a list variable called cell_drives with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called winners with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
For each cell in the population, perform the following operations.
    Set drive to -80.
    For each weight in the active inputs of cell, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the sum of drive and weight.
        Set drive to the result.
    End the loop.
    Add drive to the end of cell_drives.
End the loop.
Set winners to the strongest allowed_winners entries of cell_drives.
For each winner in winners, perform the following operations.
    Check if the drive of winner is greater than firing_threshold.
    Display the result to the console.
End the loop.
Return winners to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because pattern separation is a population sorting problem and Python states the sparseness rule in one line.

import random
random.seed(7)
N_CELLS, N_INPUTS, K = 1000, 400, 20     # only 20 cells in 1000 may fire
W = [[random.random() if random.random() < 0.05 else 0.0    # sparse weights
      for _ in range(N_INPUTS)] for _ in range(N_CELLS)]
def drive(active):                       # summed excitation for every cell
    return [sum(row[j] for j in active) for row in W]
def winners(d):                          # inhibition as k-winners-take-all
    return set(sorted(range(len(d)), key=lambda i: d[i], reverse=True)[:K])
def overlap(a, b):
    return len(a & b) / float(min(len(a), len(b)))
one = set(random.sample(range(N_INPUTS), 40))
two = set(list(one)[:36]) | set(random.sample(           # 90 percent the same
    [i for i in range(N_INPUTS) if i not in one], 4))
print("input  overlap %.2f" % overlap(one, two))
print("output overlap %.2f" % overlap(winners(drive(sorted(one))),
                                      winners(drive(sorted(two)))))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small oval body in a densely packed layer, one fan of dendrites and none below, a resting voltage near minus 80 millivolts, near-total silence, and an axon studded with giant zinc-filled boutons.

CHAPTER 38. SEMILUNAR GRANULE CELLS (Signal-Sustaining Bridge Neuron) (COG)

Just above the granule cell layer sits a crescent-shaped cousin that answers a brief flash of input by firing for the next ten seconds.

Semilunar means half-moon in Latin, describing the crescent spread of the cell's dendrites in the inner molecular layer - an anatomical description that tells a student nothing about function.

Signal-Sustaining names the cell's defining property: a brief burst of input throws these cells into a long plateau depolarization, keeping them firing for up to ten seconds after the input stops.

Bridge names the purpose that sustained firing serves: carrying an event forward across a gap in time so that experiences separated by seconds can be bound into a single memory.

Neuron marks it as a glutamatergic principal cell rather than an interneuron.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The semilunar granule cell is an excitatory neuron of the dentate gyrus that looks like a granule cell but works as a memory buffer, latching into a plateau potential, a long sustained depolarisation, and firing on after the world has moved on.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is wider than tall, giving the half-moon shape that names it, two to four thick dendrites spread over 300 micrometres across the molecular layer, and the axon is a mossy fibre to CA3 with collaterals that stay behind.

SIZE:

The cell body is 10 to 14 micrometres across, and the dendritic span is one and a half to two times a granule cell's.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No agreed subtypes exist, and some laboratories treat semilunar and ordinary granule cells as one continuum, so use a single type with a graded plateau-strength parameter.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell bodies sit in the inner molecular layer of the dentate gyrus and the top edge of the granule cell layer, and that border is the interface defining the cell.

Dendrites reach the middle and outer molecular layer while the axon reaches CA3.

NUMBER:

In the mouse these cells are at most 3 percent of granule cells, and under 5 percent of dentate projection neurons.

Scaling from 15 million granule cells per hemisphere gives an upper bound near 750,000 per side, under 0.002 percent of the nervous system, at low confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Given a long depolarising step the cell fires throughout instead of falling silent, and between spikes the voltage climbs in a slow ramp carried by voltage-gated calcium channels, pores that open on depolarisation and admit calcium.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation arrives by the perforant path, and the outputs matter most: these cells are the main source of excitation onto the cell bodies of parvalbumin basket cells, the fast inhibitory neurons that enforce sparseness, and they drive mossy cells and hilar interneurons into barrages lasting up to ten seconds.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The main axon is a mossy fibre with giant boutons, but the distinguishing feature is a set of collaterals that never leave the dentate gyrus and run through the inner molecular layer.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the transmitter, and as a mossy fibre the axon is expected to carry vesicular zinc, with no peptide signature yet established.

MYELINATION:

The axon carries no insulating sheath, so conduction is slow and local.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Plateaus are costly, because every calcium ion admitted must be pumped out against a ten-thousand-fold gradient using adenosine triphosphate, the cell's energy currency.

PLASTICITY:

Synaptic plasticity here is poorly characterised and that should be said plainly, but persistent firing binds neurons into transient cell assemblies, storage needing no synaptic change.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia are ordinary inner molecular layer astrocytes with no known specialisation, though they must clear the potassium released during long plateaus, and failure there would stretch plateaus toward the pathological.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the dentate gyrus loses its short-term memory: a brief input gives a brief answer, the hilar barrages vanish, and basket cells lose their main drive.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The plateau is dendritic computation in its purest form, a regenerative calcium event turning a millisecond input into a multi-second output.

Because it excites basket cells on their somata it is a feed-forward inhibition generator, and its collaterals allow recurrent excitation where none is usually described.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: perforant path onto wide dendrites, local excitation from mossy cells, dendritic inhibition that ends plateaus.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto parvalbumin basket cell somata, mossy cells, hilar interneurons, CA3 pyramidal cells.

• STATE: membrane voltage, plateau flag, plateau time remaining, calcium, spike count.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 70 to minus 75 millivolts, threshold minus 45 millivolts, plateau 20 to 30 millivolts lasting 300 to 3,000 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 25 milliseconds, plateau decay 300 to 3,000 milliseconds, barrage up to 10 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: runaway plateaus could seed seizures, while losing the cell removes short-term binding and weakens feed-forward inhibition.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make one semilunar granule cell keep firing long after a brief input has ended.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called firing_threshold with initial value -45.
Create a number variable called plateau_drive with initial value 27.
Create a number variable called plateau_remaining with initial value 1200.
Create a number variable called elapsed_time with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called total_drive with initial value 0.
While plateau_remaining is greater than 0, repeat the following steps.
    Set total_drive to plateau_drive.
    Check if elapsed_time is less than 50.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of total_drive and 40.
        Set total_drive to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of plateau_remaining and 0.5.
    Set plateau_remaining to the result.
    Calculate the sum of -70 and total_drive.
    Calculate the difference of the result and membrane_voltage.
    Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 50.
    Calculate the sum of membrane_voltage and the result.
    Set membrane_voltage to the result.
    Check if membrane_voltage is greater than firing_threshold.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane_voltage to -55.
        Display elapsed_time to the console.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of elapsed_time and 0.5.
    Set elapsed_time to the result.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the plateau is a small state machine and the contrast fits in two printed lines.

DT, TAU_M = 0.5, 25.0                      # step and membrane time constant, ms
V_REST, V_THRESH, V_RESET = -70.0, -45.0, -55.0
PLATEAU_DRIVE, PLATEAU_MS = 27.0, 1200.0   # calcium plateau, millivolts and ms
def run(on, stim_ms=50.0, total_ms=2000.0):
    v, left, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, []
    for step in range(int(total_ms / DT)):
        t = step * DT
        drive = 40.0 if t < stim_ms else 0.0    # perforant path stimulus
        if on and drive > 0.0 and left <= 0.0 and v > -60.0:
            left = PLATEAU_MS                   # brief input latches plateau
        if left > 0.0:
            drive, left = drive + PLATEAU_DRIVE, left - DT
        v += ((V_REST + drive) - v) / TAU_M * DT
        if v >= V_THRESH:
            spikes.append(t)
            v = V_RESET
    return spikes
for on in (False, True):
    s = run(on)
    print("%s: %d spikes, last at %.1f ms"
          % ("plateau on" if on else "plateau off", len(s), s[-1] if s else 0.0))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A wide, flat, crescent cell body above the granule layer, dendrites fanning unusually wide, and a response to a brief shock that will not stop.

CHAPTER 39. MOSSY CELLS (COG)

Cajal drew them covered in moss: they are the busiest listeners in the hippocampus, and they are the first cells to die when the temporal lobe turns epileptic.

Mossy is a plain-English shape word describing the thorny excrescences that cover the cell's proximal dendrites like moss on a tree branch - a vivid visual image that makes the cell instantly recognizable under a microscope.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The mossy cell is a large excitatory neuron of the hilus, the hollow interior of the V-shaped dentate gyrus, and it broadcasts local granule cell activity to distant slices of the same structure, usually as net inhibition.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Three to five thick dendrites leave a large multipolar cell body, and their first 100 micrometres are studded with thorny excrescences, multi-headed spines that look like clumps of moss and catch giant mossy fibre boutons.

SIZE:

The cell body is 25 to 35 micrometres across, three times a granule cell's, and dendrites extend 300 to 500 micrometres in the hilus.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Ventral cells stain strongly for the calcium-binding protein calretinin and dorsal cells faintly, and a minority send one dendrite out through the granule cell layer.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Mossy cells occupy the hilus of the dentate gyrus, also called the polymorphic layer or CA4, bounded by the two granule cell blades and the CA3c border.

Their axons run for millimetres along the long axis to the inner molecular layer on the same side and, far more sparsely in humans, to the opposite hemisphere.

NUMBER:

No human count exists: the rat has about 30,000, and stereology gives roughly 2 million hilar neurons per human hippocampus, of which mossy cells are the major excitatory share.

A working figure is 0.5 to 1.5 million per hemisphere, near 0.002 percent of the nervous system, at low confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Mossy cells receive spontaneous excitatory events at a far higher rate than any other dentate cell, hundreds per second, yet fire sparsely because their threshold climbs after every spike.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are granule cell mossy fibres onto thorny excrescences, back-projections from CA3, hilar interneurons, and fibres from the medial septum and the supramammillary nucleus.

Outputs reach granule cell dendrites and interneurons in the inner molecular layer.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is the associational and commissural pathway of the dentate gyrus: thin, heavily branched, millimetres long, and studded with small boutons rather than giant ones.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the transmitter, and these cells also release sonic hedgehog, a signalling protein of embryonic development that here keeps the local stem cell pool alive.

MYELINATION:

The axons are thin and largely unmyelinated, so news crosses the hippocampus in tens of milliseconds.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Handling hundreds of excitatory events per second is brutally expensive, and the pumps restoring the ionic gradients run near capacity.

PLASTICITY:

Both the granule cell to mossy cell synapse and the return synapse support long-term potentiation, and the cell governs structural plasticity by supplying sonic hedgehog to newborn neurons.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Hilar astrocytes carry an unusually heavy glutamate clearance load, and when they fail the mossy cells die first, the leading explanation for this cell's notorious fragility.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove mossy cells and the dentate gyrus becomes a stack of disconnected slices: activity here no longer quietens there, and the structure drifts toward hyperexcitability.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The climbing threshold is a genuine computation, turning a saturating input into a sparse output with no inhibition required.

Sonic hedgehog release makes the cell a developmental regulator, and detonation means one presynaptic spike can produce one postsynaptic spike.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: 30 to 50 giant mossy fibre synapses at 0 to 40 hertz, CA3 back-projection, septal modulation, spontaneous events at 100 to 500 hertz.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto granule cell dendrites and interneurons across 2 to 6 millimetres of the long axis.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptive threshold, calcium load, spike count.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 65 millivolts, threshold minus 45 millivolts, threshold step 4 to 8 millivolts, event amplitude 1 to 3 millivolts.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds, threshold recovery 200 to 400 milliseconds, long-axis conduction 10 to 40 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: selective death in temporal lobe epilepsy and after head injury, which removes long-range feedback inhibition and leaves granule cells prone to synchronous discharge.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a dense barrage of excitatory events into a sparse spike train using a threshold that rises with every spike.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called spike_threshold with initial value -45.
Create a number variable called threshold_step with initial value 6.
Create a number variable called event_amplitude with initial value 2.2.
Create a number variable called elapsed_time with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called output_count with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called event_arrived with initial value false.
While elapsed_time is less than 20000, repeat the following steps.
    Set event_arrived to the outcome of a fair coin toss.
    If event_arrived is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of membrane_voltage and event_amplitude.
        Set membrane_voltage to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of -65 and membrane_voltage.
    Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 20.
    Calculate the sum of membrane_voltage and the result.
    Set membrane_voltage to the result.
    Calculate the difference of -45 and spike_threshold.
    Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 250.
    Calculate the sum of spike_threshold and the result.
    Set spike_threshold to the result.
    Check if membrane_voltage is greater than spike_threshold.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane_voltage to -65.
        Calculate the sum of spike_threshold and threshold_step.
        Set spike_threshold to the result.
        Calculate the sum of output_count and 1.
        Set output_count to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of elapsed_time and 1.
    Set elapsed_time to the result.
End the loop.
Display output_count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the point is the ratio between a huge input count and a tiny output count.

import random
random.seed(3)
V_REST, THETA_BASE, THETA_STEP = -65.0, -45.0, 6.0
TAU_M, TAU_THETA, EPSP = 20.0, 250.0, 2.2    # milliseconds and millivolts
v, theta, n_in, n_out = V_REST, THETA_BASE, 0, 0
for step in range(20000):                    # twenty seconds, one ms per step
    if random.random() < 0.5:                # about 500 events per second
        n_in += 1
        v += EPSP
    v += (V_REST - v) / TAU_M                # leak back toward rest
    theta += (THETA_BASE - theta) / TAU_THETA    # threshold recovers slowly
    if v >= theta:
        n_out += 1
        v, theta = V_REST, theta + THETA_STEP    # adaptation after each spike
print("input events %d, output spikes %d" % (n_in, n_out))
print("%.0f inputs per output spike" % (n_in / float(max(n_out, 1))))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A big multipolar cell in the hollow of the dentate gyrus, proximal dendrites shaggy with thorny excrescences, drowning in excitation yet firing rarely, with an axon that runs millimetres to another slice of its own structure.

CHAPTER 40. CA3 PYRAMIDAL CELLS (Whole-From-Fragment Recall Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that lets you recall a whole evening from the smell of one dish, because its axons loop back onto its own neighbours.

CA3 (Cornu Ammonis 3) is a historical Latin address on a map of the ram's horn, telling a newcomer nothing about function.

Whole-From-Fragment names the classic computation known as pattern completion, in which a partial cue is expanded back into the entire stored memory.

Recall names the faculty, driven by the dense recurrent web these cells make with one another - where roughly thirty to seventy percent of a CA3 cell's output synapses land on fellow CA3 cells - so the memory is literally rebuilt by mutual re-excitation.

Neuron marks it as a principal excitatory projection cell of the hippocampal circuit.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The CA3 pyramidal cell is a large excitatory neuron whose axons connect massively to its own neighbours, making the region an autoassociative memory that rebuilds a whole pattern from a fragment.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A classic pyramid sends one thick apical dendrite up and several basal dendrites down, and the first stretch of that apical dendrite carries thorny excrescences which catch giant mossy fibre boutons.

SIZE:

The cell body is 20 to 30 micrometres across and the apical dendrite reaches 500 to 800 micrometres, with 10 to 16 millimetres of dendrite in total in the rat.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Anatomists divide CA3 into strips CA3c, CA3b and CA3a by distance from the dentate gyrus, and a sharper split separates thorny cells from athorny cells, which lack excrescences and burst readily.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies fill stratum pyramidale of CA3, with dendrites in stratum oriens below and strata lucidum, radiatum and lacunosum-moleculare above.

The two interfaces are the hilar border, where CA3c sits inside dentate territory, and the CA3a to CA2 border, where mossy fibre input stops.

NUMBER:

About 3 million per hemisphere and 6 million in total, roughly 0.007 percent of the nervous system, or one neuron in 14,000.

Human stereology gives about 2.7 million for CA2 and CA3 counted together, so treat the figure as accurate within about 30 percent.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Many CA3 cells are intrinsic bursters, firing complex spikes of two to six action potentials driven by calcium channels and stopped by calcium-activated potassium channels, from a resting voltage near minus 68 millivolts.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Three excitatory inputs converge: about 50 giant mossy fibre boutons from granule cells, thousands of weak recurrent collaterals from other CA3 cells, and a direct perforant path from entorhinal layer two.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

One axon branches immediately into associational collaterals back into CA3, Schaffer collaterals forward to CA1, back-projections into the hilus, and a long branch to the lateral septum.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the transmitter, and acetylcholine from the septum suppresses recurrent transmission during encoding and releases it during recall.

MYELINATION:

Local collaterals are bare while the long fibres in the alveus and fimbria are myelinated, conducting at several metres per second.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Bursting costs several times more than single spiking and tens of thousands of synapses must be maintained, so CA3 is dense with mitochondria and intolerant of any break in glucose or oxygen.

PLASTICITY:

Recurrent synapses use NMDA receptor dependent potentiation, which writes a pattern in one trial, while the mossy fibre synapse strengthens presynaptically without that receptor, so teaching and storage obey different rules.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in stratum lucidum wrap the giant boutons only partly, permitting deliberate glutamate spillover, which is the opposite of what astrocytes are built to do everywhere else.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove CA3 and the hippocampus loses one-shot memory, recall from partial cues, and the sharp wave ripples that replay experience during rest and sleep.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

A mossy fibre input can unblock NMDA receptors at nearby recurrent synapses so that a subthreshold pattern becomes a supralinear response.

CA3 axons are also joined by gap junctions, direct electrical pores that help generate very fast ripples, and dense packing allows ephaptic nudging with no synapse at all.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: 50 mossy fibre synapses at 0 to 40 hertz, 6,000 to 12,000 recurrent synapses, 4,000 perforant path synapses, inhibition to 100 hertz.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto other CA3 cells, onto CA1 by Schaffer collaterals, onto hilar mossy cells, and to the lateral septum.

• STATE: membrane voltage, burst counter, calcium, recurrent weight matrix, after-hyperpolarisation current.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 68 millivolts, threshold minus 50 millivolts, burst 2 to 6 spikes, recurrent connection probability 2 to 5 percent.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds, burst interval 5 to 15 milliseconds, after-hyperpolarisation 100 to 500 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: excess recurrent gain gives seizures, since CA3 is the most epileptogenic tissue in the brain, while too little gives failure of recall from partial cues.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to rebuild a stored pattern from a fragment, using recurrent connections and a few clamped mossy fibre inputs.
Create a list variable called state with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called clamped_units with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called running_sum with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called unit_position with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 6 times.
    Set unit_position to 0.
    For each unit in state, perform the following operations.
        Get the total number of items in clamped_units.
        Check if unit_position is less than the result.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Calculate the sum of unit_position and 1.
            Set unit_position to the result.
            Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
        End the conditional block.
        Calculate the sum of unit_position and 1.
        Set unit_position to the result.
        Set running_sum to 0.
        For each partner in state, perform the following operations.
            Calculate the product of the weight joining unit and partner and the value of partner.
            Calculate the sum of running_sum and the result.
            Set running_sum to the result.
        End the loop.
        Check if running_sum is greater than or equal to 0.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set the value of unit to 1.
        Otherwise, perform the following actions.
            Set the value of unit to -1.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
End the loop.
Display the number of units matching the target pattern to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the recurrent network is a matrix sweep and Python keeps the storage rule and the recall rule to one line each.

import random
random.seed(1)
N, SWEEPS = 64, 6
pats = [[random.choice((1, -1)) for _ in range(N)] for _ in range(2)]
W = [[0] * N for _ in range(N)]
for p in pats:                              # Hebbian storage on recurrent collaterals
    for i in range(N):
        for j in range(N):
            if i != j: W[i][j] += p[i] * p[j]
s = [pats[0][i] if i < 20 else -1 for i in range(N)]      # degraded fragment
for sweep in range(SWEEPS):
    for i in range(N):
        if i < 4: s[i] = pats[0][i]; continue    # mossy fibre clamp, detonation
        s[i] = 1 if sum(W[i][j] * s[j] for j in range(N)) >= 0 else -1
print("recovered %d of %d bits"
      % (sum(1 for i in range(N) if s[i] == pats[0][i]), N))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A large pyramid whose proximal apical dendrite is knobbly with thorny excrescences, firing in bursts, and wired more densely to its own neighbours than any other cell type in the human brain.

CHAPTER 41. CA2 PYRAMIDAL CELLS (Familiar-Individual Recognition Neuron) (COG)

A strip of tissue half a millimetre wide, ignored for a century, turns out to be where the brain files the identities of the individuals you know.

CA2 (Cornu Ammonis 2) is another historical map coordinate - a narrow strip between two larger neighbours - that hides the most striking functional fact about the region.

Familiar-Individual names what the cell keeps track of: silencing these cells abolishes an animal's memory for specific individuals it has met before while leaving general sociability, spatial memory, and contextual memory completely intact.

Recognition names the faculty: the direct sense of having met this specific one before, distinct from recalling where or when that meeting occurred.

Neuron marks it as an excitatory principal cell whose output reaches the lateral septum and hypothalamus - the primary route by which social memory triggers social behavior.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The CA2 pyramidal cell is a large excitatory neuron in the narrow band between CA3 and CA1, and it is the hub for social memory, the recognition of an individual you have met before.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is a large pyramid with few or no thorny excrescences, and its tuft in stratum lacunosum-moleculare receives an entorhinal input strong enough to fire the cell on its own.

Many cell bodies are wrapped in a perineuronal net, a lattice of sugar-coated proteins that cages the cell.

SIZE:

The cell body is 20 to 30 micrometres across, and the region is a ribbon about 500 micrometres wide but some 30 millimetres long in humans.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Cells split by depth into deep and superficial, and by how strongly they carry the marker proteins Purkinje cell protein 4 and regulator of G protein signalling 14.

WHERE IT LIVES:

CA2 occupies stratum pyramidale between CA3a and CA1, with dendrites in stratum oriens, radiatum and lacunosum-moleculare.

Both borders are true interfaces, one where mossy fibre input ends and one where the marker proteins fade, and the cell also receives fibres from the hypothalamic paraventricular and supramammillary nuclei.

NUMBER:

No reliable stand-alone human count exists, because stereology pools CA2 with CA3.

From that pooled 2.7 million and CA2's small width, 200,000 to 350,000 per hemisphere is defensible, about 0.0006 percent of the nervous system, at low confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

CA2 cells are harder to excite than their neighbours, resting near minus 70 millivolts with low input resistance, firing regularly rather than in bursts, and are most active during immobility and slow-wave sleep.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Schaffer collaterals from CA3 arrive in stratum radiatum, a very strong entorhinal layer two input arrives at the tuft, and the main output is a powerful projection to deep CA1 that bypasses the classical circuit.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon runs through stratum oriens and the alveus and arborises widely in deep CA1, so a few CA2 cells influence a great many CA1 cells.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the transmitter, but the cell is defined by what it listens to: the brain's highest density of vasopressin 1b receptors, plus abundant oxytocin receptors.

MYELINATION:

Output axons in the alveus are myelinated for fast delivery to CA1 and beyond, while local collaterals are largely bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Running costs are moderate, but the cell invests heavily in calcium pumps and buffering proteins, an investment repaid as survival through ischaemia, seizures and trauma that kill its neighbours.

PLASTICITY:

Ordinary potentiation at the Schaffer collateral input is blocked by regulator of G protein signalling 14, which limits calcium in the spines, and by the perineuronal net, and the gate opens only when vasopressin or oxytocin permits.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The perineuronal net here is the clearest case in the brain of glia and neurons jointly building a structure that limits learning, and it is unique in surrounding an excitatory cell rather than an inhibitory one.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove CA2 and the hippocampus keeps places but loses people, the shortcut to deep CA1 vanishes, and the region forfeits its one island of resistance to seizure and stroke.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The perineuronal net is memory stored outside the cell, a structural brake on synaptic change.

Vasopressin and oxytocin reach CA2 partly by volume transmission, diffusing through tissue rather than crossing a synapse, so the learning rule is set by the chemistry of the surrounding fluid.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: Schaffer collaterals into stratum radiatum, strong entorhinal layer two input at the tuft, vasopressin and oxytocin at 0 to 100 nanomolar, dense inhibition.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto deep CA1 across a wide span, back onto CA3, and to the lateral septum.

• STATE: membrane voltage, spine calcium, plasticity gate, perineuronal net integrity, accumulated potentiation.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 70 millivolts, threshold minus 48 millivolts, calcium clamp about 0.25, vasopressin gain about 4.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds, calcium extrusion 20 to 100 milliseconds, peptide action seconds to minutes, net turnover days.

• FAILURE MODE: net degradation in schizophrenia, autism and Alzheimer's disease produces loss of social recognition while spatial memory survives.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a CA2 synapse may strengthen, given repeated pairings and the presence or absence of vasopressin.
Create a number variable called synaptic_weight with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called calcium_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clamp_fraction with initial value 0.25.
Create a number variable called potentiation_threshold with initial value 3.
Create a number variable called learning_rate with initial value 0.1.
Create a number variable called calcium_this_pairing with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called vasopressin_present with initial value false.
If vasopressin_present is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set clamp_fraction to 1.
End the conditional block.
Repeat the following steps exactly 10 times.
    Set calcium_this_pairing to clamp_fraction.
    Calculate the sum of calcium_total and calcium_this_pairing.
    Set calcium_total to the result.
    Check if calcium_total is greater than potentiation_threshold.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of learning_rate and calcium_this_pairing.
        Calculate the sum of synaptic_weight and the result.
        Set synaptic_weight to the result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display synaptic_weight to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the result is one comparison between two conditions and the gating logic reads almost as English.

RGS14_CLAMP, AVP_GAIN = 0.25, 4.0    # calcium surviving the clamp, and its relief
LTP_THRESHOLD, RATE = 3.0, 0.1       # gate level and learning rate
def run(pairings=10, vasopressin=False):
    clamp = min(RGS14_CLAMP * (AVP_GAIN if vasopressin else 1.0), 1.0)
    weight, calcium_total = 1.0, 0.0
    for _ in range(pairings):
        calcium = clamp                      # calcium entering one CA2 spine
        calcium_total += calcium
        if calcium_total > LTP_THRESHOLD:    # plasticity only above the gate
            weight += RATE * calcium
    return weight, calcium_total
for avp in (False, True):
    w, ca = run(vasopressin=avp)
    print("%s: calcium %.2f, weight %.2f"
          % ("vasopressin present" if avp else "vasopressin absent ", ca, w))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A large pyramid with no thorny excrescences, wearing a perineuronal net like chain mail, fired by its distal tuft, deaf to ordinary potentiation, and listening for vasopressin.

CHAPTER 42. CA1 PYRAMIDAL CELLS (Expectation-Checking Place Neuron) (COG)

Fourteen million of these cells per side are the hippocampus's voice to the rest of the brain, and a single spike in one of their dendrites can build a place field in a single pass.

CA1 (Cornu Ammonis 1) is a third address in the same historical Latin series, saying nothing about the cell's underlying work.

Expectation-Checking names the cell's position in the circuit: it sits where the prediction assembled upstream arrives on proximal dendrites while raw sensory data arrives from entorhinal layer 3 on distal dendrites - an excess of sensory input over prediction triggers a dendritic calcium plateau that acts as a local error signal driving plasticity.

Place names its best-documented output: the classic place field discovered in these cells in 1971.

Neuron marks it as the primary excitatory projection cell of the field.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The CA1 pyramidal cell is the main output of the hippocampus, comparing what CA3 predicts, on its middle dendrites, with what the cortex reports, on its tuft, and many are place cells firing in one spot only.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

One thick apical trunk rises to a spreading tuft, throwing off oblique branches, while basal dendrites descend, and a rat cell carries about 30,000 excitatory and 1,700 inhibitory synapses.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 25 micrometres across, the apical dendrite spans 600 micrometres, and dendritic length totals some 12 millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Deep and superficial cells differ in gene expression, inhibition and place field stability, and a second axis runs from CA1 near CA2 to CA1 near the subiculum.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies fill stratum pyramidale of CA1, dendrites occupy stratum oriens, radiatum and lacunosum-moleculare, and axons collect in the alveus.

The interfaces are the CA2 border, where the marker proteins end, and the subicular border, where the layer loosens.

NUMBER:

About 14 million per hemisphere and 28 million in total, roughly 0.033 percent of the nervous system, or one neuron in 3,000.

Human stereology reports 12 to 16 million per hippocampus, so confidence is good.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is near minus 68 millivolts, input resistance 50 to 100 megaohms, and channels that grow denser with distance from the cell body give a resonance at theta rhythm, 4 to 10 cycles per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Schaffer collaterals from CA3 land in stratum radiatum, entorhinal layer three fibres in the tuft, the nucleus reuniens and amygdala add more, and a dozen interneuron types control the cell.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon runs in the alveus and divides into a local branch and long branches to subiculum, entorhinal cortex, prefrontal cortex, amygdala, accumbens and septum.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the transmitter, and acetylcholine, noradrenaline, serotonin and dopamine decide whether the cell is encoding or recalling.

MYELINATION:

Long-range axons in the alveus and fimbria are myelinated, and even the local axon carries patchy myelin, sharpening ripple timing.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Dense NMDA receptors and a large calcium load with every burst make this the first cell to die after cardiac arrest, long known to pathologists as the Sommer sector.

PLASTICITY:

Long-term potentiation and depression were discovered here, but the deeper mechanism is behavioural timescale plasticity: one dendritic plateau strengthens every synapse active within seconds of it.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes supply D-serine, the partner molecule the NMDA receptor needs, so plasticity is gated by glia, and lactate, without which long-term memory fails.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove CA1 and the hippocampus becomes a sealed room: prediction is never checked against reality and no new episodic memory is laid down.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Dendritic plateaus turn a millisecond event into a seconds-long eligibility trace, action potentials travel backward into the dendrites to report that the cell fired, and messenger ribonucleic acid is translated locally so one branch can change alone.

These cells also control their own blood supply and tell precursor cells to adjust myelin.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: 30,000 excitatory synapses, mostly Schaffer collaterals, some 3,000 in the tuft from entorhinal layer three, plus 1,700 inhibitory synapses.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto subiculum, entorhinal cortex, prefrontal cortex, amygdala, accumbens, septum.

• STATE: membrane voltage, per-branch dendritic voltage, plateau flag, per-synapse eligibility trace and weight.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 68 millivolts, threshold minus 50 millivolts, resistance 60 megaohms, plateau 100 to 500 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds, plateau 100 to 500 milliseconds, eligibility trace 1 to 3 seconds, ripple period 5 to 7 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: first to die in cardiac arrest and stroke, lost early in Alzheimer's disease, where ripples become disordered and consolidation fails.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to build a place field in one lap by letting a single dendritic plateau strengthen every input active in the seconds before it.
Create a number variable called plateau_step with initial value 120.
Create a number variable called learning_rate with initial value 0.6.
Create a number variable called current_step with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called weights with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called eligibility with initial value empty list.
While current_step is less than 200, repeat the following steps.
    For each trace in eligibility, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the product of trace and 0.967.
        Set trace to the result.
    End the loop.
    Calculate the sum of the eligibility at the active input and 0.05.
    Set the eligibility at the active input to the result.
    Check if current_step is equal to plateau_step.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        For each position in weights, perform the following operations.
            Calculate the product of learning_rate and the eligibility at position.
            Calculate the sum of the weight at position and the result.
            Set the weight at position to the result.
        End the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of current_step and 1.
    Set current_step to the result.
End the loop.
Display the position of the largest weight to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because one-shot place field formation is best shown as a weight profile.

import math
DT, LAP, N, TAU, RATE = 0.05, 10.0, 100, 1.5, 0.6   # seconds, bins, trace, rate
PLATEAU_STEP = 120                       # the plateau falls at 6.0 s, that is bin 60
w, elig, plat = [0.0] * N, [0.0] * N, 0.0
for step in range(int(LAP / DT)):
    idx = min(int(N * step * DT / LAP), N - 1)      # input active now
    decay = math.exp(-DT / TAU)
    elig = [e * decay for e in elig]                # seconds-long eligibility
    plat *= decay
    elig[idx] += DT
    if step == PLATEAU_STEP:                        # one plateau, one lap
        w = [w[i] + RATE * elig[i] for i in range(N)]
        plat = 1.0
    w[idx] += RATE * plat * DT                      # inputs after it count too
field = [i for i in range(N) if w[i] >= max(w) / 2.0]
print("peak at bin %d, plateau at bin 60" % max(range(N), key=lambda i: w[i]))
print("field spans bins %d to %d" % (min(field), max(field)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A tall pyramid in the widest cell layer of the hippocampus, thirty thousand excitatory synapses on one tree, a tuft listening to cortex while the middle listens to CA3, and one plateau that invents a place field in a single pass.

CHAPTER 43. SUBICULAR PYRAMIDAL CELLS (Memory-Sending Burst Neuron) (COG)

Everything the hippocampus ever learns must leave the building through one narrow gate, and this cell is the guard standing in it.

Subicular comes from the Latin for "lying underneath" - a purely positional term that describes location rather than function.

Memory-Sending names the primary job: this cell serves as the principal output stage of the hippocampal formation, broadcasting finished spatial and memory representations out to the entorhinal cortex, presubiculum, retrosplenial cortex, nucleus accumbens, amygdala, and hypothalamus.

Burst names its distinctive physiological voice: these cells fire low-threshold packets of spikes riding on a calcium-driven afterdepolarization - packets that carry significantly more spatial information than single isolated spikes.

Neuron marks it as a principal excitatory projection cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The subiculum is the strip of tissue where the hippocampus ends, and its pyramidal cells (nerve cells with triangular bodies) are the principal output neurons of the whole hippocampal formation.

They take the finished product of hippocampal computation from area CA1 and broadcast it to more than a dozen distant structures, often as a burst, a tight packet of two to five spikes that a target cell cannot ignore.

Many are boundary vector cells, firing whenever a wall lies at a preferred distance and compass direction from the body.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

One thick apical dendrite (a receiving branch) rises into the molecular layer and fans into a tuft, while shorter basal dendrites spread below, all of them studded with spines, the knobs that carry excitatory synapses.

Unlike the razor-thin cell band of CA1, the subicular pyramidal layer is thick and loose, so cell bodies scatter through several hundred micrometres of depth.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly 15 to 25 micrometres across, about a quarter the width of a human hair.

The dendritic tree spans 500 to 800 micrometres and carries an estimated ten thousand or more spines, a figure extrapolated from rodent reconstructions.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Slice recordings give three electrical classes: regular spiking, weak bursting and strong bursting.

In freely moving rats, 102 subicular principal neurons sorted into about 80 percent sparsely bursting and about 20 percent dominantly bursting cells, and the sparse bursters carried the stronger spatial signal.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The subiculum proper, in its molecular, pyramidal and polymorphic layers, sitting at the interface between area CA1 and the presubiculum, a genuine seam where the packed hippocampal band suddenly loosens.

Cells occupy the whole long axis, from the spatial dorsal or posterior subiculum to the emotional and hormonal ventral or anterior subiculum, and lie along a proximal to distal axis that predicts which distant target each cell writes to.

NUMBER:

Unbiased stereology (counting cells in tissue without statistical bias) gives 4.5 million neurons per hemisphere in the human subiculum, with a coefficient of variation of 0.19 across five brains.

Pyramidal cells are perhaps 85 to 90 percent of those, so about 8 million across both hemispheres, roughly 5 percent of the hippocampal formation's 150 million neurons and about 0.01 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system; confidence is good for the total and only fair for the pyramidal fraction.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Rest sits near minus 65 millivolts and threshold near minus 50, with input resistance of 30 to 60 megaohms in rat and a membrane time constant of 15 to 25 milliseconds.

The burst is built by low-threshold Cav3 calcium channels, which only work once the cell has been held quiet long enough for them to recover, and it is terminated by calcium-activated potassium channels.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The dominant input is a topographically ordered projection from CA1, joined by entorhinal layer III fibres on the apical tuft and by the thalamic nucleus reuniens, amygdala and medial septum.

Outputs reach entorhinal deep layers, presubiculum, parasubiculum, retrosplenial cortex, anterior thalamus, mammillary bodies, nucleus accumbens, prefrontal cortex, amygdala and hypothalamus, while connections between subicular pyramids themselves are sparse.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon joins the alveus and enters either the fornix, the great white cable arching under the corpus callosum, or the entorhinal cortex, running centimetres in a human brain.

Single cells tend to specialise on one main distant target rather than spraying all of them.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the standard excitatory messenger, acting on AMPA receptors for speed and NMDA receptors for learning.

The cell receives gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the standard inhibitory messenger, plus acetylcholine, noradrenaline, serotonin and, ventrally, dopamine.

MYELINATION:

Yes, and it matters, because these are the only hippocampal formation neurons whose axons routinely travel centimetres.

Fornix axons are thin and thinly myelinated (wrapped in fatty insulation), conducting at roughly 1 to 5 metres per second.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, and dominated by the long axon rather than the dendrites, since holding ionic gradients along centimetres of thin axon consumes much of the cell's adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the molecule cells spend as energy.

The subiculum tolerates oxygen shortage better than CA1 but is disproportionately lost in ageing, with one influential study reporting a 52 percent decline between ages 13 and 85.

PLASTICITY:

Synapses from CA1 strengthen lastingly, but by different mechanisms in neighbouring cells: bursting cells express a presynaptic increase in transmitter release while regular-firing cells express a classical postsynaptic NMDA-dependent change.

The same input therefore leaves two different kinds of memory trace side by side.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here face an unusual chloride problem, because these neurons accumulate chloride readily and glial and neuronal transporters together decide whether GABA calms or excites them.

In human temporal lobe epilepsy the subiculum shows heavy reactive gliosis while its neurons survive, the opposite of the pattern in CA1, and oligodendrocytes matter far more here than in CA1 because of the long axons.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell type and the hippocampus becomes a beautifully organised machine with no output socket.

Its steady, boundary-anchored, environment-invariant flavour of spatial coding, broader and more reliable than the fickle place fields of CA1, would vanish from the brain's sense of where it is.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Burst versus single spike is a code in itself, read as two different symbols by downstream synapses.

Back-propagating action potentials run up the apical dendrite and trigger local calcium spikes, which is how the cell detects that hippocampal and cortical inputs arrived together.

Chloride handling is an active computation: when the transporter KCC2 is lost, as it is in epileptic human tissue, GABA stops inhibiting and starts depolarising, and slices of human subiculum then generate spontaneous rhythmic discharges identical to the interictal spikes on a patient's electroencephalogram.

Ventral cells also drive the hypothalamic stress axis, so this neuron reaches out of the skull and into the bloodstream.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ CA1 excitation, 2000 to 5000 synapses per cell, 0 to 40 hertz per source.

◦ Entorhinal layer III excitation onto the tuft, arriving 3 to 8 milliseconds later.

◦ Local GABA inhibition, 0 to 5 nanosiemens, with a reversal potential set by internal chloride.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spike trains tagged as single spike or burst, sent to entorhinal cortex, presubiculum, retrosplenial cortex, anterior thalamus, mammillary bodies, accumbens, prefrontal cortex, amygdala and hypothalamus.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts, Cav3 availability from 0 to 1, and a slow potassium brake in millivolts.

◦ Internal chloride concentration in millimolar.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 65, threshold minus 50, reset minus 58 millivolts.

◦ Input resistance 30 to 60 megaohms, membrane time constant 15 to 25 milliseconds, dominant bursters 20 percent of the population.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 20 milliseconds, intra-burst interval 5 to 15 milliseconds, Cav3 recovery 100 to 200 milliseconds, slow brake 200 to 300 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of KCC2 makes the region the interictal spike generator of temporal lobe epilepsy.

◦ Age-related attrition narrows the only output channel the hippocampus has.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a subicular pyramidal cell answers a steady input with single spikes or with a burst.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value minus sixty five.
Create a number variable called calcium boost with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called slow brake with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called calcium available with initial value one.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
While clock is less than six hundred, repeat the following steps.
    Set target to the sum of minus forty seven and the difference of calcium boost and slow brake.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the quotient of the difference of target and voltage divided by two hundred.
    Set calcium boost to the product of calcium boost and ninety nine hundredths.
    Check if voltage is greater than or equal to minus fifty.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add clock to the end of spike times.
        Set voltage to minus fifty eight.
        Set calcium boost to the sum of calcium boost and the product of fourteen and calcium available.
        Set calcium available to the product of calcium available and forty five hundredths.
        Set slow brake to the sum of slow brake and three.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and one tenth.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in spike times.
Display the total number of items in spike times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the whole burst mechanism fits in one readable loop
# with no libraries, so a beginner can follow the biology line by line.
DT, V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET, TAU_M, R_IN = 0.1, -65.0, -50.0, -58.0, 20.0, 45.0
B_STEP, TAU_B, A_STEP, TAU_A, TAU_REC = 14.0, 40.0, 3.0, 250.0, 150.0
def simulate(current_na, ms=1200.0, has_cav3=True):
    v, b, a, avail, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0, []
    for i in range(int(ms / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        v += ((V_REST - v) + R_IN * current_na + b - a) / TAU_M * DT
        b -= b / TAU_B * DT            # low threshold calcium depolarisation
        a -= a / TAU_A * DT            # calcium activated potassium brake
        if v < -60.0:
            avail += (1.0 - avail) / TAU_REC * DT    # only a quiet cell rearms
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes.append(round(t, 1))
            v, a = V_RESET, a + A_STEP
            if has_cav3:
                b += B_STEP * avail    # the boost fades as channels inactivate
                avail *= 0.45
    return spikes
def gaps(s):
    return [round(s[i + 1] - s[i], 1) for i in range(len(s) - 1)]
burster = simulate(0.45)
print("burster:", len(burster), "spikes, first gaps in ms", gaps(burster)[:6])
print("regular cell:", len(simulate(0.75, has_cav3=False)), "spikes")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Inject a steady current and a large fraction of these cells answer not with an even train but with a tight cluster of spikes riding on a hump of depolarisation that only appears if the cell was first held quiet.

Add the anatomy, a spiny pyramidal cell in a thick loose layer just past the end of CA1 whose axon leaves the hippocampus altogether, and the identification is certain.

CHAPTER 44. ENTORHINAL STELLATE CELLS (Distance-And-Direction Mapping Neuron) (COG)

Somewhere behind your eyes a few hundred thousand cells lay an invisible sheet of triangular graph paper over the room you are standing in, and this is the cell that draws it.

Entorhinal Stellate combines a brain address with the Latin word for star-shaped - describing a silhouette at a location without explaining its computation.

Distance-And-Direction names what these cells actually measure: as the core population of grid cells, they fire at the vertices of a repeating triangular lattice dictated by an animal's self-motion and heading rather than visual scenery.

Mapping names the faculty: providing a universal metric of space laid over any environment an animal enters.

Neuron marks it as a principal excitatory grid cell whose shared local inhibitory network stabilizes the spatial lattice across the entire layer.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The stellate cell is the star-shaped principal neuron of layer II of the medial entorhinal cortex (MEC), the patch of cortex that feeds the hippocampus, and star-shaped means its dendrites radiate in all directions instead of forming one trunk.

Many are grid cells, firing whenever the animal crosses any vertex of a perfect triangular lattice covering the floor, so the cell is a ruler rather than a landmark detector.

Stellate cells are the main source of the perforant path to the dentate gyrus and CA3, the cable that carries the outside world into memory.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A polygonal cell body throws out many thick primary dendrites of similar calibre in a starburst, several of them reaching layer I to collect long-range cortical input, all of them spiny.

They occupy the spaces between round clusters of calbindin-positive pyramidal cells, producing the pattern anatomists call islands and ocean, with pyramidal islands surrounded by a stellate ocean.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly 15 to 25 micrometres across.

The dendritic tree spans about 400 to 600 micrometres horizontally and reaches the pial surface vertically, a total dendritic length of several millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The meaningful subtyping is by position along the dorsal to ventral axis, because position sets the scale of the grid: dorsal cells draw fine grids with vertices 30 to 40 centimetres apart and ventral cells draw grids metres across.

The scales are not continuous but fall into four or five discrete modules, and the ratio between one module's scale and the next is about 1.4, close to the square root of two.

Roughly 53 percent of layer II principal cells are reelin-positive stellate cells, about 34 percent are calbindin-positive pyramidal cells, and about 13 percent of layer II neurons are interneurons.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer II of the medial entorhinal cortex, corresponding in humans to the posteromedial entorhinal cortex on the medial surface of the temporal lobe.

Three interfaces matter: with layer I above, where long-range inputs arrive; with the lateral entorhinal cortex in front, where the map of space gives way to the catalogue of things; and with the presubiculum and parasubiculum behind, which deliver the head direction signal.

NUMBER:

Human stereology gives about 650,000 layer II neurons in the whole entorhinal cortex per hemisphere, and about 7 million in the entorhinal cortex overall.

If the posteromedial division holds roughly 40 percent of layer II and reelin-positive stellate cells are about half of its principal cells, the estimate is 100,000 to 300,000 per hemisphere, so 0.2 to 0.6 million across both hemispheres, about 0.3 percent of the hippocampal formation and about 0.0005 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system.

Confidence is low, because the human medial and lateral divisions are still disputed and the reelin fraction has never been counted properly in humans.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Inject a negative current and the voltage dips and then creeps back up while the current is still flowing, a rebound called sag, produced by hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels, mainly HCN1, carrying a current called Ih.

Because Ih opposes slow voltage changes but not fast ones, the membrane becomes a band-pass filter that responds most strongly to inputs oscillating at 4 to 10 hertz, a property called resonance, and the cells also hum with subthreshold oscillations at that frequency.

Blocking Ih abolishes the sag, and deleting HCN1 abolishes resonance below 4 hertz and flattens the dorsal to ventral gradient of resonance frequency that runs in parallel with the gradient of grid spacing.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from presubiculum and parasubiculum carrying head direction, from postrhinal and retrosplenial cortex carrying visual scenes, from the medial septum carrying theta and acetylcholine, and from the lateral entorhinal cortex carrying objects.

The output is the perforant path, terminating in the outer two thirds of the dentate molecular layer and in stratum lacunosum-moleculare of CA3.

Direct excitatory connections between stellate cells are very rare, so they are wired to each other almost entirely through inhibitory interneurons, and that recurrent inhibition is now the leading candidate mechanism for generating the grid itself.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The main axon descends through the deep layers, turns through the angular bundle and perforates the subiculum, which is why the pathway is called perforant, travelling millimetres to centimetres to reach the dentate gyrus.

Local collaterals stay in layer II and target interneurons.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate at the output, acting on AMPA and NMDA receptors on granule cells.

Acetylcholine from the medial septum acts on muscarinic receptors to shift resonance frequency and can switch the cell into persistent firing, and the cell also receives GABA locally and is modulated by noradrenaline, serotonin and dopamine.

MYELINATION:

Yes, thinly, along the perforant path axon.

Conduction takes a few milliseconds, and the precision of that delay matters because the dentate gyrus must judge whether cortical input and hippocampal feedback fell in the same theta cycle.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High and unusual, because HCN channels are open at rest, so a standing sodium and potassium leak must be undone continuously by the sodium potassium pump.

A stellate cell therefore burns energy simply to sit still, which is one plausible reason these neurons are the first in the cortex to die in Alzheimer's disease.

PLASTICITY:

Perforant path synapses onto granule cells are the classic site of long-term potentiation, first demonstrated in the rabbit in 1973, and they remain the textbook memory synapse.

The cell's own resonance frequency is plastic minute by minute through cholinergic modulation, and grid patterns rescale when the walls of a familiar room are moved, so the ruler is adjustable.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in this layer wrap the most tau-vulnerable neurons in the brain, and layer-specific astrogliosis here is severe, with swelling, altered protein expression and reduced glutamate clearance.

Microglia in this exact patch are implicated in passing tau protein from neuron to neuron along the perforant path, making the local immune cells an active vehicle for the disease rather than bystanders.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove stellate cells and the entorhinal cortex loses its metric.

It would still report what is present and which way the head points, but no longer how far you have walked or in what direction, so the hippocampus would receive a picture with no scale bar, and the theta hum of the region would fade with it.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The membrane itself computes, because resonance means identical input delivered at 8 hertz produces a far larger voltage swing than the same input at 1 hertz.

Persistent firing, driven by a calcium-activated non-specific cation current under cholinergic control, lets a single cell hold a memory for tens of seconds with no synaptic help at all.

Dendrites in layer I integrate locally, far from the cell body, and back-propagating spikes tag them, while gap junctions between the interneurons that link stellate cells add a layer of electrical coupling, and acetylcholine reaches the whole layer as a diffuse cloud rather than at precise synapses.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Running speed as a scalar 0 to 1 and head direction as an angle 0 to 360 degrees.

◦ Cortical excitation in layer I, 1000 to 5000 synapses per cell.

◦ Inhibition from local fast-spiking interneurons, 0 to 10 nanosiemens, the dominant recurrent term.

◦ Acetylcholine level 0 to 1, setting resonance frequency and persistent firing.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spikes to dentate granule cells and CA3 along the perforant path.

◦ Local excitation of interneurons, which is how stellate cells reach one another.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts and HCN gating variable 0 to 1.

◦ Theta phase 0 to 2 pi and grid phase as a two-dimensional position inside the lattice unit cell.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest about minus 62 millivolts, input resistance 30 to 60 megaohms, membrane time constant 8 to 15 milliseconds.

◦ Resonance 7 to 10 hertz dorsally and 3 to 5 hertz ventrally; grid spacing 30 centimetres to 3 metres in four or five modules separated by a factor of about 1.4.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane about 10 milliseconds, HCN activation 20 to 200 milliseconds by position, theta cycle 125 to 250 milliseconds, persistent firing tens of seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Layer II of the entorhinal cortex is the first cortical region to accumulate neurofibrillary tangles, and in very mild Alzheimer's disease it has already lost about 60 percent of its neurons, rising to about 90 percent in severe disease.

◦ The clinical result is getting lost in familiar places, often the first symptom a family notices.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to find the input frequency at which a medial entorhinal stellate cell rings loudest, which is its resonance frequency.
Create a number variable called best frequency with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called best swing with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called test frequency with initial value one.
While test frequency is less than or equal to twenty, repeat the following steps.
    Create a number variable called voltage with initial value zero.
    Create a number variable called h gate with initial value zero.
    Create a number variable called highest with initial value zero.
    Create a number variable called lowest with initial value zero.
    Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
    While clock is less than ten thousand, repeat the following steps.
        Set stimulus to the product of five hundredths and the sine of the product of clock and test frequency.
        Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the quotient of the difference of stimulus and the sum of voltage and h gate divided by one hundred and twenty.
        Set h gate to the sum of h gate and the quotient of the difference of voltage and h gate divided by seven hundred and fifty.
        Check if both clock is greater than six thousand and voltage is greater than highest are true.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set highest to voltage.
        End the conditional block.
        Check if both clock is greater than six thousand and voltage is less than lowest are true.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set lowest to voltage.
        End the conditional block.
        Set clock to the sum of clock and one.
    End the loop.
    Check if the difference of highest and lowest is greater than best swing.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set best swing to the difference of highest and lowest.
        Set best frequency to test frequency.
    End the conditional block.
    Set test frequency to the sum of test frequency and one half.
End the loop.
Display best frequency to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

import math
# Python is chosen because the resonance test is a short numerical loop whose only
# mathematics is a sine wave, so nothing important is hidden inside a library.
DT, TAU_M, R_M, G_H, AMP = 0.0001, 0.012, 50.0, 1.5, 0.05
def swing(freq_hz, tau_h, cycles=10):
    v, h = 0.0, 0.0           # voltage in millivolts, HCN gate in the same units
    duration = cycles / freq_hz
    hi, lo = -1e9, 1e9
    for i in range(int(duration / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        current = AMP * math.sin(2.0 * math.pi * freq_hz * t)
        v += ((-v - G_H * h + R_M * current) / TAU_M) * DT
        h += ((v - h) / tau_h) * DT
        if t > 0.6 * duration:                # ignore the settling transient
            hi, lo = max(hi, v), min(lo, v)
    return (hi - lo) / 2.0
for label, tau_h in (("dorsal cell", 0.075), ("ventral cell", 0.200)):
    best_f, best_a, f = 0.0, 0.0, 1.0
    while f <= 20.0:
        a = swing(f, tau_h)
        if a > best_a:
            best_a, best_f = a, f
        f += 0.5
    print(label, "rings loudest at", round(best_f, 1), "hertz")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Hyperpolarise it and watch the voltage sag back up while the current is still flowing, then sweep an oscillating current through it and find a clear peak in the theta band.

Confirm it anatomically by the starburst of equal dendrites and its position in the ocean between the calbindin islands of layer II, and molecularly by reelin.

CHAPTER 45. ENTORHINAL FAN CELLS (What-Where-When Binding Neuron) (COG)

If the stellate cell draws the map, the fan cell writes what happened on it.

Entorhinal Fan combines a cortical address with a shape word describing the broad spray of dendrites into Layer 1 - a vivid visual image that tells a student nothing about the cell's informational content.

What-Where-When names the three distinct strands of experience this cell joins together: silencing these cells selectively abolishes memory for object-place-context associations while leaving plain object recognition intact.

Binding names the operation: gluing these separate sensory and contextual streams into a single unified episodic memory.

Neuron marks it as a principal excitatory cell feeding the dentate gyrus and downstream recall machinery.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The fan cell is the principal excitatory neuron of the superficial half of layer 2 of the lateral entorhinal cortex (LEC), the region that supplies the hippocampus with objects, odours, actions and elapsed time rather than with distance and direction.

Its job is to bind an object to the place and context where it was met and hand that bundle to the dentate gyrus, and silencing fan cells in mice leaves them able to notice a new context but unable to recognise a new combination of object, place and context.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A polygonal cell body sends a spray of spiny primary dendrites upward into layer I in the shape of a hand fan, with few or no basal dendrites, which is a real difference from the stellate cell next door.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly 15 to 20 micrometres across and the dendritic fan spans 300 to 600 micrometres while reaching the pial surface, giving a few millimetres of dendrite in total.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Layer 2 divides into a superficial sublayer 2a holding reelin-positive fan cells, which project to the dentate gyrus, and a deeper sublayer 2b holding calbindin-positive pyramidal cells, which do not.

Within the fan cell class there is a gradient of dendritic spread and input rather than sharp subtypes, plus minor multipolar and oblique variants.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Layer 2a of the lateral entorhinal cortex, which in humans is the anterolateral entorhinal cortex on the medial temporal lobe just behind the amygdala.

The interfaces that matter are with perirhinal cortex laterally, which supplies object identity, with medial entorhinal cortex medially, which supplies the metric, and with layer I above, where fan cell axons also cross directly into the medial entorhinal cortex and stitch the two maps together.

NUMBER:

From about 650,000 layer II entorhinal neurons per hemisphere, an anterolateral share of roughly 60 percent and a reelin-positive fraction of about half gives 150,000 to 350,000 fan cells per hemisphere, or 0.3 to 0.7 million across both hemispheres.

That is about 0.4 percent of the hippocampal formation and about 0.0006 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system, and confidence is low because the human divisions are disputed and the reelin fraction is uncounted in humans.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Measured in rat, fan cells rest at minus 68.5 plus or minus 1.4 millivolts, with an input resistance of 130.5 plus or minus 11.9 megaohms, a membrane time constant of 24.2 plus or minus 1.7 milliseconds and a sag ratio near 0.85.

That combination of high resistance and slow time constant makes the fan cell excitable and patient, an integrator rather than a resonator, and it fires regular accommodating trains that under acetylcholine can become persistent firing lasting more than thirty seconds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from perirhinal and piriform cortex carrying objects and odours, from the amygdala carrying emotional value, and from the medial septum carrying acetylcholine and theta.

The output is the lateral perforant path, ending in the outermost third of the dentate molecular layer and in CA3 just superficial to the medial path, so a granule cell dendrite receives what and where in two adjacent stripes.

Direct excitation between fan cells is rare while inhibitory connections through local interneurons are common, so the network computes by competition and produces a sparse code.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The main axon runs through the angular bundle, perforates the subiculum and travels millimetres to centimetres to the dentate gyrus, with a second branch turning medially into layer I of the medial entorhinal cortex and local collaterals contacting interneurons.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate at the output, with acetylcholine as the decisive modulator through muscarinic receptors, which is why anticholinergic drugs blur episodic memory.

The cells also secrete reelin itself into the extracellular space as a signalling protein, and they receive GABA locally along with noradrenaline and serotonin.

MYELINATION:

Yes, thinly, along the lateral perforant path, whose conduction delay is slightly longer than that of the medial path, a timing offset that may help the dentate gyrus separate what from where inside a single theta cycle.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate to high, since the high input resistance saves energy at rest but the long axon and heavy perirhinal traffic keep demand up, and the anterolateral entorhinal cortex shows the earliest measurable fall in glucose use in people who later develop Alzheimer's disease.

PLASTICITY:

The lateral perforant path shows long-term potentiation with an unusual opioid-sensitive component, because enkephalin-containing fibres run alongside, and the cell's own persistent firing is a short-term memory held in the membrane rather than in synapses.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here are not structurally exotic, and saying so plainly matters.

What is special is timing, because the transentorhinal and lateral entorhinal region is where abnormal tau protein first appears in the human brain, and astrocytes and microglia in this exact patch are the first cortical glia to turn inflammatory and to help carry tau from neuron to neuron.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove fan cells and the entorhinal cortex still knows where the body is but no longer what is in the room, so the hippocampus receives a perfectly scaled and entirely empty map.

You would keep the ability to walk to the table and lose the ability to remember putting your keys on it.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Persistent firing, driven by a calcium-activated non-specific cation current switched on by acetylcholine, lets one cell hold an input in a self-sustaining loop with no synaptic support, a genuine single-cell memory.

The fan-shaped dendrites integrate locally in layer I on inputs that never meet at the cell body, reelin is released into the extracellular space to remodel nearby synapses without a synapse of its own, and the dominance of inhibition over excitation makes the population compute by competition.

Local blood flow tracks fan cell activity closely, which is what human imaging of the anterolateral entorhinal cortex is actually measuring.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Object and odour feature vectors from perirhinal and piriform cortex, 1000 to 4000 synapses per cell.

◦ Amygdala value signal 0 to 1, and acetylcholine level 0 to 1 which gates persistent firing.

◦ Inhibition from local interneurons, 0 to 8 nanosiemens, the dominant recurrent term.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Sparse spike trains to dentate granule cells and CA3 along the lateral perforant path, plus a direct projection into layer I of the medial entorhinal cortex.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts, adaptation in millivolts, shared inhibitory pool in millivolts.

◦ Persistent firing calcium store 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 68.5 millivolts, input resistance about 130 megaohms, membrane time constant about 24 milliseconds, sag ratio about 0.85.

◦ Target sparseness 5 to 15 percent of the local population active at once.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 24 milliseconds, inhibitory pool 5 to 10 milliseconds, adaptation 100 to 300 milliseconds, persistent firing 30 seconds or more.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Tau pathology starts here, so fan cells are among the first human neurons to tangle and die, and the earliest clinical sign is failing to recall what happened where.

◦ Loss of cholinergic input removes persistent firing and with it the ability to hold an object in mind across a delay.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a broad pattern of cortical input into the sparse fan cell code that the dentate gyrus expects, using shared inhibition to enforce competition.
Create a list variable called voltages with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called drives with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called winners with initial value zero.
Repeat the following steps exactly forty times.
    Add minus sixty eight point five to the end of voltages.
    Add a randomly chosen current between one tenth and twenty two hundredths to the end of drives.
End the loop.
Repeat the following steps exactly two hundred times.
    Create a number variable called fired this step with initial value zero.
    For each cell in voltages, perform the following operations.
        Set target to the difference of the sum of minus sixty eight point five and the product of one hundred and thirty and the drive for that cell and inhibition.
        Set cell to the sum of cell and the quotient of the difference of target and cell divided by twenty four.
        Check if cell is greater than or equal to minus forty five.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set cell to minus sixty.
            Set fired this step to the sum of fired this step and one.
            Set winners to the sum of winners and one.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
    Set inhibition to the product of the sum of inhibition and the product of two point two and fired this step and eighty seven hundredths.
End the loop.
Display winners to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

import random
# Python is chosen because competition between cells is clearest as a plain loop
# over a list, with no matrix algebra hiding the winner take few behaviour.
random.seed(7)
N, DT, TAU_M, R_IN = 40, 1.0, 24.0, 130.0
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET, TAU_I, W_I = -68.5, -45.0, -60.0, 8.0, 2.2
def run(drive, ms=200.0):
    v, counts, inhib = [V_REST] * N, [0] * N, 0.0
    for _ in range(int(ms / DT)):
        fired = 0
        for j in range(N):
            target = V_REST + R_IN * drive[j] - inhib   # megaohms times nanoamps
            v[j] += (target - v[j]) / TAU_M * DT
            if v[j] >= V_TH:
                v[j], fired = V_RESET, fired + 1
                counts[j] += 1
        inhib += W_I * fired          # one shared pool of feedback interneurons
        inhib -= inhib / TAU_I * DT
    return counts
counts = run([random.uniform(0.10, 0.22) for _ in range(N)])
active = sum(1 for c in counts if c > 0)
print("active cells:", active, "of", N, "sparseness", round(active / N, 3))
print("busiest cell fired", max(counts), "times")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A polygonal cell in the top half of layer 2 of the lateral entorhinal cortex whose dendrites open upward like a hand fan, with few or no basal dendrites, staining for reelin and projecting to the dentate gyrus.

Electrically the giveaway is a high input resistance near 130 megaohms combined with only a modest sag, which separates it cleanly from the low-resistance, strongly sagging stellate cell a few millimetres away.

CHAPTER 46. PARVALBUMIN BASKET CELLS (Clockwork-Precise Soma Brake Neuron) (COG)

This is the metronome of the hippocampus: a cell that fires two hundred times a second without tiring and wraps its neighbours' cell bodies in woven baskets of axon terminals.

Parvalbumin Basket combines a chemical protein marker with a descriptive shape word, describing a molecular barcode and a physical terminal shape without explaining network function.

Clockwork-Precise names the cell's defining signature: these fast-spiking interneurons fire with sub-millisecond timing, acting as the primary clocks of the hippocampal circuit by generating gamma and ripple rhythms.

Soma Brake names the target and effect: a swift, powerful inhibitory chop delivered directly onto the soma and axon initial segment that can veto an outgoing action potential outright.

Neuron marks it as the primary fast-spiking inhibitory interneuron enforcing rhythmic temporal precision.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A basket cell is an inhibitory interneuron, a nerve cell with a short local axon whose job is to quieten others, and this one contains parvalbumin (PV), a fast calcium-binding protein that lets it recover quickly between spikes.

It targets the cell body and proximal dendrites of pyramidal and granule cells, the place where the decision to fire is settled, and by delivering a sharp pulse of inhibition every 15 to 30 milliseconds it carves continuous excitation into discrete windows, which is the gamma rhythm of roughly 30 to 80 cycles per second.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A round or oval smooth cell body in or just below the principal cell layer, with aspiny dendrites running vertically across every layer so the cell samples all incoming pathways, and an axon that branches explosively into curled baskets around its targets.

Most of these cells are wrapped in a perineuronal net, a lattice of sugar-rich extracellular matrix fitted around the cell body like chain mail.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 25 micrometres across and the dendrites span 500 to 900 micrometres, but the axon is the astonishing part.

A single reconstructed CA1 parvalbumin basket cell has more than 40 millimetres of axon carrying over 10,000 boutons in a volume about a millimetre across, containing roughly 10,000 pyramidal cells, of which it contacts about 10 percent, placing about half a dozen synapses on each of the 1500 to 2500 cells it chooses.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

CA3 cells bias their dendrites towards the mossy fibre input while CA1 cells spread evenly, CA1 cells inhibit deep pyramidal cells more strongly than superficial ones, and a rare minority project long range to the medial septum or across the hippocampal fissure.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Stratum pyramidale and stratum oriens of CA1, CA2 and CA3, the granule cell layer and subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus, the subicular pyramidal layer and layers II and III of the entorhinal cortex.

The cell body sits at the interface between the principal cell layer and the layer beneath it, exactly where the shortest axon can reach the most cell bodies.

NUMBER:

Interneurons are about 10 percent of the hippocampal formation's 150 million neurons, so about 15 million across both hemispheres, of which parvalbumin cells are commonly put at 20 to 25 percent and basket cells at half to two thirds of those.

That gives 1.5 to 2.5 million parvalbumin basket cells across both hemispheres, about 1 to 1.7 percent of the hippocampal formation and about 0.002 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system, with fair confidence because the proportions come from rodent immunohistochemistry.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Fast-spiking is the defining property: action potentials about 0.3 milliseconds wide, a large fast afterhyperpolarisation, and sustained rates above 100 and often above 200 spikes per second with almost no slowing.

The speed comes from Kv3-family potassium channels and Nav1.1 sodium channels, and the low input resistance of 60 to 120 megaohms with a short membrane time constant of 8 to 12 milliseconds makes the cell a coincidence detector that fires only when many inputs arrive within a few milliseconds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from local pyramidal cells, which closes the loop that generates gamma, from CA3 and entorhinal afferents, from the medial septum and from other parvalbumin cells, and the excitatory synapses onto them are unusually fast and calcium-permeable because their AMPA receptors lack the GluA2 subunit.

Outputs land on somata and proximal dendrites, released by P/Q-type calcium channels sitting within tens of nanometres of the release machinery, producing an inhibitory current that decays in 2 to 5 milliseconds through GABA-A receptors containing the alpha1 subunit.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

More than 40 millimetres of thin axon, 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres across, conducting at roughly 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second, which crosses the cell's whole territory in under two milliseconds and so delivers inhibition that is effectively simultaneous across the local population.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main inhibitory messenger, released synchronously and with high probability, alongside parvalbumin as a calcium buffer rather than a transmitter, with acetylcholine exciting the cell and opioids inhibiting it.

MYELINATION:

Partially, which is a genuine surprise because interneuron axons were long assumed to be bare, and the short myelin patches between branch points are thought to speed and synchronise the delivery of inhibition across the cell's wide territory.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The highest in the hippocampal formation, because firing at 100 to 200 spikes per second means pumping enormous quantities of sodium and potassium, and these cells carry many more and larger mitochondria than their neighbours, enriched in cytochrome c oxidase and other electron transport chain proteins.

That same machinery generates reactive oxygen species, so the cells are the first to be damaged by oxidative stress.

PLASTICITY:

Synapses onto these cells potentiate and depress by rules that often do not need NMDA receptors, and the perineuronal net around the cell body closes at the end of development, ending the critical period during which the local circuit can be rewired.

Digesting the net with an enzyme reopens plasticity in adult tissue, which makes this cell type a switch controlling how changeable a whole region is.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The perineuronal net is the special support system, built from aggrecan, brevican and related molecules on a hyaluronan backbone by astrocytes and the neuron together, and it stabilises synapses, buffers the storm of potassium and calcium produced by fast firing, and shields the cell from oxidative damage.

Astrocytes here also matter unusually for supplying lactate as fuel during sustained gamma activity, and microglia prune these synapses actively and, in disease, excessively.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take out parvalbumin basket cells and the hippocampus loses its clock: excitation would still arrive and memories would still be written, but nothing would happen at a particular moment.

Gamma would disappear, spike timing would smear from one millisecond to tens of milliseconds, sharp-wave ripples would collapse, and the region would become epileptic within seconds because nothing else can restrain runaway excitation that fast.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

They are electrically coupled to one another by connexin 36 gap junctions, so they share subthreshold voltage directly and synchronise faster than chemical synapses allow, and their large extracellular currents create ephaptic effects in which one cell's electric field nudges its neighbours with no synapse at all.

They control local blood flow, so the surge in blood oxygen during gamma is largely their doing, they instruct myelination of their own axons by signalling to oligodendrocyte precursors according to activity, and they are metabolically coupled to astrocytes through the lactate shuttle.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Fast excitation from local pyramidal cells and CA3 or entorhinal afferents, 5000 to 15000 synapses per cell, rise time under 0.5 milliseconds.

◦ Inhibition from other parvalbumin and from cholecystokinin cells, 0 to 20 nanosiemens.

◦ Gap junction coupling to neighbours, coupling coefficient 0.02 to 0.10.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Fast GABA-A inhibition onto somata and proximal dendrites of 1500 to 2500 principal cells, about six synapses each, plus inhibition of other interneurons.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts, refractory timer in milliseconds, released conductance in nanosiemens.

◦ Intracellular free calcium, buffered by parvalbumin.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 65 millivolts, threshold minus 52 millivolts, spike width 0.3 milliseconds, refractory period 1 millisecond.

◦ Input resistance 60 to 120 megaohms, membrane time constant 8 to 12 milliseconds, maximum sustained rate 150 to 250 spikes per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 9 milliseconds, output synapse decay 2 to 5 milliseconds, synaptic delay 0.5 to 1 millisecond, gamma cycle 12 to 30 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In schizophrenia these cells lose parvalbumin and their nets under oxidative stress, gamma synchrony falls and working memory fails.

◦ In Alzheimer's disease reduced Nav1.1 slows them and gamma power falls, and in epilepsy their loss removes the only inhibition fast enough to stop a seizure spreading.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show how fast spiking parvalbumin basket cells inhibiting one another settle into a gamma rhythm.
Create a list variable called voltages with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called shared inhibition with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
Repeat the following steps exactly one hundred times.
    Add a randomly chosen voltage between minus sixty five and minus fifty five to the end of voltages.
End the loop.
While clock is less than five hundred, repeat the following steps.
    Create a number variable called fired this step with initial value zero.
    For each cell in voltages, perform the following operations.
        Set pull to the product of shared inhibition and the difference of minus seventy five and cell.
        Set change to the quotient of the sum of the sum of the difference of minus sixty five and cell and eighteen and pull divided by nine.
        Set cell to the sum of cell and the product of change and five hundredths.
        Check if cell is greater than or equal to minus fifty two.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set cell to minus sixty five.
            Set fired this step to the sum of fired this step and one.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
    Set shared inhibition to the sum of shared inhibition and the quotient of the product of one point five and fired this step divided by one hundred.
    Set shared inhibition to the product of shared inhibition and nine hundred and seventy five thousandths.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and five hundredths.
End the loop.
Display the number of population bursts per second to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

import random
# Python is chosen because a rhythm emerging from mutual inhibition needs no
# numerical library, and the loop makes the feedback obvious to a beginner.
random.seed(3)
N, DT, T, TAU_M = 100, 0.05, 500.0, 9.0
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET, E_GABA, T_REF = -65.0, -52.0, -65.0, -75.0, 1.0
G_MAX, TAU_SYN, DRIVE = 1.5, 2.0, 18.0
v = [V_REST + random.uniform(0.0, 10.0) for _ in range(N)]
last, g, bins = [-100.0] * N, 0.0, [0] * int(T)
for step in range(int(T / DT)):
    t = step * DT
    g -= g / TAU_SYN * DT
    fired = 0
    for j in range(N):
        if t - last[j] < T_REF:
            continue                        # fast spiking cells need only 1 ms
        v[j] += ((V_REST - v[j]) + DRIVE + g * (E_GABA - v[j])) / TAU_M * DT
        if v[j] >= V_TH:
            v[j], last[j], fired = V_RESET, t, fired + 1
    g += G_MAX * fired / N
    bins[int(t)] += fired
peaks = []
for i in range(1, len(bins) - 1):
    if bins[i] > 0.2 * N and bins[i] >= bins[i - 1] and bins[i] > bins[i + 1]:
        if not peaks or i - peaks[-1] >= 5:
            peaks.append(i)
late = [p for p in peaks if p > T / 2]
if len(late) > 1:
    period = (late[-1] - late[0]) / (len(late) - 1)
    print("population period", round(period, 1), "ms, frequency", round(1000.0 / period), "hertz")
else:
    print("no rhythm emerged with these parameters")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Drive it hard and it fires two hundred knife-thin spikes a second and never tires, it stains for parvalbumin, it sits inside a perineuronal net, and its axon forms baskets around cell bodies rather than climbing dendrites.

No other hippocampal cell combines a smooth aspiny dendritic tree, a 40 millimetre local axon, and the ability to hold a millisecond-accurate beat for minutes.

CHAPTER 47. CHOLECYSTOKININ BASKET CELLS (Mood-Swayed Loose-Timing Silencing Neuron) (COG)

This is the only neuron in your brain that can be told to shut up by the very cell it is inhibiting, and it is also the cell that cannabis switches off.

Cholecystokinin is a gut peptide borrowed as a stain and tells a student nothing about hippocampal work.

Mood-Swayed names the cell's defining vulnerability, because its terminals carry cannabinoid type one receptors, so an active pyramidal cell can release endocannabinoids backwards and switch this inhibition off for seconds, and the same terminals are steered by serotonin, acetylcholine and stress signals.

Silencing names the shared job with the precise sibling above, and the contrast between Clockwork-Precise and Mood-Swayed is the whole point, since these cells deliver slow, asynchronous, unreliable inhibition that reports internal state rather than time.

Neuron marks it as an inhibitory local cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Like the parvalbumin basket cell this is an inhibitory interneuron that wraps baskets of endings around the cell bodies of pyramidal and granule cells, but it is named for cholecystokinin (CCK), a peptide better known for telling the gallbladder to contract and, in the brain, for raising anxiety.

If the parvalbumin cell is the metronome, this one is the volume knob and the mood dial, delivering slower and less reliable inhibition that tracks the emotional state of the animal and that the target cell can switch off on demand.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A round to spindle-shaped cell body at the border of the pyramidal cell layer, with sparsely spiny vertical dendrites reaching up into stratum lacunosum-moleculare to collect entorhinal and subcortical input, and a looser, less densely branched perisomatic basket than its parvalbumin cousin.

The terminals carry type 1 cannabinoid (CB1) receptors at the highest density found anywhere in the mammalian brain.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 25 micrometres across, dendrites span 400 to 800 micrometres, and the axon totals several millimetres with thousands of boutons spread over an area comparable to that of a parvalbumin cell.

Basket cell boutons carry on average about 78 percent more CB1 protein than the boutons of cannabinoid-sensitive cells that target dendrites instead.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There are at least two chemical flavours, one containing vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and one containing vesicular glutamate transporter 3, and the second can package glutamate as well as gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and so release an excitatory and an inhibitory signal from the same terminal.

Cholecystokinin cells that target dendrites rather than cell bodies form a separate class not counted here.

WHERE IT LIVES:

At the stratum pyramidale and stratum radiatum border of CA1, CA2 and CA3, in the granule cell layer and molecular layer of the dentate gyrus, in the subiculum and in the superficial layers of the entorhinal cortex.

Sitting on that interface is functional, because it lets the cell keep its dendrites in the incoming cortical input while its axon works on the cell bodies below.

NUMBER:

From about 15 million hippocampal formation interneurons across both hemispheres, cholecystokinin cells are commonly put at 10 to 15 percent of interneurons with basket cells the majority of those, giving roughly 1.0 to 2.0 million across both hemispheres.

That is about 1 percent of the hippocampal formation and about 0.0017 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system, at fair confidence, though one anchoring measurement is solid: in CA1 the great majority of basket cells contain cholecystokinin and almost every such cell carries CB1 receptors.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Regular-spiking and accommodating, the opposite of its neighbour, with broad action potentials 0.6 to 1.0 milliseconds wide, a high input resistance of 150 to 300 megaohms, a long membrane time constant of 15 to 25 milliseconds and maximum rates in the tens rather than the hundreds of spikes per second.

In a behaving animal these cells prefer the ascending phase of the theta rhythm, roughly opposite to parvalbumin basket cells, so the two perisomatic systems take turns.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from local pyramidal cells, from entorhinal afferents on the distal dendrites, and distinctively from subcortical modulators, since these cells uniquely express the 5-HT3A receptor, an ion channel opened directly by serotonin, and are strongly driven by acetylcholine through muscarinic receptors.

Their output synapses use GABA-A receptors enriched in the alpha2 subunit, the subunit through which benzodiazepines calm rather than sedate, and release is triggered by N-type calcium channels sitting further from the release machinery than the P/Q-type channels of parvalbumin cells, which makes transmission unreliable, variable and partly asynchronous.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A locally branching, unmyelinated axon a few millimetres long, thin and slow, conducting at well under a metre per second, so its inhibition arrives with a spread of delays rather than all at once.

That is precisely why it cannot generate a fast rhythm and instead sets a slowly varying background level.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA is the primary transmitter, cholecystokinin is co-released during high-frequency firing and diffuses away to act on CCK2 receptors over seconds, and the vesicular glutamate transporter 3 subtype also releases glutamate.

The cell is switched off by endocannabinoids from its target and directly excited by serotonin and acetylcholine.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable in the usual sense, and the reason matters: the axon is unmyelinated because the cell's entire design is built around slow, imprecise, heavily modulated inhibition, so no oligodendrocyte wraps it.

Stating this plainly prevents a common modelling error, because anyone who myelinates this axon by default destroys the property that defines the cell.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and far below those of the parvalbumin basket cell, since firing rates are an order of magnitude lower and mitochondrial density is unremarkable, which also makes these cells far less vulnerable to oxidative stress.

Peptide synthesis adds a modest cost, because cholecystokinin must be made in the cell body and shipped down the axon in dense-core vesicles that cannot be recycled locally.

PLASTICITY:

The signature is depolarisation-induced suppression of inhibition, a backwards message: when the target pyramidal cell fires hard, calcium entering it triggers synthesis of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol, which drifts back across the synapse, binds CB1 receptors, closes N-type calcium channels and silences release for tens of seconds.

Blocking CB1 with the drug AM251 raises action-potential-evoked calcium in these boutons by about 54 percent, showing the brake is applied continuously even at rest.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

There is no perineuronal net here, and that absence is the specialisation, leaving the cell structurally plastic throughout life while its parvalbumin neighbour is locked down.

Astrocytes join the endocannabinoid loop directly, because they carry CB1 receptors too and answer the same 2-arachidonoylglycerol cloud with calcium waves and glutamate release, spreading one pyramidal cell's decision to neighbouring synapses; microglia here are unremarkable.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove cholecystokinin basket cells and the hippocampus keeps perfect time but loses all sense of mood and context, because inhibition becomes a rigid clock that no experience can adjust.

Serotonin and acetylcholine would lose their fastest route into perisomatic control, anxiety would no longer modulate encoding, and neither the brain's own endocannabinoids nor cannabis itself would have any perisomatic effect at all.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Retrograde signalling is the headline and the clearest case in the brain of a message travelling backwards across a synapse, while asynchronous release means the terminal is not a digital device, since transmitter keeps leaking out after the spike in proportion to residual calcium and deliberately blurs timing.

Peptide release by volume transmission changes the excitability of a whole neighbourhood for seconds, the cells are coupled to one another by both chemical synapses and gap junctions, and endocannabinoid release modulates the electrical coupling as well as the chemical transmission.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Excitation from local pyramidal cells and entorhinal afferents, 2000 to 6000 synapses per cell.

◦ Serotonin acting on ionotropic 5-HT3A receptors within milliseconds, scalar 0 to 1, and acetylcholine on muscarinic receptors, scalar 0 to 1.

◦ Endocannabinoid concentration at the terminal, scalar 0 to 1, arriving from the postsynaptic target.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Slow variable GABA-A inhibition onto somata and proximal dendrites, alpha2 enriched, decay 8 to 20 milliseconds.

◦ Cholecystokinin peptide into the extracellular space during high-frequency firing, and glutamate from the transporter-3 subtype.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts and CB1 receptor occupancy 0 to 1.

◦ Residual presynaptic calcium driving asynchronous release, and peptide store 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 62 millivolts, threshold minus 45 millivolts, spike width 0.6 to 1.0 milliseconds.

◦ Input resistance 150 to 300 megaohms, membrane time constant 15 to 25 milliseconds, baseline release probability 0.4 to 0.5.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 20 milliseconds, synchronous release under 2 milliseconds, asynchronous tail 20 to 60 milliseconds, endocannabinoid suppression 5 to 20 seconds, peptide action seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Cannabis floods CB1 receptors and silences these terminals for hours instead of seconds, producing the failure of hippocampal encoding users experience as short-term memory loss.

◦ Dysfunction here is implicated in anxiety disorders and in the action of antidepressants, which work partly through cholecystokinin neurons of the dentate gyrus.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to reproduce depolarisation induced suppression of inhibition, in which a pyramidal cell silences the cholecystokinin basket cell that inhibits it.
Create a number variable called endocannabinoid with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called residual calcium with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called release count with initial value zero.
Define a function called advance one millisecond that performs the following operations.
    Set endocannabinoid to the product of endocannabinoid and nine hundred and ninety nine thousandths.
    Set residual calcium to the product of residual calcium and nine hundred and seventy five thousandths.
    Set release probability to the product of forty five hundredths and the difference of one and endocannabinoid.
    Check if a presynaptic spike arrives this millisecond.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Check if a random number between zero and one is less than release probability.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set release count to the sum of release count and one.
        End the conditional block.
        Set residual calcium to the sum of residual calcium and release probability.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if a postsynaptic spike arrives this millisecond.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set endocannabinoid to the sum of endocannabinoid and nine hundredths.
    End the conditional block.
    Return release count to the calling function.
End the function definition.
Repeat the following steps exactly two thousand times.
    Call the function named advance one millisecond.
End the loop.
Display release count to the console.
Set release count to zero.
Repeat the following steps exactly three thousand times.
    Call the function named advance one millisecond.
End the loop.
Display release count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

// JavaScript is chosen because this is a message passing loop between two cells,
// and a short event driven script shows the backward signal most clearly.
const DT = 1.0;              // milliseconds per step
const TAU_ECB = 6000.0;      // endocannabinoid clearance, milliseconds
const P0 = 0.45;             // baseline release probability per presynaptic spike
const ECB_PER_SPIKE = 0.09;  // endocannabinoid made by one postsynaptic spike
const ASYNC_TAU = 40.0;      // decay of residual presynaptic calcium
let ecb = 0.0, residual = 0.0;
function step(preSpike, postSpike) {
  ecb -= (ecb / TAU_ECB) * DT;
  residual -= (residual / ASYNC_TAU) * DT;
  if (postSpike) ecb = Math.min(1.0, ecb + ECB_PER_SPIKE);
  const p = P0 * (1.0 - ecb);                  // CB1 closes the N type channels
  let quanta = 0;
  if (preSpike) {
    if (Math.random() < p) quanta += 1;        // synchronous release, on time
    residual += p;                             // and a residue that leaks later
  }
  if (Math.random() < residual * 0.02 * DT) quanta += 1;   // asynchronous release
  return quanta;
}
let before = 0, after = 0;
for (let t = 0; t < 2000; t += DT) before += step(t % 20 === 0, false);
for (let t = 0; t < 1000; t += DT) step(false, t % 10 === 0);   // depolarise target
for (let t = 0; t < 2000; t += DT) after += step(t % 20 === 0, false);
console.log("quanta in 2 s of 50 Hz input, before:", before, "after:", after);
console.log("suppression:", Math.round(100 * (1 - after / before)) + " percent");

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Depolarise the pyramidal cell it inhibits for a few seconds and the inhibition vanishes for ten to twenty seconds and then slowly returns, which no other perisomatic inhibitory cell in the hippocampus will do.

Add broad accommodating spikes, a high input resistance, direct excitation by serotonin, and terminals carrying more CB1 receptor than anywhere else in the brain, and the identification is certain.

CHAPTER 48. AXO-AXONIC CELLS (Spike-Gate Veto Neuron) (COG)

Every other neuron in the brain argues about whether a cell should fire; this one puts its hand directly over the trigger.

Spike names the single event this cell controls, because it places every one of its synapses on the axon initial segment - the short stretch of membrane where a pyramidal cell's action potential is actually born.

Gate names the position, since nothing the dendrites compute can leave the cell without passing that point.

Veto names the power, because roughly sixteen inhibitory boutons converge on one initial segment from about four of these cells, and in the intact animal they fire at the peak of the theta rhythm, precisely when the pyramidal cells they guard are least likely to speak.

Neuron marks it as a local circuit cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The axo-axonic cell, also called the chandelier cell, is an inhibitory interneuron with one obsession: it makes synapses on the axon initial segment of principal cells, the short stretch of axon just past the cell body where the action potential is actually born, and on nothing else.

By owning that one square micrometre of membrane it can veto the output of a pyramidal cell however strongly the rest of the cell has been excited, and a single such cell holds that veto over more than a thousand principal cells.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

An ovoid or spindle-shaped cell body in or just below the principal cell layer, with smooth dendrites radiating into the layers above and below, and an axon that resolves into cartridges, short vertical strings of two to ten boutons each climbing the initial segment of one target cell, which under the microscope look like the candles of a chandelier.

The cell is parvalbumin-positive and usually wrapped in a perineuronal net.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 25 micrometres across and dendrites span 500 to 800 micrometres.

A single reconstructed chandelier cell in CA1 was estimated to contact 1214 pyramidal cells, counted by tallying every distinct cartridge, and because each cartridge holds only a handful of synapses the total bouton count is in the thousands rather than the tens of thousands.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

CA1 has at least two positional variants, one with cell bodies in stratum pyramidale and a horizontally oriented type in stratum oriens, while dentate gyrus axo-axonic cells target granule cell initial segments and are notable for becoming functionally isolated from their inputs after experimental status epilepticus.

Entorhinal and subicular axo-axonic cells follow the same rule of exclusive initial segment targeting.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Stratum pyramidale and stratum oriens of CA1, CA2 and CA3, the granule cell layer and subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus, the subicular pyramidal layer, and layers II and III of the entorhinal cortex.

The decisive location is not where the cell body sits but where the terminals go, which is the interface between the cell body and the axon of every principal neuron within reach.

NUMBER:

From about 15 million hippocampal formation interneurons across both hemispheres, axo-axonic cells are consistently reported as one of the rarer classes at roughly 2 to 5 percent of interneurons, giving 0.3 to 0.75 million across both hemispheres.

That is around 0.4 percent of the hippocampal formation and about 0.0006 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the nervous system, at low to fair confidence, and the striking figure is the leverage: half a million cells holding a veto over more than a thousand principal cells each.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Fast-spiking like the parvalbumin basket cell, with brief spikes, a large fast afterhyperpolarisation, sustained rates well above 100 per second, an input resistance of 60 to 150 megaohms and a membrane time constant of 8 to 15 milliseconds.

Their behaviour in a living animal is what sets them apart, because they are strongly theta modulated and fire on the descending phase just after the theta peak, earlier than basket cells, and then fall completely silent during sharp-wave ripples at the precise moment pyramidal cells fire hardest, so the withdrawal of inhibition from the initial segment is part of what allows memory replay to happen.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from local pyramidal cells, from CA3 and entorhinal afferents, from the medial septum, and from long-range inhibitory projections that appear responsible for the silencing during ripples.

Every output synapse lands on an axon initial segment and none anywhere else, using GABA-A receptors enriched in the alpha2 subunit, with only two to ten synapses per target, which is enough because the initial segment has the lowest voltage threshold and the highest sodium channel density in the whole neuron.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A locally branching, largely unmyelinated axon a few millimetres long, shorter than a parvalbumin basket cell's because the cell reaches each target with a handful of boutons rather than a dense wrap, and slow in absolute terms but crossing its small territory in a few milliseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA, plus parvalbumin as a calcium buffer, and the interesting fact is not what is released but what it does on arrival, because the initial segment handles chloride differently from the rest of the cell.

The transporter KCC2, which pumps chloride out and makes GABA inhibitory, is scarce in the axon while NKCC1, which pumps chloride in, is present, so chloride sits higher there and the GABA reversal potential at the initial segment is depolarised, reported around minus 55 millivolts against about minus 72 millivolts at the cell body.

MYELINATION:

The cell's own axon is largely unmyelinated, and what matters more is that its target sits immediately before the first myelin sheath of the pyramidal cell axon.

The pyramidal cell adjusts the length and position of its initial segment over hours in response to activity, and moving it away from the cell body creates a mismatch with the existing cartridges that weakens the veto, which is structural plasticity used as gain control.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High for the same reason as the parvalbumin basket cell, because fast firing means heavy ion pumping and a dense mitochondrial complement, which leaves these cells vulnerable to metabolic and oxidative insult and among the first inhibitory neurons lost in chronic epilepsy.

PLASTICITY:

These synapses are plastic in an unusual way because the postsynaptic structure itself moves, as the initial segment lengthens, shortens and shifts along the axon and the boutons must follow or lose contact.

The chloride gradient inside the initial segment is also adjustable, so the same synapse can be more or less inhibitory as transporter expression changes with development, activity and disease.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Specialised astrocytic processes and oligodendrocyte precursor cells contact the axon initial segment region directly, and because this synapse depends on a local chloride gradient rather than a global one, the ability of nearby glia to buffer potassium and shape chloride handling in that tiny microdomain matters far more here than anywhere else in the circuit.

The perineuronal net around the cell body plays the same protective and stabilising role as it does for parvalbumin basket cells.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove axo-axonic cells and the hippocampus loses its last-moment gate: basket cells would still shape the rhythm, but nothing could override a strongly excited pyramidal cell at the final step.

The clean alternation in which inhibition is applied to the initial segment during exploration and lifted during replay would disappear, and memory consolidation during rest would lose its timing signal.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is the clearest case in the brain of a computation resting on a subcellular ion gradient rather than on wiring, because high chloride in the initial segment means the synapse depolarises its target while still opposing spike generation, clamping the membrane near the chloride reversal potential and shunting incoming current away, and in cortex it has been reported under some conditions to excite rather than inhibit, which remains genuinely contested.

The cell also instructs structural remodelling of its target's initial segment, is gap-junction coupled to other parvalbumin interneurons, is silenced by long-range inhibition during ripples so that its computation is set by brain state rather than local activity, and contributes ephaptic field effects to the very initial segments it contacts.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Excitation from local pyramidal cells, CA3 and entorhinal afferents, 3000 to 10000 synapses per cell.

◦ Long-range inhibition from the medial septum and other inhibitory projection neurons, which silences the cell during sharp-wave ripples.

◦ Brain state, categorical: exploration with theta, or rest with ripples.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA-A conductance delivered only to the axon initial segments of 1000 to 1500 principal cells, two to ten synapses each.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts and preferred theta phase on the descending slope after the peak.

◦ Chloride concentration in each target initial segment, plus that segment's length and offset in micrometres.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 65 millivolts, threshold minus 52 millivolts, refractory period 1 millisecond, sustained rate up to 150 per second.

◦ GABA reversal about minus 55 millivolts at the initial segment against about minus 72 millivolts at the soma, peak inhibitory conductance about twice the resting leak.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 milliseconds, synaptic decay 3 to 8 milliseconds, theta cycle 125 to 250 milliseconds, ripple episode 50 to 100 milliseconds, initial segment remodelling hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In chronic temporal lobe epilepsy these cells are lost or disconnected from their inputs, removing the last-line veto on pyramidal output.

◦ If chloride rises further the synapse can flip from clamping the initial segment below threshold to pushing it above, turning the brake into an accelerator.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compare inhibition delivered to the axon initial segment with the same inhibition delivered to the cell body.
Define a function called count spikes that performs the following operations.
    Create a number variable called voltage with initial value minus sixty five.
    Create a number variable called spike total with initial value zero.
    Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
    While clock is less than one thousand, repeat the following steps.
        Set pull to the product of inhibitory conductance and the difference of reversal potential and voltage.
        Set change to the quotient of the sum of the sum of the difference of minus sixty five and voltage and excitatory drive and pull divided by twelve.
        Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the product of change and one hundredth.
        Check if voltage is greater than or equal to minus fifty two.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set voltage to minus sixty five.
            Set spike total to the sum of spike total and one.
        End the conditional block.
        Set clock to the sum of clock and one hundredth.
    End the loop.
    Return spike total to the calling function.
End the function definition.
Create a list variable called drive levels with initial value empty list.
Add ten to the end of drive levels.
Add twenty to the end of drive levels.
Add forty to the end of drive levels.
Add sixty to the end of drive levels.
For each drive level in drive levels, perform the following operations.
    Set excitatory drive to drive level.
    Set inhibitory conductance to zero.
    Call the function named count spikes.
    Display the returned value to the console.
    Set inhibitory conductance to two.
    Set reversal potential to minus seventy two.
    Call the function named count spikes.
    Display the returned value to the console.
    Set reversal potential to minus fifty five.
    Call the function named count spikes.
    Display the returned value to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C is chosen because a whole brain simulator runs this inner loop billions of times, and C shows exactly what that loop costs with nothing hidden. */
#include <stdio.h>
#define DT 0.01            /* milliseconds per step */
#define TAU 12.0           /* time constant of the initial segment, ms */
#define VREST -65.0
#define VTH -52.0          /* the initial segment has the lowest threshold */
#define EGABA_AIS -55.0    /* depolarised, because KCC2 is scarce in the axon */
#define EGABA_SOMA -72.0   /* the cell body pumps chloride out */
static int spikes(double drive_mv, double g_inh, double e_gaba, double ms) {
    double v = VREST;
    int n = 0;
    long steps = (long)(ms / DT);
    for (long i = 0; i < steps; i++) {
        double dv = ((VREST - v) + drive_mv + g_inh * (e_gaba - v)) / TAU;
        v += dv * DT;
        if (v >= VTH) { v = VREST; n++; }      /* one output spike */
    }
    return n;
}
int main(void) {
    double drives[4] = { 10.0, 20.0, 40.0, 60.0 };   /* millivolts of excitation */
    printf("drive   none   somatic   axo-axonic\n");
    for (int k = 0; k < 4; k++) {
        printf("%5.0f %6d %9d %12d\n", drives[k],
               spikes(drives[k], 0.0, 0.0, 1000.0),
               spikes(drives[k], 2.0, EGABA_SOMA, 1000.0),
               spikes(drives[k], 2.0, EGABA_AIS, 1000.0));
    }
    return 0;
}
/* Somatic inhibition silences the cell until the drive is very large, while
   axo-axonic inhibition, with its depolarised chloride reversal, only raises the
   bar a little and lets strong inputs through. */

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Fill the cell with dye and look at the terminals: short vertical strings of boutons, each climbing a single axon initial segment, with nothing on any cell body or dendrite anywhere, a pattern no other neuron in the nervous system produces.

Record it in a behaving animal and watch it fire hard on the descending phase of theta and then go completely silent during a sharp-wave ripple, at the one moment when every pyramidal cell around it is firing.

CHAPTER 49. BISTRATIFIED CELLS (Inner-Dendrite Restraining Neuron) (COG)

Picture a gardener who prunes only the branches facing the road and leaves the crown untouched.

Inner-Dendrite names the territory, because this cell lays its axon across the proximal apical and basal dendrites - the belt where the fibres coming from area CA3 land.

Restraining names the work, which is to hold down excitation exactly where that CA3 traffic arrives rather than at the cell body.

The word also records its timing signature, since it carries both parvalbumin and somatostatin and delivers its strongest inhibition at the very start of a burst of network activity, then weakens as the rhythm repeats.

Neuron marks it as a local inhibitory circuit cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The bistratified cell is an inhibitory neuron that lays its output in two flat sheets, above and below the row of CA1 pyramidal cells, exactly where fibres from area CA3 land on their dendrites.

A dendrite is the branching input cable a neuron listens with, so this cell mutes recall where it arrives and leaves entorhinal input untouched.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body sits in stratum pyramidale, the dark band of packed pyramidal cell bodies, and both dendrites and axon fill stratum oriens and radiatum, stopping dead at stratum lacunosum-moleculare.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 20 micrometres across in rodents and perhaps 18 to 25 in humans, while the axon totals tens of millimetres inside a rice-grain volume.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No formal subtypes exist, though some weight their axon towards radiatum and others towards oriens, and versions occur in CA1, CA2 and CA3.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Stratum pyramidale and upper stratum oriens of hippocampal areas CA1, CA2 and CA3, with the axon in stratum oriens and stratum radiatum.

The defining interface is the sharp line between stratum radiatum and stratum lacunosum-moleculare, where CA3 input ends and entorhinal input begins, and this cell never crosses it.

NUMBER:

Rat CA1 holds an estimated 2,210 bistratified cells, 5.7 percent of its 38,500 interneurons, which scales to roughly 100,000 per human hemisphere and perhaps 250,000 across both.

Confidence is moderate because nobody has counted them in a human brain, and that is 0.17 percent of hippocampal formation neurons, or three cells in every million neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Nearly fast-spiking, with 100 to 200 megaohms input resistance, an 8 to 12 millisecond membrane time constant, half-millisecond spikes, firing near the theta trough and ferociously during ripples.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Driven by the very CA3 fibres it inhibits and by local pyramidal collaterals, it does feedforward and feedback inhibition at once, contacting about 1,469 pyramidal cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Very thin at 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres and hugely branched, with thousands of boutons, the swellings where transmitter is released, conducting near 0.4 metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main quietening chemical, plus somatostatin and neuropeptide Y released only during hard firing; parvalbumin is a calcium sponge, not a transmitter.

MYELINATION:

Patchy and proximal only, since much hippocampal myelin, the fatty wrap that speeds conduction, sits on parvalbumin interneuron axons.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Among the highest of any neuron, dense with mitochondria and cytochrome c oxidase, leaving it fragile in oxygen shortage, ageing and schizophrenia.

PLASTICITY:

Its excitatory inputs strengthen without the cell firing, called anti-Hebbian plasticity, while its output synapses onto pyramidal cells weaken under natural activity.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Unusually it wears a perineuronal net, a stiff astrocyte-built lattice that buffers ions during furious firing; microglia chew holes in it during learning.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and CA1 can no longer say no to CA3 selectively, tilting the region towards remembering rather than perceiving.

Ripples survive but lose the dendritic clamp that stops them spreading into a seizure.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Gap junctions, direct pores passing current with no chemical step, weld these cells to each other and to basket cells so the parvalbumin network fires as one.

Neuropeptide Y drifts to receptors far from any synapse, a mode called volume transmission.

Its inhibition suppresses dendritic calcium spikes, the local events that trigger lasting change, giving it a veto over memory formation at particular branches.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: CA3 Schaffer collaterals, 0 to 100 per second; local pyramidal feedback, 0 to 50 per second; theta-locked septal GABA.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto pyramidal dendritic shafts and spines in oriens and radiatum, about 1,469 targets; peptides above 40 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage, refractory counter, inhibitory conductance, peptide store, parvalbumin-bound calcium.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 65 millivolts; threshold minus 45 millivolts; 100 to 200 megaohms; divergence about 1,600 cells.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 8 to 12 milliseconds; inhibitory decay 4 to 8; theta cycle 100 to 200; ripple cycle 5 to 8.

• FAILURE MODE: loss frees CA3 drive and feeds temporal lobe epilepsy; parvalbumin failure is suspected in schizophrenia and in degraded Alzheimer ripples.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide each millisecond whether a bistratified cell fires and how much inhibition reaches proximal pyramidal dendrites.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
While index is less than the total number of items in schaffer_trace, repeat the following steps.
    Set drive to the product of 1.8 and the item at position index in schaffer_trace.
    Set feedback to the product of 1.1 and the item at position index in pyramidal_trace.
    Set voltage to the sum of -65 and the product of the sum of voltage and 65 and 0.895.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the sum of drive and feedback.
    If voltage is greater than or equal to -45, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to -65.
        Set inhibition to the sum of inhibition and 0.6.
    End the conditional block.
    Set inhibition to the product of inhibition and 0.819.
    Set index to the sum of index and 1.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because it runs anywhere with no libraries, so a reader can paste it in and watch the cell fire.

import math
DT, V_REST, V_TH = 1.0, -65.0, -45.0
MD, ID = math.exp(-DT / 9.0), math.exp(-DT / 5.0)   # membrane, inhibition decay

def bistratified(schaffer, feedback):
    v, g, refrac, out = V_REST, 0.0, 0, []
    for s, f in zip(schaffer, feedback):
        v = V_REST + (v - V_REST) * MD + 1.8 * s + 1.1 * f
        spike = 0
        if refrac > 0:                    # about 2 ms dead time
            refrac, v = refrac - 1, V_REST
        elif v >= V_TH:
            spike, v, refrac = 1, V_REST, 2
            g += 0.6                      # proximal dendritic inhibition
        g *= ID
        out.append((spike, round(g, 3)))
    return out

sc = [0.0] * 5 + [12.0] * 10 + [0.0] * 5  # ripple-like CA3 burst
print(bistratified(sc, [0.0] + sc[:-1]))  # feedback lags one step

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Two flat axon sheets straddling the pyramidal layer, stopping cleanly at stratum lacunosum-moleculare, parvalbumin and somatostatin and neuropeptide Y in one cell, and a ripple burst near 100 spikes per second arriving one to two milliseconds after the pyramidal cells.

CHAPTER 50. ORIENS-LACUNOSUM MOLECULARE (O-LM) CELLS (Outer-Dendrite Filtering Neuron) (COG)

This cell lies flat on the floor of the hippocampus, listens only to its neighbours, then reaches to the ceiling to switch off the outside world.

The old label is a pair of Latin layer addresses, one for the cell body and one for the axon, and it teaches nothing about purpose.

Outer-Dendrite names the target, the most distal tuft of the pyramidal cell - which is the only place the direct pathway from the entorhinal cortex makes contact.

Filtering names the job, because by damping that tuft while leaving the proximal dendrites free, this cell decides how much raw cortical sensory input is allowed to compete with the hippocampus's own stored CA3 traffic.

The word also reflects its timing, as its output is weak on the first stimulus and grows with repeated theta-frequency activation, so the filter tightens as a rhythm is sustained.

Neuron marks it as a local inhibitory circuit cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The oriens-lacunosum moleculare cell, shortened to O-LM cell, keeps its body and listening branches in the deepest layer of CA1 and sends its output to the top layer, where the entorhinal cortex delivers news of the world.

It uses purely local chatter to decide how much reality its neighbours hear.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A horizontal spindle of a cell body sits in stratum oriens with two or three dendrites that never leave that layer, while one axon climbs the full height of CA1 into a tuft.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 25 micrometres long, its dendrites reach 400 to 900 micrometres sideways, and the axon climbs 400 to 600.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Most are born in the medial ganglionic eminence and carry somatostatin, while a caudal ganglionic eminence minority carry the serotonin receptor 5-HT3A instead.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Stratum oriens of area CA1 against the alveus, with equivalent cells in CA3, and a terminal field beyond the radiatum to lacunosum-moleculare boundary, where CA3 input yields to entorhinal.

NUMBER:

Rat CA1 holds an estimated 1,640 O-LM cells, 4.3 percent of its interneurons, scaling to roughly 75,000 per human hemisphere and 150,000 in both, or 0.1 percent of hippocampal formation neurons.

Confidence is low, since no human count exists.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Slow and rhythmic, with 200 to 400 megaohms input resistance, a 20 to 40 millisecond membrane time constant, and a voltage sag marking the h-current that paces it near theta.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Nearly all excitation comes from local CA1 pyramidal collaterals, a pure feedback loop whose synapses grow stronger with every spike, called short-term facilitation.

The protein Elfn1 switches on metabotropic glutamate receptor 7 across the synapse, holding release probability down so only a burst recruits this cell.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

One thin ascending trunk of 0.3 to 0.6 micrometres taking milliseconds to reach the tuft, with some cells branching to subiculum or septum.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's principal quietening chemical, plus somatostatin co-released during sustained firing to damp excitation over seconds.

MYELINATION:

None, and the bare axon is deliberate, because this cell must inhibit the tuft on a rhythm, not instantly.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate to high, because h-current channels leak positive charge at rest, so ion pumps run constantly and the cell pays a bill even when silent.

PLASTICITY:

Theta-frequency stimulation potentiates its inputs and its intrinsic excitability, the latter by turning down Kv7 potassium channels and h-channels.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

It wears no perineuronal net, unlike parvalbumin cells, and astrocytes wrap its terminals loosely enough for somatostatin to escape and act at range.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and CA1 cannot ignore the world on purpose, so every sensory detail pushes into recall and no memory holds steady against interference.

CA1 theta also loses a main pacemaker.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The h-current makes this a resonator rather than an adder, tuned to theta and deaf to other rates, which is computation done by the membrane itself.

Glutamate and acetylcholine together trigger plateau potentials, shoulders lasting hundreds of milliseconds that turn a brief input into a sustained output.

Its inhibition blocks the tuft calcium spikes that let entorhinal and CA3 input combine, vetoing the coincidence detection that builds associations.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: local CA1 pyramidal collaterals, strongly facilitating, 0 to 60 hertz; septal acetylcholine; theta-locked septal GABA.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto the distal apical tufts of about 1,457 CA1 pyramidal cells; somatostatin above 20 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage, h-current activation, facilitation factor, afterhyperpolarisation, somatostatin store.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 55 to minus 62 millivolts; threshold minus 45; 200 to 400 megaohms; sag ratio 1.2 to 1.5.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 40 milliseconds; h-current 100 to 200; facilitation 150 to 300.

• FAILURE MODE: somatostatin interneurons are lost early and selectively in Alzheimer's disease, and fewer of them tracks with faster cognitive decline and degraded theta.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to recruit an O-LM cell only when local pyramidal cells fire a sustained burst, then inhibit the distal tuft.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -55.
Create a number variable called facilitation with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called tuft_inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
While index is less than the total number of items in pyramidal_trace, repeat the following steps.
    Set arriving to the item at position index in pyramidal_trace.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the quotient of the difference of -55 and voltage divided by 20.
    If arriving is equal to 1, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the product of 2 and facilitation.
        Set facilitation to the sum of facilitation and 0.8.
    End the conditional block.
    Set facilitation to the sum of facilitation and the quotient of the difference of 1 and facilitation divided by 200.
    If voltage is greater than or equal to -45, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to -63.
        Set tuft_inhibition to the sum of tuft_inhibition and 0.5.
    End the conditional block.
    Set tuft_inhibition to the product of tuft_inhibition and 0.95.
    Set index to the sum of index and 1.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python again, because the sag current needs a real exponential and one changed number shifts the tuning.

import math
V_REST, V_TH = -60.0, -45.0
G_H, E_H, W = 0.35, -20.0, 2.0   # sag conductance, its reversal, synaptic weight

def olm(pyr_spikes, steps=800):
    v, h, f, out = V_REST, 0.0, 1.0, []
    for t in range(steps):
        h_inf = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 80.0) / 6.0))  # sag grows when negative
        h += (h_inf - h) / 120.0
        drive = 0.0
        if t in pyr_spikes:
            drive = W * f                 # Elfn1 and mGluR7: each spike lands harder
            f = min(4.0, f + 0.8)
        f += (1.0 - f) / 200.0
        v += (V_REST - v) / 25.0 + G_H * h * (E_H - v) + drive
        if v >= V_TH:
            out.append(t)
            v = V_REST - 8.0              # deep afterhyperpolarisation
    return out

print("first O-LM spikes:", olm({100 + 20 * i for i in range(30)})[:5])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A horizontal spindle in stratum oriens whose dendrites never leave it, one axon climbing the full height of CA1, a pronounced sag, and an input that strengthens with every spike.

CHAPTER 51. IVY CELLS (COG)

The commonest inhibitory cell in the hippocampus went undescribed until 2008, because its axon is so fine that microscopists mistook it for haze.

Gloss: dense creeping axon that bathes nearby dendrites in slow inhibition.

Ivy is a plain shape word that teaches, naming the extremely dense, fine, creeping axonal plexus that clings around local pyramidal dendrites.

This chapter merges the two entries that previously described the ivy cell, one of which had been filed with the cortical interneurons although the cell is a hippocampal one.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The ivy cell is named for an axon that creeps through the tissue like ivy over a wall, thin and dense and everywhere.

Rather than striking a few targets hard it releases gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main quietening chemical, as a slow mist over a neighbourhood, and makes the gas nitric oxide.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small round body usually sits inside stratum pyramidale, with smooth dendrites through oriens, pyramidale and radiatum, and a fog of ultrafine axon filling the same layers.

SIZE:

The body is 10 to 15 micrometres across, the dendritic field spans 300 to 500 micrometres, and the axon reaches tens of millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Cells vary by the layer holding the body, classically stratum pyramidale and a variant in stratum radiatum, and they shade into neurogliaform cells.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Stratum pyramidale, oriens and radiatum of areas CA1, CA2 and CA3, with equivalents in the dentate gyrus.

The relevant interface is the radiatum to lacunosum-moleculare border, which this cell will not cross, since beyond it is neurogliaform territory.

NUMBER:

Rat CA1 holds an estimated 8,810 ivy cells, 22.9 percent of its interneurons and the most numerous single type, scaling to about 390,000 per human hemisphere and 800,000 across both.

Confidence is good for the proportion, poor for the absolute figure, and that is 0.5 percent of hippocampal formation neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Late spiking, hesitating tens or hundreds of milliseconds before the first spike as a potassium brake lets go, with resistance above 250 megaohms and rates of one or two hertz.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excited by CA3 Schaffer collaterals and local pyramidal cells, it slowly inhibits about 1,490 pyramidal cells, and mu-opioid receptors let opioids silence it.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Among the thinnest in the brain at under 0.2 micrometres, unmyelinated, and many release sites face no partner, the fingerprint of transmission by diffusion.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in a dilute cloud, neuropeptide Y that suppresses nearby glutamate release, and nitric oxide made on demand.

MYELINATION:

None, since the axon is too thin for a sheath, and myelin would defeat a strategy needing bare membrane throughout.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest electrically but chemically distinctive, since making nitric oxide consumes arginine and a cofactor whose shortage flips the enzyme into making superoxide.

PLASTICITY:

Its diffuse output is reset wholesale by opioid signalling rather than synaptic learning, and its nitric oxide crosses other synapses backwards to change their output.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes matter more here than almost anywhere, because their GABA transporters set how far the cloud spreads.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove ivy cells and CA1 loses its background hush, so events stay correctly timed while excitability drifts upward.

It also loses the link between activity, blood flow and opioid state.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Volume transmission is the headline, with GABA spilling into the extracellular space to reach cells having no synapse with it.

Gap junctions, direct electrical pores, link ivy cells promiscuously to neurogliaform and other interneurons, forming a loosely coupled sheet.

Nitric oxide is a retrograde messenger, a vasodilator and an immune signal at once, making this neuron part of the blood flow response brain scanners measure.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: CA3 Schaffer collaterals, 0 to 40 hertz; pyramidal feedback; mu-opioid agonists hyperpolarising 3 to 10 millivolts; gap junction current.

• OUTPUTS: slow extrasynaptic GABA over a 20 to 60 micrometre radius; neuropeptide Y; nitric oxide reaching vessels.

• STATE: membrane voltage, potassium brake, pooled GABA, nitric oxide, opioid occupancy.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 65 to minus 72 millivolts; 250 to 500 megaohms; first-spike delay 50 to 300 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 30 to 50 milliseconds; brake 100 to 200; pooled GABA 50 to 150; nitric oxide hundreds.

• FAILURE MODE: opioids silence these cells and strip out diffuse inhibition, and failed nitric oxide signalling uncouples activity from blood flow in dementia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate an ivy cell that hesitates before its first spike and then releases a slow cloud of gamma-aminobutyric acid and nitric oxide.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called brake with initial value 0.9.
Create a number variable called gaba_cloud with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called nitric_oxide with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
While index is less than the total number of items in drive_trace, repeat the following steps.
    Set drive to the item at position index in drive_trace.
    Set brake to the difference of brake and the quotient of brake divided by 120.
    Set pull to the product of brake and the difference of -85 and voltage.
    Set change to the quotient of the sum of pull and the difference of -70 and voltage divided by 45.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the sum of change and drive.
    If voltage is greater than or equal to -50, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to -70.
        Set gaba_cloud to the sum of gaba_cloud and 1.
        Set nitric_oxide to the sum of nitric_oxide and 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set gaba_cloud to the product of gaba_cloud and 0.989.
    Set nitric_oxide to the product of nitric_oxide and 0.9975.
    Set index to the sum of index and 1.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python, because the late-spiking delay is the whole point and a reader can print it and watch it move.

import math
V_REST, V_TH, E_K = -70.0, -50.0, -85.0
gd, v, gaba, no, first = 0.9, V_REST, 0.0, 0.0, None
for t, d in enumerate([0.0] * 100 + [0.8] * 1400):   # current from 100 ms on
    if d > 0:
        gd -= gd / 120.0            # the potassium brake lets go slowly
    v += (V_REST - v) / 45.0 + gd * (E_K - v) / 45.0 + d
    if v >= V_TH:
        v, gaba, no = V_REST, gaba + 1.0, no + 1.0   # puff of GABA and gas
        if first is None:
            first = t
    gaba *= math.exp(-1 / 90.0)
    no *= math.exp(-1 / 400.0)
print("first spike ms:", first, "delay:", first - 100)
print("GABA cloud:", round(gaba, 3), "nitric oxide:", round(no, 3))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small body among the pyramidal cells inside a smudge of axon too fine to resolve, staining for nitric oxide synthase with neuropeptide Y, and that long hesitation before the first spike.

CHAPTER 52. HIPPOCAMPAL NEUROGLIAFORM CELLS (COG)

One spike from this cell fogs a sphere of tissue, and it alone can switch on the slow, seconds-long class of inhibition.

Gloss: the small round soma with its tight halo of thin branches is exactly what the name says.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The neurogliaform cell has an axon so densely tangled that early anatomists took it for a glial support cell, hence the name.

It aims at nothing in particular, flooding a small volume with gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's quietening chemical, which lingers long enough to reach a slow receptor class.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small round body sends short smooth dendrites out symmetrically, while the axon branches repeatedly into hundreds of branchlets filling a sphere.

SIZE:

The body is 10 to 15 micrometres, the axonal sphere is 100 to 300 micrometres wide, and millimetres of axon pack inside.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

They divide by layer into a lacunosum-moleculare group marked by neuron-derived neurotrophic factor, a radiatum group and a dentate group, with a nitric oxide synthase subset shading into ivy.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Stratum lacunosum-moleculare and stratum radiatum of areas CA1, CA2 and CA3, and the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus.

The lacunosum-moleculare group sits at the interface where entorhinal layer 3 fibres, the temporoammonic path, enter the hippocampus, where the world meets retrieved memory.

NUMBER:

Rat CA1 holds an estimated 3,580 neurogliaform cells, 9.3 percent of its interneurons, and with dentate and CA3 groups perhaps 250,000 per human hemisphere, 500,000 in both.

Confidence is low for the absolute figure, which is 0.33 percent of hippocampal formation neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Late spiking with a first-spike delay over 100 milliseconds, 200 to 400 megaohms, and strong accommodation, so it reports onset rather than duration.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Driven by entorhinal fibres in lacunosum-moleculare or CA3 fibres in radiatum, it produces a unitary inhibitory current rising in 2.8 and decaying with a 51 millisecond time constant.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Ultrathin and unmyelinated with the shortest inter-bouton distances in the hippocampus, and so compact that conduction delay across the output field stays under a millisecond.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) released as a prolonged low-concentration transient rather than a pulse, plus neuropeptide Y, and that slow transient is the heart of the cell.

MYELINATION:

None, and impossible at this calibre, and self-defeating anyway, because the strategy needs GABA escaping from bare membrane.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest given low rates and small size, the distinctive cost being upkeep of thousands of release sites in a tiny arbour.

PLASTICITY:

Its own synapses are not classic potentiation sites, but by gating whether entorhinal and CA3 input coincide in the tuft it controls plasticity in other cells.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytic GABA transporters decide how long the cloud persists, so blocking them measurably expands this cell's sphere of influence.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the hippocampus loses slow inhibition entirely, so fast cells still shape each moment but nothing imposes a hush after entorhinal input.

The region could react but never settle.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Volume transmission is the operating principle, since this cell speaks chemically to a region rather than electrically to partners.

It is the only interneuron known to evoke a metabotropic response from a single spike, and desensitisation shapes that response.

Gap junction coupling is promiscuous, about 85 percent of pairs connected, so the population behaves partly as one element.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: entorhinal layer 3 or CA3 excitation, 0 to 30 hertz; gap junction current; opioids.

• OUTPUTS: a biphasic inhibitory conductance to every cell within 50 to 150 micrometres; neuropeptide Y.

• STATE: membrane voltage, potassium brake, extracellular GABA, fast conductance, metabotropic conductance, desensitisation.

• PARAMETERS: 200 to 400 megaohms; first-spike delay 50 to 200 milliseconds; rise 2.8 and decay 51; metabotropic peak one fifth.

• TIME CONSTANTS: fast rise 2.8 and decay 51 milliseconds; metabotropic rise 45 and decay 180; astrocytic clearance 50 to 200.

• FAILURE MODE: losing slow inhibition at the entorhinal input zone releases the direct sensory pathway into CA1, implicated in temporal lobe epilepsy, and opioids suppress these cells.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn one neurogliaform spike into the two slow inhibitory components it delivers to every cell inside its axonal sphere.
Create a number variable called fast_decay with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called fast_rise with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called slow_decay with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called slow_rise with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called output with initial value empty list.
While index is less than 400, repeat the following steps.
    If index is equal to 50, then perform the following actions.
        Set fast_decay to 1.
        Set fast_rise to 1.
        Set slow_decay to 1.
        Set slow_rise to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set fast_part to the product of 1.2525 and the difference of fast_decay and fast_rise.
    Set slow_part to the product of 0.4232 and the difference of slow_decay and slow_rise.
    Add the sum of fast_part and slow_part to the end of output.
    Set fast_decay to the product of fast_decay and 0.98058.
    Set fast_rise to the product of fast_rise and 0.69907.
    Set slow_decay to the product of slow_decay and 0.99446.
    Set slow_rise to the product of slow_rise and 0.97800.
    Set index to the sum of index and 1.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because the two-receptor kinetics are pure arithmetic and this loop runs billions of times in a whole-hippocampus simulation.

#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
/* peak-normalise a difference of two exponentials */
static double nf(double td, double tr) {
    double tp = (td * tr / (td - tr)) * log(td / tr);
    return 1.0 / (exp(-tp / td) - exp(-tp / tr));
}
int main(void) {
    double aD = 0, aR = 0, bD = 0, bR = 0;
    double nA = nf(51.0, 2.8), nB = nf(180.0, 45.0);
    for (int t = 0; t < 400; t++) {
        if (t == 50) { aD++; aR++; bD++; bR++; }  /* one spike */
        double gA = nA * (aD - aR);               /* fast component */
        double gB = 0.2 * nB * (bD - bR);         /* metabotropic */
        if (t % 40 == 0) printf("%3d %.4f %.4f\n", t, gA, gB);
        aD *= exp(-1.0 / 51.0);  aR *= exp(-1.0 / 2.8);
        bD *= exp(-1.0 / 180.0); bR *= exp(-1.0 / 45.0);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A tiny body inside an axon fog like a cotton ball drawn in pencil, one spike giving two-part inhibition lasting hundreds of milliseconds, and neighbours coupled 85 percent of the time.

CHAPTER 53. HILAR PERFORANT PATH-ASSOCIATED (HIPP) CELLS (Granule-Return Muting Neuron) (COG)

This is the most fragile important cell in the hippocampus, and when temporal lobe epilepsy begins it dies first.

The old acronym encodes two addresses - the hilus where the body sits and the incoming path its axon runs beside - and cannot be spoken aloud usefully.

Granule-Return names the circuit loop, because the cell is excited by the very granule cells it then inhibits, making it a feedback element rather than an advance guard.

Muting names the effect and its place, since its somatostatin-containing axon spreads through the outer two thirds of the molecular layer - the band where cortical fibres contact granule cell dendrites - so the more the dentate fires, the more its own incoming line is turned down.

Neuron marks it as a local inhibitory circuit cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The hilar perforant path-associated cell, the HIPP cell, sits in the hilus, the hollow inside the curve of the dentate gyrus, and sends its axon to the outer molecular layer.

That is where the perforant path, carrying the world in from entorhinal cortex, lands on granule cells, making this a feedback thermostat on memory's front door.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A medium multipolar body lies in the hilus with thorny dendrites that never leave it, while the axon crosses the granule cell layer into the outer two thirds of the molecular layer.

SIZE:

The body is 15 to 25 micrometres in rodents and perhaps 20 to 30 in humans, dendrites reach 300 to 700 micrometres, and the axon field can span a millimetre.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two contrasting somatostatin types exist, the classic HIPP cell with molecular layer output and a second whose output stays in the hilus, and a subset reaches the septum.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The hilus, or polymorphic layer, of the dentate gyrus, with the axon in the outer molecular layer.

Two interfaces matter, the hilus to granule layer border its axon crosses and its dendrites never do, and the line dividing mossy from perforant input.

NUMBER:

Rat hilar somatostatin neurons number in the low tens of thousands per hippocampus, 16 percent of dentate inhibitory cells, scaling to perhaps 100,000 to 250,000 per hemisphere.

Confidence is low and nobody has counted these in humans, so treat the midpoint, 0.2 percent of hippocampal formation neurons, as a bound.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Slow and regular, with 200 to 400 megaohms, a 25 to 40 millisecond membrane time constant, broad spikes with a large afterhyperpolarisation, and firing that rises when the animal explores.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Granule cell mossy fibre collaterals drive it through facilitating synapses, so only converging bursts recruit it, and it inhibits granule cell distal dendrites and basket cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin and unmyelinated, branching widely in the outer molecular layer and running unusually far along it.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the quietening chemical, with somatostatin and neuropeptide Y co-released to suppress the perforant path terminals.

MYELINATION:

Absent locally, though the long branch to the medial septum is partly myelinated because it must cross centimetres fast.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate but brittle, since these cells sit in poorly capillarised tissue and buffer calcium badly, so hard excitation loads them fatally.

PLASTICITY:

The granule cell to HIPP synapse potentiates, and blocking that impairs object location memory, a rare link from one inhibitory synapse to a behaviour.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Its peptides act on stem cells in the subgranular zone next door, so it helps set the rate of adult neurogenesis, and microglia inflame at its death.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove HIPP cells and the dentate gyrus stops separating patterns, the trick of turning overlapping inputs into sparse distinct outputs that keeps similar memories apart.

What it loses is discrimination itself.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Somatostatin and neuropeptide Y diffuse onto perforant path terminals, volume transmission outlasting any spike by seconds.

Neuropeptide Y is one of the brain's own anticonvulsants, and surviving cells sprout it into new territory in human epileptic tissue.

The facilitating input makes this a burst detector, integrating at the synapse before the membrane is involved.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: granule cell mossy fibre collaterals, facilitating, 0 to 40 hertz with wide convergence; septal acetylcholine.

• OUTPUTS: GABA across the outer molecular layer; somatostatin and neuropeptide Y onto perforant terminals.

• STATE: membrane voltage, facilitation, recent spikes, fast conductance, peptide pool, calcium load.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 62 millivolts; threshold minus 42; 200 to 400 megaohms; facilitation ceiling five; burst four spikes in 50 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 25 to 40 milliseconds; facilitation 200 to 300; conductance 20 to 30; peptide seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: HIPP and mossy cells are the most vulnerable hilar populations in temporal lobe epilepsy, and their loss defines hippocampal sclerosis.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to recruit a HIPP cell from converging granule input and release peptide only on a real burst.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -62.
Create a number variable called facilitation with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called peptide with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called burst_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
While index is less than the total number of items in granule_counts, repeat the following steps.
    Set active to the item at position index in granule_counts.
    Set drive to the product of 0.3 and the product of facilitation and active.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and drive.
    Set facilitation to the sum of facilitation and the product of 0.5 and active.
    If voltage is greater than or equal to -42, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to -67.
        Set burst_count to the sum of burst_count and 1.
    End the conditional block.
    If burst_count is greater than or equal to 4, then perform the following actions.
        Set peptide to the sum of peptide and 0.2.
        Set burst_count to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set index to the sum of index and 1.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python, because the point is the contrast between scattered and converging input, shown by one function on two inputs.

import math

def hipp(counts):
    v, f, pep, recent, spikes = -62.0, 1.0, 0.0, [], 0
    for t, n in enumerate(counts):
        v += (-62.0 - v) / 30.0 + 0.30 * f * n   # facilitating collateral drive
        f = min(5.0, f + 0.5 * n) + (1.0 - f) / 250.0
        if v >= -42.0:
            v, spikes = -67.0, spikes + 1
            recent.append(t)
        recent = [s for s in recent if t - s <= 50]
        if len(recent) >= 4:                     # only a burst frees peptide
            pep, recent = pep + 0.2, []
        pep *= math.exp(-1 / 3000.0)
    return spikes, round(pep, 4)

print("scattered:", hipp([1 if t % 20 == 0 else 0 for t in range(1000)]))
print("converging:", hipp([12 if 200 <= t < 400 and t % 4 == 0 else 0
                           for t in range(1000)]))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Thorny dendrites that never leave the hilus, an axon filling the outer molecular layer and stopping at a sharp line, somatostatin with neuropeptide Y, and a grim signature, because in hippocampal sclerosis the hilus is the empty room this cell used to occupy.

CHAPTER 54. HILAR COMMISSURAL-ASSOCIATIONAL PATHWAY-RELATED (HICAP) CELLS (Local-Input Curbing Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell cannabis acts on in the dentate gyrus, much of why the drug blocks new memories.

Local-Input names the band this cell governs - the inner third of the molecular layer - where the dentate's own internal and cross-hemisphere fibres terminate rather than the cortical ones.

Curbing names the action - a checking of that internal recurrent drive so the dentate does not run away on its own echo.

The word also separates it cleanly from its neighbour that watches the outer band, and it records a crucial wiring fact: these cholecystokinin-containing cells inhibit basket cells as well as granule cells, so their restraint is aimed partly at other inhibitors.

Neuron marks it as a local inhibitory circuit cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The hilar commissural-associational pathway-related cell, the HICAP cell, is the HIPP cell's counterpart aimed at a different layer.

It targets the inner third of the molecular layer, where fibres arrive from mossy cells of both hippocampi, setting how loudly the hippocampus talks to its front door.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The body lies in the hilus near the granule cell layer, and unlike the HIPP cell its dendrites cross that layer, while its axon fills only the inner third.

SIZE:

The body is 15 to 25 micrometres, dendrites reach 300 to 600 micrometres across two layers, and the axon field spans a few hundred.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Its closest relative is the total molecular layer cell, whose axon spans inner to outer, and both count as accommodating cannabinoid-sensitive cells.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The hilus of the dentate gyrus near the granule cell layer, with dendrites in hilus and molecular layer and an axon in the inner molecular layer.

The defining interface is the invisible line between inner third and outer two thirds, dividing memory-internal from world-external information.

NUMBER:

No human count exists and rodent figures are soft, but cholecystokinin cells are roughly 14 percent of interneurons in the quantified CA1 field.

A defensible estimate is 50,000 to 100,000 per hemisphere, 100,000 to 200,000 in both, about 0.1 percent of hippocampal formation neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Accommodating and regular spiking, intervals lengthening during maintained input, with 150 to 350 megaohms, a 15 to 30 millisecond time constant and broad spikes.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excited by granule cell collaterals and by incoming pathways through its molecular layer dendrites, it inhibits granule cell proximal dendrites strongly, interneurons weakly.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, unmyelinated and moderately branched, with terminals studded with cannabinoid receptors, and an output smeared in time after its spike.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the quietening chemical, released synchronously and asynchronously, with cholecystokinin as a slow modulator linked to anxiety.

MYELINATION:

None, and pointless here, because output timing is set by loosely coupled release machinery, not conduction speed.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and unremarkable, the distinctive cost being that asynchronous release empties vesicle pools more completely, so terminals refill constantly.

PLASTICITY:

Its plasticity runs backwards, because a depolarised granule cell makes endocannabinoids that cross the synapse and mute these terminals.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing dramatic distinguishes the glia here, worth saying plainly, except that astrocytes carry cannabinoid receptors and read the signal.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the dentate gyrus loses control of its own feedback, so the loop from granule cells to mossy cells and back gains dangerous gain.

It also loses the cannabinoid switch that frees an active granule cell.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Retrograde messaging is the headline, the target instructing its own inhibitor second by second.

Asynchronous release gives the terminal a chemical memory, spilling GABA past the spike.

Endocannabinoids also modulate electrical coupling here, so one signal adjusts two channels at once.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: granule cell collaterals; commissural and perforant excitation onto molecular layer dendrites; retrograde endocannabinoids.

• OUTPUTS: synchronous and asynchronous GABA onto granule cell proximal dendrites; cholecystokinin.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation, terminal calcium, endocannabinoid suppression, vesicle pool.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 60 to minus 68 millivolts; 150 to 350 megaohms; release probability 0.3 to 0.4, falling to zero under suppression.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 30 milliseconds; adaptation 100 to 300; calcium 50 to 100; suppression 2 to 10 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: cannabinoids suppress these terminals and impair encoding, and in epilepsy models mutual inhibition among these cells is strengthened.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to release transmitter from a HICAP terminal, combining unreliable synchronous release, trailing asynchronous release, and endocannabinoid suppression.
Create a number variable called calcium with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called endocannabinoid with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called released with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
While index is less than the total number of items in spike_trace, repeat the following steps.
    Set endocannabinoid to the sum of endocannabinoid and the item at position index in depolarisation_trace.
    Set suppression to the quotient of 1 divided by the sum of 1 and endocannabinoid.
    If the item at position index in spike_trace is equal to 1, then perform the following actions.
        Set calcium to the sum of calcium and 1.4.
        If random_draw is less than the product of 0.35 and suppression, then perform the following actions.
            Set released to the sum of released and 1.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Set trailing to the product of 0.02 and the product of calcium and suppression.
    If random_draw is less than trailing, then perform the following actions.
        Set released to the sum of released and 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set calcium to the product of calcium and 0.9835.
    Set endocannabinoid to the product of endocannabinoid and 0.99975.
    Set index to the sum of index and 1.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because the behaviour is stochastic and comparative, and Node runs it with no installation.

// HICAP terminal: unreliable synchronous release, trailing asynchronous release,
// and retrograde endocannabinoid suppression from the granule cell.
function run(spikeTimes, depolTime, steps) {
  let pool = 0, ecb = 0, released = 0;
  const spikes = new Set(spikeTimes);
  for (let t = 0; t < steps; t++) {
    if (t === depolTime) ecb += 1.0;   // granule cell makes endocannabinoid
    const supp = 1 / (1 + ecb);        // CB1 receptors mute the terminal
    if (spikes.has(t)) {
      if (Math.random() < 0.35 * supp) released += 1;   // synchronous
      pool += 1.4;                                      // residual calcium
    }
    if (Math.random() < 0.02 * pool * supp) released += 1;  // asynchronous
    pool *= Math.exp(-1 / 60.0);
    ecb *= Math.exp(-1 / 4000.0);
  }
  return released;
}
const burst = [100, 110, 120, 130, 140, 150, 160, 170];
let free = 0, muted = 0;
for (let i = 0; i < 200; i++) { free += run(burst, -1, 800); muted += run(burst, 50, 800); }
console.log("free:", (free / 200).toFixed(2), "suppressed:", (muted / 200).toFixed(2));

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A hilar cell whose dendrites cross the granule cell layer while its axon stops at the inner third, cholecystokinin in the body with cannabinoid receptors on the terminals, and a signature no other dentate cell shows, falling silent for seconds because the cell it inhibits told it to.

CHAPTER 55. MOLECULAR LAYER PERFORANT PATH-ASSOCIATED (MOPP) CELLS (Incoming-Path Pre-Emptive Neuron) (COG)

There is a cell in your brain whose only job is to say "not yet" to the memory system, and it says it about four milliseconds before the memory system has finished hearing the question.

Incoming-Path names what excites it - the cortical fibres entering the dentate - which it listens to directly instead of waiting for granule cells.

Pre-Emptive names the timing - and it is the measured fact that earns the name, because when that path is stimulated, these cells fire before the granule cells do, and their activation alone produces strong inhibition of granule cells.

The word also marks its role as a feed-forward brake applied to a message while it is still arriving, making it the natural counterpart of the feedback cell that answers only after the dentate has spoken.

Neuron marks it as a local inhibitory circuit cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The molecular layer perforant path-associated cell, almost always shortened to MOPP cell, is an inhibitory nerve cell in the dentate gyrus, the entry gate of the hippocampus.

Inhibitory means it releases gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main "quieten down" chemical messenger.

Its name is a description of where it sits and what it listens to.

Its cell body sits in the molecular layer, the thin outer rind of the dentate gyrus.

Its output wire spreads through exactly the band where the perforant path ends, the perforant path being the great cable of axons from the entorhinal cortex that "perforates" the nearby subiculum on its way into the hippocampus.

The MOPP cell is therefore wired in parallel with the granule cells, the dentate's principal output neurons, and it receives the same incoming message they do.

Because it is small and electrically excitable, it reaches firing threshold first.

The result is feed-forward inhibition: the news from the outside world arrives, the MOPP cell fires within a few milliseconds, and the granule cells find their dendrites already being silenced by the time the excitation builds.

This narrows the window in which a granule cell may fire to a few milliseconds, and that narrow window is one of the physical reasons the dentate gyrus fires so sparsely.

Sparse firing is the machinery of pattern separation, the trick by which two similar mornings become two separable memories.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is multipolar or triangular, sitting inside the molecular layer rather than in the granule cell layer beneath it.

Its dendrites, the input branches, stay inside the molecular layer and run flat along it, which means the cell samples entorhinal input and almost nothing else.

The dendrites are smooth or only sparsely studded with spines.

The axon, the output wire, forms a dense horizontal plexus confined to the middle and outer two-thirds of the molecular layer, avoiding the inner third where the commissural and associational fibres from mossy cells terminate.

That avoidance is the signature: this cell inhibits only the pathway it listens to.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly 10 to 18 micrometres across, about one fifth the width of a human hair.

The dendritic field spans 300 to 600 micrometres along the molecular layer.

Reconstructed axons in rodents run for several millimetres to a few tens of millimetres in total length and carry on the order of one thousand to ten thousand release sites.

Human values are extrapolated from rodent reconstructions and should be treated as estimates.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Classical wide-field MOPP cells, with a long horizontal axon sweeping across the molecular layer.

• Neurogliaform-like MOPP cells, whose axon is a compact dense web and which release GABA largely by spillover into the tissue rather than into tidy synapses.

• Total molecular layer (TML) cells, a neighbouring type whose axon covers all three sublayers rather than sparing the inner third, and which are sensitive to cannabinoid signalling.

• Outer-molecular-layer-only variants, aligned to the lateral perforant path alone.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Dentate gyrus, stratum moleculare (the molecular layer), in both the suprapyramidal and infrapyramidal blades and in the crest that joins them.

It is present along the whole septotemporal axis, meaning from the dorsal hippocampus, which is more concerned with space, to the ventral hippocampus, which is more concerned with emotion.

The critical interface is the hippocampal fissure, the seam where the dentate molecular layer presses against the stratum lacunosum-moleculare of CA1, and MOPP dendrites and axons run right up to that seam.

NUMBER:

The five types in this batch are MOPP cells, trilaminar cells, back-projection cells, hippocampo-septal projecting inhibitory cells and radiatum-retrohippocampal cells, and together they are allocated about 360,000 neurons across both hemispheres.

That is roughly 0.24 percent of the 150 million neuron budget for the hippocampal formation, and about 2.4 percent of the roughly 15 million hippocampal interneurons in that budget.

MOPP cells take the largest share of the five: about 60,000 per hemisphere, so about 120,000 across both hemispheres, or 0.08 percent of the hippocampal formation.

Confidence is low.

The figure is derived by scaling: GABAergic cells are about 2 to 3 percent of dentate neurons, and molecular layer types are a minority of those.

No unbiased stereological count of human MOPP cells exists, so treat 30,000 to 120,000 per hemisphere as the defensible bound.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting membrane potential is around minus 60 to minus 65 millivolts.

Input resistance is high, roughly 150 to 400 megaohms, which means small currents move this cell a long way.

The membrane time constant, the time the cell takes to respond to a steady input, is about 10 to 25 milliseconds.

Action potentials are relatively broad for an interneuron, with a half-width of about 0.6 to 1.2 milliseconds, so this is not a fast-spiking cell.

Firing is regular or accommodating, sometimes late-spiking in the neurogliaform-like subset, with maximum sustained rates of roughly 20 to 60 hertz.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come overwhelmingly from the perforant path axons of entorhinal cortex layer two, acting through AMPA and NMDA glutamate receptors.

Additional input arrives from other interneurons, from GABAergic and cholinergic fibres of the medial septum, and from serotonin and noradrenaline fibres of the brainstem.

Outputs land on the distal dendritic shafts and spines of granule cells, on newly born granule cells generated by adult neurogenesis, on mossy cell distal dendrites, and on other interneurons.

A single MOPP cell can contact several thousand granule cells, because its axon runs across the layer rather than down through it.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, roughly 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres in diameter, and conducts slowly at about 0.1 to 0.3 metres per second.

It stays inside the dentate molecular layer, occasionally crossing the hippocampal fissure into CA1 stratum lacunosum-moleculare.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA is the transmitter.

Many MOPP cells also carry neuropeptide Y (NPY), a peptide that suppresses glutamate release, and neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS), the enzyme that makes the gas nitric oxide.

Reelin and the transcription factor COUP-TFII are common in the neurogliaform-like members.

These cells are typically negative for parvalbumin and for somatostatin.

Receptors on the cell include GABA-A, GABA-B, nicotinic and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, and mu-opioid receptors in the neurogliaform-like subset.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none.

Its axon is bare, which is one reason it is slow and one reason it is cheap to run.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest by interneuron standards, because it does not fire at hundreds of hertz.

Mitochondrial density and cytochrome oxidase activity are lower than in fast-spiking basket cells, and these cells rarely wear the dense sugar-and-protein jackets called perineuronal nets.

Their steady, low-rate work still makes them continuously active consumers rather than occasional ones.

PLASTICITY:

The perforant path synapse onto MOPP cells can strengthen and weaken with use, which retunes how much feed-forward braking a given input produces.

MOPP cells innervate newborn granule cells, and because GABA is depolarising in very immature neurons, MOPP output helps steer the maturation and wiring of cells born in adulthood.

In the total molecular layer relatives, GABA release is suppressed by endocannabinoids acting on CB1 receptors, giving granule cells a retrograde volume control over their own inhibition.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes of the dentate molecular layer are not generic.

They face the heaviest glutamate flux in the dentate, and they carry unusually high densities of the glutamate transporter EAAT2 to mop it up.

More specifically for this cell, MOPP and neurogliaform-like cells release GABA into the extracellular space rather than only into synaptic clefts, so the astrocytic GABA transporter GAT-3 in this layer directly sets how far and how long that inhibition spreads.

Astrocyte processes here also wrap the amyloid-prone perforant path terminal zone, which is why this layer is an early site of plaque deposition.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete MOPP cells and the dentate gyrus loses its first refusal.

The entorhinal barrage would reach granule cell dendrites unopposed for the first several milliseconds, widening the firing window from a few milliseconds to tens of milliseconds.

More granule cells would fire per input, the code would stop being sparse, and pattern separation would blur, so similar experiences would begin to overwrite one another.

The layer would also lose its slow, lingering, tissue-wide GABA tone, and gain a jumpy, all-or-nothing quality.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell is a volume broadcaster.

GABA that escapes its release sites activates GABA-B receptors and extrasynaptic GABA-A receptors containing the delta subunit, producing inhibition that lasts hundreds of milliseconds rather than tens.

Neurogliaform-type MOPP cells are electrically coupled to one another and to other interneuron types through gap junctions, small protein pores that let current pass directly between cells, so they act partly as a syncytium.

Nitric oxide made by nNOS diffuses freely, acts backwards onto presynaptic terminals, and dilates local capillaries, which means this cell helps decide where blood goes in the molecular layer.

Neuropeptide Y released from its terminals suppresses glutamate release from the perforant path and is powerfully anticonvulsant.

Because its dendrites sit in a single lamina, it is close to a linear integrator of entorhinal drive rather than a dendritic computer, which is precisely what a timing device should be.

Its release is markedly asynchronous, with vesicles continuing to fuse for tens of milliseconds after the spike.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Perforant path glutamatergic drive from entorhinal cortex layer two, modelled as conductance in the range 0 to 20 nanosiemens, with AMPA rise 0.5 milliseconds and NMDA voltage dependence.

◦ Septal GABAergic and cholinergic modulation, 0 to 1 normalised tone.

◦ Local interneuron GABA input, 0 to 5 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Fast synaptic GABA-A conductance onto granule cell middle and outer dendrites, about 0.5 to 2 nanosiemens per spike.

◦ Slow extrasynaptic GABA-B and delta-subunit GABA-A conductance from spillover, about 0.1 to 0.4 nanosiemens per spike.

◦ Nitric oxide and neuropeptide Y as diffusible scalar fields over a radius of roughly 20 to 100 micrometres.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, refractory timer, fast inhibitory conductance, slow spillover conductance, NMDA gating variable, peptide store fraction.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Input resistance 150 to 400 megaohms, threshold about minus 45 millivolts, resting potential minus 65 millivolts, spike half-width 0.6 to 1.2 milliseconds, divergence 1,000 to 5,000 granule cells.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 to 25 milliseconds, GABA-A decay 5 to 12 milliseconds, spillover GABA-B 150 to 300 milliseconds, refractory 2 to 3 milliseconds, feed-forward latency 3 to 6 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In temporal lobe epilepsy the loss of dentate inhibition removes the feed-forward brake and lets the perforant path drive granule cells directly into synchronous discharge.

◦ In Alzheimer's disease the perforant path terminal zone in this exact layer is an early site of amyloid deposition and synapse loss, so the MOPP cell's input is degraded before its own machinery fails, and the dentate's sparse code degrades early.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the feed-forward inhibition that a molecular layer perforant path-associated cell places onto dentate granule cells.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called fast_inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called slow_inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called refractory_timer with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step_count with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spike_steps with initial value empty list.
While step_count is less than 2000, repeat the following steps.
    Set perforant_drive to the entorhinal glutamate input for this step.
    Check if refractory_timer is greater than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of refractory_timer and 1.
        Set refractory_timer to that result.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of perforant_drive and 0.02.
        Calculate the sum of membrane_voltage and that product.
        Set membrane_voltage to that result.
        Check if membrane_voltage is greater than or equal to -45.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set membrane_voltage to -65.
            Set refractory_timer to 25.
            Add step_count to the end of spike_steps.
            Calculate the sum of fast_inhibition and 1.2.
            Set fast_inhibition to that result.
            Calculate the sum of slow_inhibition and 0.25.
            Set slow_inhibition to that result.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of fast_inhibition and 0.9876.
    Set fast_inhibition to that result.
    Calculate the product of slow_inhibition and 0.9994.
    Set slow_inhibition to that result.
    Calculate the sum of step_count and 1.
    Set step_count to that result.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in spike_steps.
Display that total to the console.
Display slow_inhibition to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: multi-timescale synaptic kinetics are clearest as a few plain exponentials.
DT = 0.1  # milliseconds per step
class MoppFeedForward:
    """Perforant path -> MOPP cell -> granule cell distal dendrite."""
    def __init__(self):
        self.v = -65.0        # MOPP membrane potential, millivolts
        self.tau_m = 15.0     # membrane time constant, milliseconds
        self.r_in = 250.0     # input resistance, megaohms
        self.thresh = -45.0   # spike threshold, millivolts
        self.refrac = 0.0
        self.g_a = 0.0        # fast synaptic GABA-A conductance, nanosiemens
        self.g_b = 0.0        # slow spillover GABA-B conductance, nanosiemens
        self.tau_a = 8.0      # milliseconds
        self.tau_b = 180.0    # milliseconds, volume transmission outlasts the spike
    def step(self, i_pp):
        """i_pp is perforant path drive in picoamps."""
        fired = False
        if self.refrac > 0.0:
            self.refrac -= DT
        else:
            # r_in (megaohm) * current (picoamp) * 1e-3 gives millivolts.
            self.v += (-(self.v + 65.0) + self.r_in * i_pp * 1e-3) / self.tau_m * DT
            if self.v >= self.thresh:
                self.v = -65.0
                self.refrac = 2.5
                self.g_a += 1.20   # wired synapse onto the granule cell dendrite
                self.g_b += 0.25   # GABA that escapes the cleft and pools
                fired = True
        self.g_a -= self.g_a / self.tau_a * DT
        self.g_b -= self.g_b / self.tau_b * DT
        return fired
cell = MoppFeedForward()
n, first = 0, None
for k in range(2000):                                  # 200 milliseconds
    t = k * DT
    drive = 300.0 if 20.0 <= t < 60.0 else 0.0         # 40 ms perforant path burst
    if cell.step(drive):
        n += 1
        if first is None:
            first = t - 20.0
print("MOPP spikes in the burst:", n)
print("latency to first spike: %.1f ms" % first)
print("slow inhibition still present at 200 ms: %.3f nS" % cell.g_b)
# Output: 5 spikes, 4.6 ms latency, 0.512 nS of slow inhibition still running.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A GABA cell whose body sits inside the dentate molecular layer and whose axon fills the outer two-thirds of that layer while deliberately skipping the inner third.

No other dentate interneuron aligns itself so exactly to the perforant path and to nothing else.

CHAPTER 56. TRILAMINAR CELLS (Three-Layer Handover Neuron) (COG)

This cell fires more than twenty times a second while you are in dreamless sleep, in bursts faster than two hundred hertz, and then falls almost silent the moment you start to dream.


What is solidly established here is anatomy rather than behaviour, so the name records only that.

Three-Layer names the unusually wide local axon - which spreads through three separate layers of area CA1 instead of respecting a single band as most inhibitory cells do.

Handover names the second half of the same axon - which leaves the hippocampus altogether and innervates the subiculum, the region that carries hippocampal output onward.

The cell is marked by a high level of the $M_2$ acetylcholine receptor on its body and dendrites and by incoming terminals rich in a group III metabotropic glutamate receptor, but no single agreed behavioural role has yet been shown, and the name deliberately claims none.

Neuron marks it as a local inhibitory circuit cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The trilaminar cell is an inhibitory GABA-releasing neuron of the hippocampal CA1 region, named because its output wire fans out through exactly three of CA1's layers.

It is also a long-range projection cell, which is unusual: most inhibitory cells whisper only to their immediate neighbours, but this one sends a branch out of CA1 entirely, into the subiculum, the hippocampus's main output station.

Its most surprising property is what it inhibits.

Between 59 and 84 percent of its identified output targets are the dendrites of other inhibitory neurons rather than excitatory pyramidal cells, and 37 percent of those inhibitory targets are parvalbumin-expressing cells, the fast basket cells that set hippocampal rhythm.

Inhibiting an inhibitor releases the brake, so the trilaminar cell is largely a disinhibitor: it hands control of CA1 back to the pyramidal cells at moments of its own choosing.

Because it also broadcasts to the subiculum, it tells the hippocampus's exit gate what state CA1 is in.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body sits in stratum oriens, the layer beneath the CA1 pyramidal cell bodies, right up against the alveus, the white matter sheet that carries axons out of the hippocampus.

Its dendrites run horizontally and stay inside stratum oriens.

That single detail dictates its logic: stratum oriens is where CA1 pyramidal cells send their own local axon collaterals, so the trilaminar cell listens almost exclusively to CA1's own output and is therefore a feedback device.

The axon is very large.

One fully reconstructed cell had about 62 millimetres of axon, with the heaviest branching in stratum oriens and the alveus, less in stratum pyramidale and stratum radiatum, and none at all in stratum lacunosum-moleculare, plus a long branch running to the subiculum.

The same cell had 8.3 millimetres of dendrite, all in one layer.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly 15 to 25 micrometres along its long axis and flattened horizontally.

Total dendritic length is about 8 millimetres; total axonal length about 62 millimetres, which is longer than a credit card is wide, packed into a few cubic millimetres of tissue plus one long projection.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• CA1 trilaminar cells projecting to the subiculum, the best characterised form.

• CA3 trilaminar cells, with the same three-layer local pattern in CA3.

• Trilaminar cells projecting to other cortical targets in addition to the subiculum.

• A defining negative subtype boundary: trilaminar cells do not project to the medial septum, which separates them from the hippocampo-septal cells described later in this section.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Hippocampus CA1, stratum oriens, concentrated at the oriens and alveus border.

Also present in CA3 stratum oriens.

There are two interfaces that matter.

The first is the oriens and alveus border, where grey matter meets the white matter sheet, and where this cell places its soma.

The second is the CA1 and subiculum junction, which its long axon crosses.

NUMBER:

Trilaminar cells are allocated about 25,000 per hemisphere, so about 50,000 across both hemispheres, which is roughly 0.03 percent of the 150 million neuron budget for the hippocampal formation.

Confidence is very low.

The estimate is built from rarity in intracellular labelling studies, where trilaminar cells appear as single-digit counts among dozens of recovered CA1 interneurons, and from the fact that they are negative for somatostatin and parvalbumin, so they lie outside the three human interneuron populations that have been counted stereologically.

A defensible bound is 10,000 to 60,000 per hemisphere.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

In the freely moving rat this cell is a high-rate, bursting neuron whose rate is set by brain state.

Mean rates are about 21.6 hertz in slow wave sleep, 19 hertz in quiet wakefulness, 8.5 hertz during movement, 5 hertz across theta epochs and 1.8 hertz in rapid eye movement sleep.

Within bursts it exceeds 200 hertz, and bursting is about 2.5 times more frequent in slow wave sleep than during movement.

Intervals between spikes are consistently under 9 milliseconds, with medians between 3.5 and 8.9 milliseconds depending on state.

During theta, the roughly 8 hertz rhythm of active exploration, it fires on the ascending slope at a mean phase of about 84 degrees, which is almost exactly 180 degrees away from the somatostatin-positive projection cells.

Detailed in vitro measurements of input resistance and time constant for identified trilaminar cells are scarce, and that gap should be stated rather than filled with invented numbers.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are dominated by local CA1 pyramidal cell axon collaterals in stratum oriens.

It also receives a specific and unusual GABAergic input from the medial septum, with about 12 septal terminals counted per cell section, of which about 29 percent carry the metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR8a.

About 89 percent of the mGluR8a-positive terminals contacting these cells are GABAergic, and 66 percent of those also carry mGluR7a.

Outputs go chiefly to interneuron dendrites in CA1, including parvalbumin basket cells, with a minority onto pyramidal cell dendrites, plus the long-range projection into the subiculum.

Its output synapses have specialised postsynaptic densities, meaning the receiving side is structurally distinctive.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Local collaterals are thin and unmyelinated, conducting at a few tenths of a metre per second.

The subicular branch runs in the alveus and stratum oriens, is at least partly myelinated, and conducts considerably faster, on the order of 1 to 2 metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA.

The defining chemical fingerprint is a very high level of the M2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor on the cell body and dendrites, encoded by the gene Chrm2, combined with an absence of somatostatin and of parvalbumin.

The M2 receptor is inhibitory, coupled to the Gi class of signalling proteins, so acetylcholine turns this cell down rather than up.

MYELINATION:

Partial.

The long-range branch acquires myelin as it travels in the alveus toward the subiculum, while the local three-layer plexus stays bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High.

Sixty-two millimetres of axon and sustained firing near 20 hertz with 200 hertz bursts is expensive, and the cost is dominated by the sodium and potassium pumping needed along that axon.

PLASTICITY:

The septal input is under presynaptic metabotropic control, because group three glutamate receptors mGluR8a and mGluR7a sitting on those GABAergic terminals let ambient glutamate reduce GABA release onto this cell, a form of cross-talk between two transmitter systems.

Cholinergic modulation through M2 is the main dynamic gain control, and it neatly explains the firing data: acetylcholine is high during movement and rapid eye movement sleep, exactly the states in which this cell goes quiet.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Oligodendrocytes of the alveus myelinate the subicular branch, and that is the one clearly specialised piece of glial support this cell receives.

Otherwise its astrocytic and microglial support in stratum oriens appears unremarkable compared with neighbouring interneurons.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the trilaminar cell and CA1 loses its sleep-time disinhibition switch.

During slow wave sleep, when memories are replayed and consolidated, the parvalbumin basket cells would no longer be intermittently released from control at 200 hertz burst timing.

The subiculum would also stop receiving a direct, fast, inhibitory bulletin about CA1's state, so the hippocampus's exit gate would have to infer that state from excitation alone.

The region would keep its rhythms but lose a layer of state-dependent gating that switches sign between sleep and movement.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The trilaminar cell is a state broadcaster more than a computer.

Its dendrites live in one layer, so it performs almost no dendritic computation, and instead sums CA1's own output faithfully.

Its interesting machinery is at its terminals and on its membrane: Gi-coupled M2 receptors that translate cholinergic state into firing rate, presynaptic group three metabotropic glutamate receptors on its septal inputs that allow heterosynaptic control, specialised postsynaptic densities at its outputs, and a burst code above 200 hertz that is likely read by target interneurons as a distinct symbol from single spikes.

Its long myelinated branch means it also participates in the metabolic and signalling dialogue with oligodendrocytes that adjusts conduction delay.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Local CA1 pyramidal collateral glutamate, 0 to 30 nanosiemens, feedback only.

◦ Medial septal GABA input, about 12 terminals per section, with 29 percent mGluR8a positive, modelled as a 0 to 5 nanosiemens inhibitory conductance under presynaptic metabotropic scaling.

◦ Cholinergic tone from the medial septum as a scalar 0 to 1, acting through Gi-coupled M2 receptors.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA-A conductance onto CA1 interneuron dendrites, 59 to 84 percent of targets, of which 37 percent are parvalbumin cells.

◦ GABA-A conductance onto CA1 pyramidal dendrites in strata oriens, pyramidale and radiatum, never in lacunosum-moleculare.

◦ Long-range GABA output to the subiculum with a conduction delay of 1 to 4 milliseconds in rodent, scaled up in human.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, burst counter, time since last spike, cholinergic suppression factor, presynaptic metabotropic scaling of septal input.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ M2 suppression gain about 0.9, burst probability about 0.35, spikes per burst about 3 to 4, intra-burst interval 3.5 to 9 milliseconds, axon length 62 millimetres, dendrite length 8.3 millimetres.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Intra-burst interval about 4 milliseconds, theta cycle 125 milliseconds with preferred phase 84 degrees, state transitions on the scale of seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Cholinergic degeneration, as in Alzheimer's disease, removes the M2 brake and would leave this cell inappropriately active during movement, disinhibiting CA1 at the wrong times.

◦ Loss of the cell removes a targeted disinhibitory pathway onto parvalbumin cells, which is expected to flatten the sleep and wake difference in CA1 inhibitory tone and to degrade the sharp wave ripple replay that depends on it.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the state-dependent bursting output of a trilaminar cell under muscarinic M2 control.
Create a number variable called cholinergic_tone with initial value 0.05.
Create a number variable called excitatory_drive with initial value 10.8.
Create a number variable called m2_gain with initial value 0.9.
Create a number variable called burst_spikes_left with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called burst_countdown with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step_count with initial value 0.
Calculate the product of m2_gain and cholinergic_tone.
Calculate the difference of 1 and that product.
Calculate the product of excitatory_drive and that difference.
Set effective_rate to that result.
While step_count is less than 60000, repeat the following steps.
    Check if burst_spikes_left is greater than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of burst_countdown and 1.
        Set burst_countdown to that result.
        Check if burst_countdown is less than or equal to 0.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Calculate the sum of spike_total and 1.
            Set spike_total to that result.
            Calculate the difference of burst_spikes_left and 1.
            Set burst_spikes_left to that result.
            Set burst_countdown to 4.
        End the conditional block.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set random_draw to a fresh random number between 0 and 1.
        Calculate the quotient of effective_rate divided by 1000.
        Check if random_draw is less than that quotient.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Calculate the sum of spike_total and 1.
            Set spike_total to that result.
            Check if cholinergic_tone is less than 0.5.
            If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
                Set burst_spikes_left to 3.
                Set burst_countdown to 4.
            End the conditional block.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of step_count and 1.
    Set step_count to that result.
End the loop.
Display spike_total to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: this cell is really a small state machine, and Python keeps the states readable.
import random
random.seed(7)
DT = 1.0          # milliseconds per step
M2_GAIN = 0.90    # M2 receptors are Gi-coupled, so acetylcholine subtracts drive
BURST_P = 0.35    # chance that a spike opens a high-frequency burst
BURST_N = 3       # extra spikes inside a burst
BURST_ISI = 4     # milliseconds between spikes inside a burst (measured 3.5 to 8.9)
# "ach" is measured cholinergic tone, 0 to 1. "drive" is local pyramidal plus
# septal excitation, fitted so the M2 term reproduces the measured rates.
STATES = {
    "slow_wave_sleep": {"ach": 0.05, "drive": 10.8},
    "quiet_wake":      {"ach": 0.10, "drive": 10.0},
    "movement":        {"ach": 0.85, "drive": 36.0},
    "rem_sleep":       {"ach": 1.00, "drive": 18.0},
}
def simulate(state, seconds=60):
    ach = STATES[state]["ach"]
    rate = STATES[state]["drive"] * (1.0 - M2_GAIN * ach)   # events per second
    spikes, left, wait = 0, 0, 0
    for _ in range(int(seconds * 1000 / DT)):
        if left > 0:
            wait -= DT
            if wait <= 0:
                spikes += 1
                left -= 1
                wait = BURST_ISI
        elif random.random() < rate * DT / 1000.0:
            spikes += 1
            if ach < 0.5 and random.random() < BURST_P:      # bursts need low acetylcholine
                left, wait = BURST_N, BURST_ISI
    return spikes / float(seconds)
for name in ("slow_wave_sleep", "quiet_wake", "movement", "rem_sleep"):
    print("%-16s %5.1f Hz" % (name, simulate(name)))
# Output: 20.9, 18.0, 8.3, 1.8 Hz against measured 21.6, 19.0, 8.5, 1.8 Hz.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

An axon that occupies exactly three CA1 layers, pointedly skipping stratum lacunosum-moleculare, combined with a heavy coat of M2 muscarinic receptors, no somatostatin, no parvalbumin, and a branch running into the subiculum but never into the septum.

APPENDIX 1. THE THREE-STAGE PROVING SYSTEM OF PREVIOUSLY UNNAMED CONSTRUCTS (PUC)


A1.1 Why the Names Must Be Proved

Eleven times in this work, a construct has been marked with the tag (PUC), meaning Previously Unnamed Construct, and given a name.

That is a strong act, and it carries a burden.

To claim that a thing is real, is used, and yet has never been named is to make three assertions at once, and each of them can be wrong.

The thing might not be real.

Clustering algorithms produce clusters whether or not nature put a boundary there, and a great deal of what looks like a cell type is a cut through a continuum, drawn where the analyst set a parameter.

It might already have a name that the author overlooked.

This is the commonest and most embarrassing failure, and it is the reason the second stage below carries the heaviest burden of the three.

Or the proposed name might be a poor one that the field is right to reject.

A responsible naming, therefore, is not a christening but a proof.

This appendix supplies that proof system, and the appendices that follow it apply the system to each Previously Unnamed Construct named in this volume.

No construct earns its name by assertion.

Each must survive the three stages.

The naming is never a claim of discovery.

Every construct named in this work was already real, already relied upon, already published in parts.

What was missing was the word, and a science cannot reason efficiently about a thing it cannot name.

The proving system is the discipline that ensures a proposed word deserves to exist.


A1.2 The Three Stages

Every construct is evaluated against three stages, in order.

A construct that fails any stage does not earn its name.

STAGE 1: CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The construct must be demonstrably real and currently relied upon in the neuroscience literature.

It must be physically or functionally distinct from every adjacent named construct, not merely a paraphrase of something already named.

And it must be functionally necessary, playing a specific causal role whose existence is documented, rather than being a convenience of description.

In short: the thing must exist, must be distinct, and must matter.

Applied to a cell type rather than to a brain region, this stage is sharpened into three specific tests.

• The convergence test, for reality.

Do independent methods agree that this population exists?

A cluster that appears only in gene-expression data, and that no anatomist, physiologist or connectivity study has ever separated from its neighbours, fails.

A population that appears as a distinct cluster in sequencing, a distinct shape under a microscope, a distinct firing pattern under an electrode, and a distinct projection target in a tracing study has passed the strongest test the field can apply.

• The boundary test, for distinctness.

Which named cell type is this one most likely to be confused with, and what specifically separates them?

The answer must be stated, not assumed.

• The ablation test, for necessity.

If this population is silenced, deleted, or lost to disease, what specifically fails?

Evidence that a cell is merely active during a behaviour is not enough.

Something must break.

STAGE 2: IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

The construct must lack an accepted, widely used proper name in the existing literature.

The burden here is high, and it is placed on the person claiming the gap rather than on the reader.

Informal descriptive phrases, pedagogical metaphors, and passing usages in single papers do not count as proper names.

An established proper name is one used consistently across the literature, appearing in standard textbooks, understood without further definition by the relevant community.

If any such name exists, even an imperfect or contested one, the construct does not qualify, and it is cited as a named concept instead.

For cell types one further clarification is needed, and it is the clarification that makes this exercise possible.

A label is not a name.

None of the following counts as an accepted proper name, however consistently it is used.

• A gene symbol, or a combination of gene symbols, such as Sst Chodl or Lamp5 Lhx6.

A gene symbol names a gene, designates the cell by a correlate, and changes when a better marker is found.

• An alphanumeric cluster identifier from any atlas or taxonomy, such as subcluster 0417 or MLI2.

• An anatomical coordinate, such as layer 6b or lamina II inner.

• A description of the method by which the cell was found, or of how it looks on a plot.

• A phrase that varies from paper to paper, so that two papers about the same cell cannot be retrieved by the same search.

An eponym, meaning a scientist's surname, does count as a proper name, and disqualifies a candidate.

A long-established functional term that appears in textbooks and is understood without definition, such as silent nociceptor or intrinsic primary afferent neuron, also counts and also disqualifies.

Each construct must state, by name, the strongest counter-candidate term and precisely why that term does not clear the bar.

STAGE 3: PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

The proposed name must be self-explanatory to an informed reader, must accurately describe the construct's identity and function, and must be more useful for teaching, research and clinical application than the current unnamed state.

Names that are opaque, misleading, excessively long, or redundant with existing terminology do not pass.

The name must earn its place.

Every name proposed in this work obeys six rules.

• Plain English, with no Latin, no Greek, no eponym, no gene symbol, no acronym and no alphanumeric string.

• The name tells the story of the cell's purpose, function and faculty, so that a first-year student meeting the name alone learns something true.

• Two to five words, ending in the word neuron or cell.

• Dignified enough to print in a journal and plain enough for a curious teenager.

• Not redundant with, and not confusable with, any existing neuron name, nor with the other names proposed alongside it.

• Compound modifiers hyphenated, so that the reader parses the name correctly on first reading.


A1.3 The Additional Considerations: Ten Properties of a Sound Construct

The three stages are the minimum.

To hold each construct to the maximum, each is also examined against ten properties, drawn from the qualities that distinguish a genuine construct from a mere label.

These are stated once here and then reported briefly for each construct.

REALITY: the construct denotes something that physically or functionally exists, not a modelling artefact.

NECESSITY: the construct is required to reason about the domain; remove it and something true becomes unsayable.

CONCEPTUAL PRECISION AND SPECIFICITY: the construct picks out one thing exactly, with sharp boundaries, not a fuzzy region.

IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS: there is a demonstrable hole in the field's vocabulary that this construct fills, and no accepted proper name already occupies it.

PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY: the name teaches; a student meeting it learns something true about the construct from the name alone.

DIRECTIONALITY: what the cell takes in, and where it sends its output, is definite and stated, not ambiguous.

HIERARCHICAL POSITION: the construct sits at a definite layer of the fifteen-layer framework, and its relation to the layers above and below it is specified.

Every construct named in this work sits at Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, and each entry states the Layer 8 microcircuit motif it participates in and the Layer 9 region or pathway it helps to build.

UNIVERSALITY WITHIN ITS CLASS: the construct is not a one-off; it is an instance of a recognisable class, and the class is populated.

THEORETICAL COMPLETENESS IN HIERARCHICAL MODELS: naming the construct closes a gap that a complete hierarchical model of the nervous system would otherwise leave open.

CLINICAL CONSEQUENCE: a person is different because of it, whether through its loss, its excess, or a drug in current use that acts upon it.

For brevity, where a property is fully satisfied and needs no elaboration, it is marked as satisfied; where it requires comment, the comment is given.

A construct for which a property genuinely does not apply is marked (NA), meaning Not Applicable, and is always accompanied by the reason for its non-applicability, so that a reader never mistakes a property that does not apply for one that was merely omitted.


A1.4 How These Eleven Were Selected

The eleven Previously Unnamed Constructs named in this work were not chosen.

They are what survived.

Two sweeps were run across the whole of neuroscience, the first across twenty territories and the second across eighteen more, and together they returned four hundred and sixty-three candidate cell types, which merged into two hundred and twenty-nine distinct constructs.

Forty-six of those were carried into the proving system.

Each of the forty-six was then attacked by two independent skeptics working separately, neither of whom saw the other's report.

The first was instructed to refute the claim of namelessness, to search the standard textbooks, the review literature, the Petilla terminology, the Cell Ontology and the major brain atlases, and to reject the construct if it found any qualifying proper name, or if it was merely uncertain.

The second was instructed to refute the claim of reality, distinctness and necessity, to look for clustering artefacts, arbitrary cuts through continua, single-laboratory findings that failed to replicate, and rebrandings of things already known, and to demand causal evidence rather than correlation.

A construct passed only if both skeptics tried and failed.

Eleven survived.

Thirty-five did not.

Twenty-one of the thirty-five failed because a proper name already existed and the proposer had not found it, which is the single most important practical lesson of the exercise: the hard part of claiming that something is unnamed is not the claiming, it is the looking.

The appendices that follow apply the three stages, and the ten additional considerations, to each Previously Unnamed Construct that appears in this volume.


APPENDIX 2. Far-Hushing Slow-Wave Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 24.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

This name belongs to a rare, large nerve cell scattered through the neocortex, the brain's folded outer sheet, and packed most densely in its deepest layer.

It is inhibitory, meaning it quiets other cells, using gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main quieting messenger, plus nitric oxide gas, somatostatin and neuropeptide Y.

Every other quieting cell in the cortex speaks only to its neighbours, whereas this one grows long output cables, called axons, that cross millimetres of cortex and the midline into the matching patch opposite.

It listens to nearby excitatory cells and to the peptide substance P, then spreads a slow hush over wide stretches of cortex, tipping the sheet towards the slow electrical swells of deep sleep and pacing local blood flow.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

In mice it is "Sst Chodl" and in humans "Inh L3-6 SST NPY", gene-symbol barcodes, the second padded with a class abbreviation and a layer range.

It is also "Int1" and "Sst-MET-1", bare cluster identifiers; "type-I nNOS neuron", a protein symbol joined to an ordinal awarded for staining darkly under the method that found it; and "long-range GABAergic projection neuron", an unstable descriptive phrase.

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real: nitric-oxide-enzyme staining, retrograde tracing, single-cell sequencing in mouse and human, cross-species matching and three genetic driver lines converge on one population.

Tomioka and colleagues showed in 2005 that 91 percent of long-distance inhibitory cortical cells carried somatostatin, and Agmon and Barth, sceptics of fine transcriptomic splits, still keep this group as a robust supertype.

It is distinct from the Martinotti cell, which also carries somatostatin and shapes slow waves but keeps its axon inside its own patch, whereas this cell exports its axon to other areas and the opposite hemisphere.

It is necessary: when Turner and colleagues killed it in mouse cortex, delta-band power, the measure of how deep the slow rhythm runs, fell both awake (p = 0.011) and asleep (p = 0.022), and the usual post-stimulus dip in blood volume vanished (p = 0.0005).

Those animals slept as long as before, so what failed was the depth and cortex-wide co-ordination of the rhythm, not sleep itself.

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

What is named is the local family: basket, chandelier, Martinotti, double bouquet, bitufted, bipolar and neurogliaform cells.

What is not named is the one exception: the cortical quieting cell that projects between areas and hemispheres and sets the depth and cortex-wide coherence of slow waves.

The strongest counter-candidate, "type-I nNOS neuron", is thirty years old and cross-lab, but nNOS is a gene symbol, "type I" an ordinal from staining intensity, it is in none of the four reference textbooks, and it teaches nothing about the cell.

The nearby coined name "long-range inhibitory nNOS-expressing cell" names a hippocampal population its authors distinguish from this one.

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

"Cortex-Wide" teaches the fact that makes the cell unique: its influence is not local but reaches the whole sheet, including the far hemisphere.

"Slow-Wave" teaches what it delivers: the large, slow electrical swells that sweep the cortex in deep sleep, whose size measures sleep depth.

"Neuron" teaches that a single nerve cell does this, not a region and not a chemical.

The insight from the name alone is that inhibition is not only local: one rare cell carries the quieting signal far enough for distant regions to sleep in step.

That unlocks sleep depth as an actively imposed, cell-addressable state, relevant to shallow sleep in ageing and in genetic syndromes.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

Satisfied, five independent methods and five laboratories converge on one population.

• Necessity.

Satisfied, ablation strips out delta power and vasomotion, and silencing rescues a disease phenotype.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

Satisfied at supertype level, though the group holds two or three finer clusters.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

Satisfied, every label in use is a barcode, cluster number, staining ordinal or shifting phrase, absent from Kandel, Purves, Squire and Shepherd.

• Pedagogical clarity.

Satisfied, three plain words carry reach, effect and cell.

• Directionality.

It takes excitation from nearby pyramidal cells and substance P signals of behavioural state, and sends GABA, nitric oxide and neuropeptide Y locally and along long axons to distant cortical areas and across the midline.

• Hierarchical position.

Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework; at Layer 8 the long-range inhibitory broadcast motif; at Layer 9 the cortex-to-cortex inhibitory pathway and the neurovascular unit; the Layer 10 consequence is global sleep depth, with a Layer 12 consequence for reading functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) signals.

• Universality within its class.

Satisfied, present in every cortical area sampled and in rodents, macaque and human.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

Satisfied, models with only local inhibition lack any element able to synchronise distant areas.

• Clinical consequence.

In a mouse model of human 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome this cell showed the largest gene-expression disturbance of any cortical type, and silencing it rescued the sleep phenotype; no drug yet targets it.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Turner and colleagues, Type-I nNOS neurons orchestrate cortical neural activity and vasomotion, eLife, 2025.

• Ruff and colleagues, Long-range inhibitory neurons mediate cortical neurovascular coupling, Cell Reports, 2024.

• Morairty and colleagues, A role for cortical nNOS/NK1 neurons in coupling homeostatic sleep drive to EEG slow wave activity, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013.

• Tomioka and colleagues, Demonstration of long-range GABAergic connections distributed throughout the mouse neocortex, European Journal of Neuroscience, 2005.

• Agmon and Barth, A brief history of somatostatin interneuron taxonomy, Frontiers in Neural Circuits, 2024.


APPENDIX 3. Cortex-To-Cortex Linking Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 8.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

This is an excitatory neuron, a nerve cell that urges others to fire, using glutamate, the brain's commonest excitatory messenger.

Its body sits deep in layer six, the lowest sheet of the cerebral cortex, the brain's folded outer rind, in its side and underside districts.

Its axon, the long output fibre, branches enormously, reaching an average of fourteen target areas, among the highest for any cortical cell.

Those targets are nearby cortex and the matching area across the midline, and in mouse never the striatum, the hub selecting actions.

So it carries news between distant patches of cortex without touching the machinery of movement.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

The labels in use are "L6 IT Car3", "L5/6 IT CAR3", "CTX L6 Car3" and "Ncx-Car3", each welding a gene-symbol barcode, Car3 for carbonic anhydrase 3, onto a layer coordinate.

The atlas entry "CLA-EPd-CTX Car3 Glut" and the ontology entry "L6 intratelencephalic projecting Car3 glutamatergic neuron" are cluster identifiers.

In primates it carries different gene symbols again, "Exc L5-6 THEMIS SMYD1" in human and "Exc THEMIS NTNG2" in marmoset.

The one non-genetic label, "claustrum-like cortical (CLC) neurons", is an unstable descriptive phrase from one group.

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real because unrelated methods converge on it.

Single-nucleus ribonucleic acid sequencing (RNA sequencing), which reads which genes a cell uses, resolved it as a subclass, and gene mapping inside intact tissue found it in place, alone among cortical types in making no layered band.

Whole-brain tracing reconstructed ninety-nine axons singly, rat viral tracing recovered it without sequencing, and comparative sequencing found it in five primates.

It is most easily confused with the ordinary layer six intratelencephalic neuron, its neighbour, which also keeps its axon inside the forebrain.

One clean fact separates them: in mouse those neurons branch into the striatum and this cell never does.

It is necessary, as shown by deleting Nr4a2, the switch gene installing and maintaining its identity.

Adult deletion leaves mice hyperactive and short of anxiety, and a second laboratory found the cells misplaced, uncoupled from amygdala and cingulate cortex, the animals inattentive.

What fails is the restraint that keeps an animal cautious and attentive.

No experiment has yet silenced the cortical members alone.

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

What is named here is the neighbourhood, not the cell.

The claustrum has been named for two centuries, "claustral neuron" is established for its inner cells, and cortex has Martinotti and basket cells, but none names this cell.

What is not named is this population, the deep, lateral, striatum-avoiding, many-targeted excitatory cell running the claustrum's programme outside it.

The strongest counter-candidate is "claustrum-like cortical (CLC) neuron".

It fails because it describes rather than names, is defined at first use in its own abstract, and comes from one group keyed to a different gene, so two papers on the cell share no search term.

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

"Cortex-Only" teaches the restriction, that its output stays inside the cortical sheet and never reaches the striatum, the hub other long-range cortical cells feed.

"Far-Linking" teaches its reach, joining many cortical territories far apart, including the mirror-image territory across the midline.

"Neuron" teaches that a single nerve cell does this, not a tract or a region.

The insight from the name alone is that the cortex keeps a cell for letting its distant parts talk, barred from the machinery of action.

That insight unlocks attention and impulse control, which collapse when this cell's identity switch is removed.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

Satisfied, since sequencing, in-tissue mapping, axon reconstruction and tracing all recover it across seven species.

• Necessity.

Satisfied, since adult loss of its identity switch produces hyperactivity, lost anxiety and inattention in two laboratories.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

Satisfied, since the absence of striatal branches separates it from every other long-range cortical cell.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

Satisfied, since every label in use is a gene symbol, layer coordinate or cluster identifier.

• Pedagogical clarity.

Satisfied, since the name gives the restriction and the reach without gene, layer or acronym.

• Directionality.

It takes in signals from surrounding cortex and returns them to other cortex, near and across the midline, never the striatum.

• Hierarchical position.

It belongs to Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework.

At Layer 8 it joins the long-range cortico-cortical association motif, including the callosal mirror-image link.

At Layer 9 it builds the lateral cortical association network.

The Layer 10 consequence is cortex-wide co-ordination of attention.

• Universality within its class.

Satisfied, since it appears in every lateral cortical area examined and in five primates.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

Satisfied, since no other cortical cell reaches so widely while feeding nothing to the striatal loop.

• Clinical consequence.

Losing one working copy of Nr4a2, the gene specifying this cell, causes a human neurodevelopmental disorder with intellectual disability, epilepsy and language impairment, and no therapy targets it selectively.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Peng and colleagues, Morphological diversity of single neurons in molecularly defined cell types, Nature, 2021.

• Yao and colleagues, A high-resolution transcriptomic and spatial atlas of cell types in the whole mouse brain, Nature, 2023.

• Tao and colleagues, Nr4a2, a key factor controlling the development and functional maintenance of forebrain Car3 neurons, Neuroscience Bulletin, 2026.

• Yan and colleagues, Nurr1 orchestrates claustrum development and functionality, Advanced Science, 2025.

• Jorstad and colleagues, Comparative transcriptomics reveals human-specific cortical features, Science, 2023.

• Fang and colleagues, Similarities of neocortical deep layer Oprk1-positive neurons and claustrum neurons in connectivity and activity, iScience, 2025.


BACK COVER MATTER

Dear Reader,

Thank you for reading:

NEURONAL: Volume 1 of 5

This is an evolving work. (As this is an evolving field!)

If you are aware of emerging alternative information that could further the field of Artificial Intelligence Engineering into the future, then please let me know so that the project may be improved in the next edition! :

https://www.linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison

I hope you enjoyed this book!

Positive reviews are the lifeblood of independent authors.

Praise is always welcome in the form of a review, as it helps other readers to find the work.

Constructive criticisms are welcome privately at my LinkedIn so that I can keep improving.


Copyright © 2026 by D. R. Dison (LinkedIn) All rights reserved.


No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher, D. R. Dison, except as provided by U.S. Copyright Law or for the use of brief quotations in a book review. Acknowledgment: This work was produced with the aid of various technological tools, including Word Processing Tools (WPT), Desktop Publishing Tools (DPT), Image Processing Tools (IPT), and Artificial Intelligence Tools (AIT).

(International Standard Book Number) ISBN: 979-8-9950671-0-X

Published in the United States of America.

Printer’s Key Control Number 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

https://ai-university-aiu.github.io/


NEURONAL: VOLUME 1 OF 5


https://ai-university-aiu.github.io/    Page 2 of 539    https://www.linkedin.com/in/d-r-dison
