THE NEURONAL MANUSCRIPT

Every Type of Neuron in the Human Nervous System, Described, Explained, and Specified

VOLUME 3 OF 5

Chapters 120 to 179

D. R. Dison

Founder, Artificial Intelligence University (AIU)

ORCID: 0009-0001-9246-5758

Prepared 30 July 2026


ABOUT THIS VOLUME

This is volume 3 of five, and it continues the catalogue at Chapter 120.

The front matter and Part One, the general account of the neuron, are given in Volume 1 and are not repeated here.

The tags and flags used throughout are explained in Volume 1, and are summarised again in one line each below.

• (PUC) marks a Previously Unnamed Construct: a neuron type that is real, functionally necessary and relied upon in the literature, but which had no accepted proper name until this work gave it one.

• (COG) marks a type involved in cognition, and (NON-COG) marks a type that is not.


PART EIGHT: CEREBELLUM - COORDINATION AND TIMING (CONTINUED FROM VOLUME 2)

CHAPTER 117. GLOBULAR CELLS (Feedback-Loop Wake-Boosting Neuron) (COG)

Six Purkinje cells hold this one small neuron pinned to the floor, and only a surge of noradrenaline can lift it.

Globular records only that the cell body is round, which teaches nothing about what the cell does.

Feedback-Loop names the one connection that most cleanly distinguishes it, because it receives strong monosynaptic inhibition from the recurrent axon collaterals of the cortex's own output cells, so it hears an echo of the message the cerebellar cortex has just sent.

Wake-Boosting names its other established property, excitation by monoamines such as serotonin and noradrenaline, the chemicals that report the animal's behavioural state.

Neuron marks it as a granular layer interneuron whose role in the circuit is, beyond these two facts, genuinely not established, and the name deliberately claims nothing more.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The globular cell is a small inhibitory interneuron that sits just beneath the Purkinje cell layer and spends almost all its life silent.

It was separated from the Lugaro cell only in 2007, and much of what is known about it comes from a handful of studies, so this is one of the least understood named neurons in the human brain.

Its distinctive job is to report on the cerebellar cortex's own output.

It receives direct inhibitory input from about six Purkinje cells, so whenever the cortex is speaking loudly, the globular cell is held down.

When Purkinje cells fall quiet, or when noradrenaline arrives from the locus coeruleus during arousal, the globular cell fires and inhibits basket cells, stellate cells and Golgi cells across a wide transverse strip.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is small and round, which is where the name comes from, and it is measurably rounder than the spindle-shaped Lugaro cell, with a shape index around 0.56 to 0.63.

It sits within about 10 micrometres of the lower border of the Purkinje cell layer, essentially touching it.

An average of 4.8 processes emerge from the soma, most of them spreading sideways along the Purkinje cell layer and a few climbing up into the molecular layer.

The axon travels long distances in the transverse direction, which distinguishes it immediately from the basket cell, whose axon runs in the sagittal plane.

SIZE:

The soma is on the order of 8 to 12 micrometres across, making it one of the smaller cerebellar interneurons, clearly smaller than a Golgi cell.

For comparison, small Golgi cells recorded in the same preparations had capacitances of 19.8 plus or minus 1.4 picofarads and large Golgi cells 32.8 plus or minus 3.8 picofarads, and globular cells sit at the low end of that scale.

The dendritic processes are short, typically under 100 micrometres.

The axon, by contrast, spreads several hundred micrometres to over a millimetre transversely, so like the Lugaro cell this is a tiny cell with a wide reach.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No accepted subtypes exist, and this is a genuine gap rather than a settled finding.

The literature is still resolving whether globular cells are a single type or the small end of a continuum that includes small fusiform Lugaro cells, because the two share the glycine transporter 2 marker and both are negative for metabotropic glutamate receptor type 2 and neurogranin.

One reported chemical division is that a subset is calretinin positive, calretinin being a calcium-binding protein used as a marker.

A simulation should model globular cells as one type with wide parameter variance rather than as several types.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The uppermost granular layer of the cerebellar cortex, within about 10 micrometres of the interface with the Purkinje cell layer, and in some sections apparently inside that layer.

That interface position is the whole story of the cell, because it places the soma directly in the path of Purkinje cell axon collaterals as they descend.

Globular cells have been described throughout the cerebellar cortex, in vermis and hemispheres, though systematic mapping across all lobules I to X has not been done.

Their axons run transversely through the granular layer and send branches to targets in the granular layer and the molecular layer, so they too bridge the two.

NUMBER:

On the order of 1 to 2 million in the human cerebellum, and confidence is low.

The estimate comes from the finding that globular cells represent at least 15 percent of granule cell layer interneurons in the mouse, combined with an estimate of roughly 10 million Golgi cells and 1 million Lugaro cells in the human.

One to two million is about 0.002 percent of the 69.03 billion cerebellar neurons and about 0.0017 percent of all brain neurons.

The honest bound is 0.5 to 4 million, and no human count of any kind has been published, so this figure should be flagged as provisional in any model.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Globular cells are silent at rest, with no spontaneous firing recorded in any of the cells tested, which sets them apart from small Golgi cells that idle at 2.9 plus or minus 1.0 hertz.

Serotonin induces firing in most cells but only weakly, taking them from 0.0 hertz to about 2.1 plus or minus 0.8 hertz.

Noradrenaline is the powerful driver, facilitating firing in five of six cells tested and taking two previously silent cells to maximum rates of 12.7 and 14.0 hertz.

This is the mirror image of the Lugaro cell, which responds strongly to serotonin and not at all to noradrenaline, and the two cells therefore divide the cerebellum's neuromodulatory labour between them.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The dominant input is monosynaptic inhibition from Purkinje cell axon collaterals, arriving as a barrage of inhibitory currents at about 53.1 plus or minus 4.3 hertz with amplitudes of 84.8 plus or minus 8.3 picoamperes.

The delay between a Purkinje cell spike and the resulting current is under 2 milliseconds, confirming a direct connection, and about 6 Purkinje cells converge on each globular cell.

Excitatory input arrives from mossy fibres, at a much lower spontaneous rate of about 2.0 plus or minus 0.6 hertz and a smaller amplitude of 16.2 plus or minus 1.8 picoamperes.

Outputs go to basket cells and stellate cells in the sagittal direction and to Golgi cells in the transverse direction, so a single globular cell inhibits both the molecular layer and the granular layer inhibitory systems.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, unmyelinated, and oriented transversely, which is the opposite of the basket cell and the same axis as the parallel fibres.

Its transverse reach means it aligns with the parallel fibre beam rather than with the Purkinje cell fan, so it can act on a whole beam of activated cortex.

Terminals are varicose and symmetrical, the classic appearance of an inhibitory ending.

Conduction is slow, in the range of tenths of a metre per second, consistent with a modulatory rather than a time-critical role.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Globular cells are inhibitory and use GABA, and they are positive for glycine transporter 2 and glutamic acid decarboxylase 67, so they are best described as mixed glycinergic and GABAergic.

Some studies identify them as calretinin-positive GABAergic neurons, and the discrepancy between the glycinergic and purely GABAergic descriptions is an unresolved point in the literature that a modeller should represent as a mixing parameter.

They are negative for metabotropic glutamate receptor type 2 and negative for neurogranin, the two markers that identify Golgi cells.

On the receiving side the key receptors are GABA type A receptors for Purkinje cell input, AMPA receptors for mossy fibre input, and alpha-1 adrenergic receptors for the noradrenaline that switches them on.

MYELINATION:

None.

The globular cell axon is unmyelinated over its entire transverse course, as is true of every cerebellar cortical interneuron.

The absence of myelin here is expected rather than surprising: the axon never leaves the cortex, its longest run is around a millimetre, and its function is spatially broad suppression rather than precisely timed delivery.

This is a positive finding from ultrastructural work, not a gap in the data.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very low, and this is the most economical neuron in this batch after the granule cell.

A cell that is silent at rest, held down by six Purkinje cells, and fires at most in the low teens of hertz spends almost nothing on action potentials.

Its major standing cost is handling the constant barrage of about 53 inhibitory events per second, which means continuous chloride extrusion by the potassium chloride cotransporter, itself powered indirectly by adenosine triphosphate.

Because the cell is so small, total consumption remains trivial compared with a Purkinje cell.

PLASTICITY:

Largely unstudied, and this must be stated plainly rather than filled in by analogy.

The one established dynamic property is short-term plasticity at its inputs: the Purkinje cell collateral synapse shows paired-pulse facilitation of 1.18 plus or minus 0.04 at a 10 millisecond interval, meaning the second of two rapid Purkinje spikes inhibits harder than the first.

The mossy fibre input, by contrast, shows paired-pulse depression, meaning the second of two rapid excitatory events is weaker.

No long-term potentiation or depression has been demonstrated at any globular cell synapse, so a simulation should model long-term plasticity as absent and short-term plasticity as present with those measured signs.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing uniquely specialised has been described for the glia surrounding globular cells, and that plain statement is the accurate one.

The cells sit at the granular layer border, so they are wrapped by the same velate astrocytes that sheath glomeruli and by the descending shafts of Bergmann glia.

Because their principal excitatory drive is noradrenaline arriving by volume transmission, astrocytic noradrenaline transporters and adrenergic receptors in the surrounding tissue will shape how much reaches the cell, exactly as serotonin clearance shapes the Lugaro cell.

Beyond that, no globular-cell-specific glial specialisation has been reported, and a modeller should not invent one.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the globular cell and the cerebellar cortex loses a specific piece of self-knowledge: the ability to detect its own silence and act on it.

Because six Purkinje cells hold it down and it inhibits the inhibitory interneurons, the globular cell fires precisely when Purkinje output collapses, and its firing then removes inhibition from Purkinje cells and helps them recover.

Concretely, the region would lose an automatic recovery reflex, the mechanism that catches the cortex when it falls silent and pushes it back towards its baseline.

The tissue would still work, but it would be slower to return from a strong pause, and arousal would no longer be able to reset the balance between excitation and inhibition in a transverse beam.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The globular cell is a disinhibitory element, which means its practical effect is to increase activity in the cells two steps downstream even though everything it does is inhibitory.

Its principal excitatory drive is a neuromodulator arriving by volume transmission rather than a wired synapse, so like the Lugaro cell it converts a chemical concentration into a firing rate.

Its co-release of GABA and glycine means the identity of the receiving cell determines the size of the effect, since Golgi cells respond to the glycinergic component while Purkinje cells do not.

It closes a genuine feedback loop with the Purkinje cell, receiving direct collateral inhibition and indirectly modulating Purkinje output through molecular layer interneurons, which makes it part of a control system rather than a relay.

Its transverse axon aligned with the parallel fibre beam means it can act on the same geometric population that a burst of granule cell activity just excited, an example of computation by axonal orientation.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Purkinje cell axon collateral inhibition, about 6 sources, event rate about 53 hertz, amplitude about 85 picoamperes, with paired-pulse facilitation of 1.18 at 10 milliseconds.

◦ Mossy fibre excitation, spontaneous event rate about 2 hertz, amplitude about 16 picoamperes, with paired-pulse depression.

◦ Noradrenaline concentration, treated as a scalar 0 to 1, strong effect.

◦ Serotonin concentration, treated as a scalar 0 to 1, weak effect.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Mixed GABA and glycine release onto basket and stellate cells in the sagittal direction and onto Golgi cells in the transverse direction, at 0 to 14 hertz.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, chloride load from the inhibitory barrage, short-term facilitation factor for Purkinje input, short-term depression factor for mossy fibre input.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting potential about minus 62 millivolts, threshold about minus 44 millivolts, spontaneous rate 0 hertz, maximum noradrenaline-driven rate about 14 hertz, maximum serotonin-driven rate about 2 hertz, Purkinje convergence 6.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane about 20 milliseconds, inhibitory current decay about 5 to 10 milliseconds, paired-pulse facilitation window about 10 to 50 milliseconds, noradrenaline rise and fall in tissue hundreds of milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ No human disease is known to target globular cells selectively, which should be recorded as a known unknown rather than as evidence of robustness.

◦ Any condition that abolishes Purkinje cell firing, including severe spinocerebellar ataxia, will release globular cells from their dominant inhibition and drive them tonically, an effect that has not been measured but follows directly from the wiring.

◦ Drugs acting on alpha-1 adrenergic receptors, including some antihypertensives and antipsychotics, will alter globular cell drive.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to work out when a globular cell escapes Purkinje cell inhibition and fires, given a noradrenaline level and a Purkinje cell firing rate.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -62.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called collateral probability with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called facilitation with initial value 1.
Set collateral probability to the product of 6 and the quotient of the product of the Purkinje rate and 0.5 divided by 1000.
Repeat the following steps exactly 8000 times.
    Set drive to the sum of the product of 20 and the noradrenaline level and the product of 8 and the serotonin level.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of the sum of drive and the difference of -62 and membrane voltage divided by 40.
    Check if a random number between zero and one is less than collateral probability.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to the difference of membrane voltage and the product of 0.9 and facilitation.
        Set facilitation to 1.18.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set facilitation to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -44.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to -65.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and 1.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

// JavaScript was chosen because it runs in any browser with no build step, which suits a teaching demonstration of this feedback loop.
let seed = 1;
function rnd() { seed = (seed * 16807) % 2147483647; return seed / 2147483647; }  // reproducible
const DT = 0.5, TAU = 20.0;                       // milliseconds
const V_REST = -62.0, V_TH = -44.0, V_RESET = -65.0;   // millivolts
const NA_DRIVE = 20.0;    // millivolts at saturating noradrenaline
const HT_DRIVE = 8.0;     // serotonin pushes far more weakly than noradrenaline
const PC_IPSP = 0.9;      // millivolts removed by one Purkinje collateral event
const N_PC = 6;           // about six Purkinje cells innervate one globular cell
function run(noradrenaline, serotonin, pcRateHz) {
  let v = V_REST, spikes = 0, facilitation = 1.0;
  const steps = 8000;                                    // 4 seconds
  const pPerStep = N_PC * pcRateHz * DT / 1000.0;        // at most one event per step here
  for (let i = 0; i < steps; i++) {
    const drive = NA_DRIVE * noradrenaline + HT_DRIVE * serotonin;
    v += DT * ((V_REST - v) + drive) / TAU;
    v += (rnd() - 0.5) * 0.6;                            // synaptic background noise
    if (rnd() < pPerStep) {                              // a Purkinje collateral event lands
      v -= PC_IPSP * facilitation;
      facilitation = 1.18;                               // paired pulse facilitation
    } else {
      facilitation = 1.0;
    }
    if (v >= V_TH) { v = V_RESET; spikes++; }
  }
  return (spikes / (steps * DT / 1000.0)).toFixed(1);
}
console.log("no monoamine, Purkinje cells at 50 Hz:", run(0, 0, 50), "Hz");
console.log("serotonin only, Purkinje cells at 50 Hz:", run(0, 1, 50), "Hz");
console.log("noradrenaline, Purkinje cells at 50 Hz:", run(1, 0, 50), "Hz");
console.log("noradrenaline, Purkinje cells silenced:", run(1, 0, 0), "Hz");

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is a small round cell pressed against the underside of the Purkinje cell layer, round rather than spindle-shaped, which is the single feature that separates it from the Lugaro cell beside it.

It is silent at rest and stays silent when you add serotonin, then fires when you add noradrenaline, which is the exact opposite of its neighbour.

Its axon runs transversely while the basket cell axon it might be confused with runs sagittally.

And it is the cerebellar neuron most completely owned by the Purkinje cell, wired to about six of them and pinned down by 53 inhibitory events every second.

CHAPTER 118. CANDELABRUM CELLS (COG)

Wedged like a slice of cheese between two Purkinje cell bodies, this neuron sends up a row of vertical branches that look exactly like a many-armed candlestick.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The candelabrum cell is an inhibitory interneuron of the Purkinje cell layer, described by Lainé and Axelrad in 1994 and characterised physiologically only in 2022.

It turns out to be the most abundant interneuron in the Purkinje cell layer, present in every cerebellar lobule, and yet it was missing from textbook diagrams of the cerebellum for a quarter of a century.

Its function is disinhibition, which means it increases activity by removing inhibition.

It is excited by mossy fibres and granule cells, strongly inhibited by Purkinje cells, and its own output goes mainly onto molecular layer interneurons.

Because those interneurons inhibit Purkinje cells, the net effect of a candelabrum cell firing is that Purkinje cells fire faster, so this cell is an amplifier built entirely out of brakes.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The soma is small and pear-shaped, oriented vertically, and squeezed in a sandwich-like manner between the Purkinje cell bodies themselves.

One or two thick dendrites rise from the upper pole of the cell body and run through the entire thickness of the molecular layer, dividing into a few slightly oblique branches that can reach the pia mater at the surface.

These ascending dendrites are covered with irregularly distributed spines.

Some slimmer dendrites leave the lower part of the cell body and spread tortuously for a short distance in the upper granular layer, so the cell samples both layers.

The axon is the namesake: a thick initial segment leaves the soma or a proximal dendrite, then winds horizontally through or just above the Purkinje cell layer, giving off a row of vertically oriented beaded branches that ascend through most of the molecular layer, exactly like the arms of a candelabrum.

SIZE:

The soma is small, roughly 8 to 12 micrometres in its long axis, which is a fraction of the 33 micrometre Purkinje cell body it is wedged against.

The ascending dendrites traverse the full molecular layer, which is 300 to 500 micrometres thick in the human cerebellum, so the cell is tall and extremely thin.

The horizontal axonal trunk runs for a few hundred micrometres before and while it throws up its vertical arms.

The cell has a very high input resistance, which for a neuron is a direct consequence of small size, and that high resistance is functionally the most important number about it.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No named subtypes exist.

Single-nucleus ribonucleic acid (RNA) sequencing shows candelabrum cells forming a single molecularly distinct cluster, clearly separate from molecular layer interneurons, Golgi cells and Purkinje cells.

The cells are uniformly distributed through all cerebellar folia, with no evidence of the parasagittal striping that divides Purkinje cells.

There is variation in the number of ascending dendrites, one or two, and in how far the axon travels, but neither variation has been shown to define a subtype.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The Purkinje cell layer itself, physically interleaved between Purkinje cell somata, which makes it a resident of the thinnest layer in the nervous system.

That position is an interface by definition: the Purkinje cell layer is the boundary between the molecular layer and the granular layer, and the candelabrum cell has dendrites in both, plus a soma in the boundary.

Candelabrum cells are present in all cerebellar lobules I to X and in all folia examined, across vermis, paravermis and hemispheres.

Their axons remain within the molecular layer and Purkinje cell layer of the same and immediately neighbouring folia.

NUMBER:

On the order of 10 to 20 million in the human cerebellum, with low confidence.

The estimate comes from the finding that candelabrum cells are the most abundant Purkinje cell layer interneuron in the mouse, at densities roughly comparable to Purkinje cells themselves, combined with the well-measured human figure of 15 million Purkinje cells.

Fifteen million would be about 0.022 percent of the 69.03 billion cerebellar neurons and about 0.017 percent of all brain neurons.

No human count exists, and a defensible bound is 5 to 30 million, so this should be treated as an order of magnitude claim.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The defining electrical property is very high input resistance, which means that a tiny synaptic current produces a large voltage swing.

The practical consequence is that candelabrum cell firing is exquisitely sensitive to synaptic input, so a handful of granule cell spikes can drive it and a handful of Purkinje cell spikes can silence it.

Candelabrum cells fire at low to moderate rates and are strongly and reliably suppressed by Purkinje cell activity.

Because Purkinje cells fire tonically at tens of hertz, the candelabrum cell spends most of its time held near silence, and it becomes active mainly when granule cell drive is strong or Purkinje output dips.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory inputs come from mossy fibres, reaching the basal dendrites in the upper granular layer, and from granule cells, reaching the spiny ascending dendrites in the molecular layer.

The dominant inhibitory input is from Purkinje cells, and this inhibition is strong enough to dominate the cell's behaviour.

Outputs go primarily to molecular layer interneurons, the stellate and basket cells, with a smaller projection onto Purkinje cells themselves.

The circuit motif is therefore granule cell to candelabrum cell to molecular layer interneuron to Purkinje cell, a three-step path in which two inhibitory steps cancel to produce excitation.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon begins with an unusually thick initial segment and may emerge from a dendrite rather than the soma, which is rare and diagnostic.

It runs horizontally through or just above the Purkinje cell layer, then sends up a series of parallel vertical beaded branches into the molecular layer.

Those branches are unmyelinated and studded with varicosities, so transmitter is released along their whole ascending length rather than at a single terminal.

The vertical geometry means one candelabrum cell contacts interneurons at every depth of the molecular layer along one narrow line, which is the opposite of the parallel fibre's horizontal sweep.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Candelabrum cells are GABAergic, releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid, confirmed both electrophysiologically and by their molecular expression profile.

They form a molecularly distinct cluster in single-nucleus RNA sequencing, expressing a combination of inhibitory neuron genes that does not match Golgi cells, Lugaro cells or molecular layer interneurons.

On the receiving side they carry AMPA receptors for granule cell and mossy fibre input and GABA type A receptors for Purkinje cell input.

Their high input resistance means each of these receptor populations exerts a disproportionately large voltage effect for its size.

MYELINATION:

None.

Candelabrum cell axons remain entirely within the cerebellar cortex and are unmyelinated along their horizontal trunk and all their ascending arms.

This is required by the cell's design, because the ascending arms release transmitter continuously along their length from beaded varicosities, and a myelin sheath would insulate exactly the membrane that must be exposed.

The absence of myelin here is an established ultrastructural finding, not a gap in the record.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low.

The cell is small, fires at modest rates, and is held quiet much of the time by Purkinje cell inhibition.

Its main standing cost is maintaining a long, thin, highly branched axonal arbor whose surface area is large relative to the soma, so mitochondria are found along the ascending arms.

Nothing about candelabrum cell metabolism has been shown to be unusual, and a simulation can treat its energy budget as that of a generic small cortical interneuron.

PLASTICITY:

Essentially unstudied, and it would be dishonest to present a mechanism as established.

The synapses from granule cells onto candelabrum cells are of the same anatomical class as granule cell synapses onto other interneurons, which do show long-term potentiation, so plasticity is plausible but unproven here.

What is established is that the cell's very high input resistance means that small changes in synaptic strength produce large changes in output, so whatever plasticity exists will have an outsized effect.

A modeller should implement plasticity at these synapses as an optional, disabled-by-default feature and flag it as speculative.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The candelabrum cell soma sits in the Purkinje cell layer wedged among Bergmann glial cell bodies, and its ascending dendrites and axonal arms run alongside Bergmann glial fibres for their whole length through the molecular layer.

That means this cell's entire receptive and output surface is bathed in the glutamate-clearing field of Bergmann glia, which express very high levels of the glutamate aspartate transporter.

Because candelabrum cells are driven by granule cell glutamate and have such high input resistance, the efficiency of Bergmann glial glutamate uptake sets how much of a parallel fibre burst the candelabrum cell actually sees.

No candelabrum-cell-specific glial specialisation has been described beyond this shared Bergmann glial environment.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the candelabrum cell and the cerebellar cortex loses its brake on its own brake.

Molecular layer interneurons would inhibit Purkinje cells without any counterweight, so strong granule cell input would suppress Purkinje output instead of shaping it, and the sign of the cortex's response to a strong input could invert.

Concretely, the region would lose its gain control at high input levels, the mechanism that stops feedforward inhibition from swamping the output when the granular layer is very active.

The cortex would still work at low activity and would choke at high activity, which in behaviour would look like coordination that fails exactly when a movement becomes fast or complex.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The candelabrum cell is the cerebellum's clearest disinhibitory circuit element, and disinhibition is a computation, not a wiring accident: it converts an inhibitory population into a gain controller.

Its extremely high input resistance makes it operate near the limit where individual synaptic events matter, so its behaviour is dominated by fluctuations rather than by averages, and a rate-based model will systematically misrepresent it.

Its axon originating from a dendrite means the site of spike initiation is displaced away from the soma, so dendritic input on that particular branch has privileged access to the output.

Its vertically oriented axonal arms sample the molecular layer at every depth along a single line, which is a geometric strategy for contacting interneurons that receive from parallel fibres of every age and depth at once.

It sits inside a closed loop with the Purkinje cell, and because that loop contains an even number of inhibitory steps in one path and an odd number in another, the same cell can push Purkinje firing up or down depending on which path dominates.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Granule cell and parallel fibre excitation onto spiny ascending dendrites, 0 to 300 hertz per fibre.

◦ Mossy fibre excitation onto basal dendrites in the upper granular layer, 0 to 500 hertz in bursts.

◦ Purkinje cell inhibition, 20 to 200 hertz, dominant and reliable.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA onto molecular layer interneurons, stellate and basket cells, at 0 to 60 hertz, distributed at all depths of the molecular layer along a narrow vertical line.

◦ A smaller direct GABAergic projection onto Purkinje cells.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, synaptic conductance for excitation and inhibition, output rate.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Input resistance high, in the range of one to several gigaohms in recording conditions, granule cell weight low, Purkinje cell weight high, resting potential about minus 60 millivolts, threshold about minus 45 millivolts.

◦ In a rate model, gain about 2.2, granule weight about 0.25, Purkinje weight about 0.15, weight onto molecular layer interneurons about 0.9.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, excitatory synaptic decay 1 to 3 milliseconds, inhibitory synaptic decay 5 to 15 milliseconds, loop settling time about 50 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ No candelabrum-cell-specific disease is known, which reflects how recently the cell was characterised rather than any established resistance to disease.

◦ Loss of candelabrum cells in a model produces excess feedforward inhibition of Purkinje cells at high input rates, predicting incoordination that worsens with movement speed.

◦ Because the cell is dominated by Purkinje cell inhibition, any disease that silences Purkinje cells will release candelabrum cells and further suppress molecular layer interneurons, a secondary effect that has not been measured in patients.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to settle the granule cell, candelabrum cell, molecular layer interneuron and Purkinje cell loop and show how much the candelabrum cell disinhibits the Purkinje cell.
Create a number variable called candelabrum rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called interneuron rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called purkinje rate with initial value 50.
Create a number variable called candelabrum target with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called interneuron target with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called purkinje target with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 600 times.
    Set candelabrum target to the product of 2.2 and the difference of the product of granule rate and 0.25 and the product of purkinje rate and 0.15.
    Check if candelabrum target is less than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set candelabrum target to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set interneuron target to the difference of the product of granule rate and 0.6 and the product of candelabrum rate and 0.9.
    Check if interneuron target is less than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set interneuron target to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set purkinje target to the difference of the sum of 50 and the product of granule rate and 0.7 and the product of interneuron rate and 0.8.
    Check if purkinje target is less than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set purkinje target to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set candelabrum rate to the sum of candelabrum rate and the quotient of the difference of candelabrum target and candelabrum rate divided by 15.
    Set interneuron rate to the sum of interneuron rate and the quotient of the difference of interneuron target and interneuron rate divided by 15.
    Set purkinje rate to the sum of purkinje rate and the quotient of the difference of purkinje target and purkinje rate divided by 15.
End the loop.
Display purkinje rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python was chosen because this is a small loop of coupled firing rates and Python keeps the sign of every arrow visible.
DT = 1.0            # milliseconds per step
TAU = 15.0          # how fast each rate follows its drive, milliseconds
CC_GAIN = 2.2       # the high input resistance of a candelabrum cell shows up as a high gain
W_GC_CC = 0.25      # granule cell drive onto the candelabrum cell
W_PC_CC = 0.15      # Purkinje collateral inhibition onto the candelabrum cell
W_GC_MLI = 0.60     # granule cell drive onto molecular layer interneurons
W_CC_MLI = 0.90     # candelabrum inhibition of molecular layer interneurons
W_MLI_PC = 0.80     # molecular layer inhibition of the Purkinje cell
W_GC_PC = 0.70      # parallel fibre excitation of the Purkinje cell
PC_PACE = 50.0      # a Purkinje cell fires at 50 Hz with no input at all
def run(cc_present, granule_rate):
    cc = mli = 0.0
    pc = PC_PACE
    for _ in range(600):                      # 600 ms, long enough to settle
        cc_target = CC_GAIN * max(0.0, W_GC_CC * granule_rate - W_PC_CC * pc)
        if not cc_present:
            cc_target = 0.0                   # simulate deleting the candelabrum cell
        mli_target = max(0.0, W_GC_MLI * granule_rate - W_CC_MLI * cc)
        pc_target = max(0.0, PC_PACE + W_GC_PC * granule_rate - W_MLI_PC * mli)
        cc += DT * (cc_target - cc) / TAU
        mli += DT * (mli_target - mli) / TAU
        pc += DT * (pc_target - pc) / TAU
    return round(cc, 1), round(mli, 1), round(pc, 1)
for rate in (0.0, 100.0, 300.0):
    with_cc = run(True, rate)
    without_cc = run(False, rate)
    print("granule rate", rate, "Hz")
    print("  with candelabrum cell, rates CC/MLI/PC:", with_cc)
    print("  without candelabrum cell, rates CC/MLI/PC:", without_cc)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron squeezed edgewise between Purkinje cell bodies like a slice of cheese in a sandwich.

Its axon runs sideways and then throws up a row of evenly spaced vertical arms, a shape no other neuron in the body produces, and once you have seen a candelabrum you cannot mistake it.

It is the only cerebellar cell whose main job is to switch off the cells that switch off the Purkinje cell.

And it is the most abundant interneuron in the thinnest layer of the nervous system, a cell that hid in plain sight between the two most famous neurons in neuroscience for a hundred and thirty years.

CHAPTER 119. UNIPOLAR BRUSH CELLS (UBCS) (COG)

This neuron shakes hands with one incoming fibre, then keeps talking about that handshake for a whole second.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A unipolar brush cell (UBC) is a small excitatory neuron of the cerebellum's input layer, excitatory meaning it makes its targets more likely to fire.

Its job is time: it stretches a few milliseconds of input from a mossy fibre, one of the cerebellum's two great input cables, into hundreds of milliseconds of output spread across hundreds of granule cells.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Its one short dendrite ends in a tuft of twenty to fifty fine tips that looks like a shaving brush, buried inside a single mossy fibre rosette, the swollen bead ending an incoming cable.

Its axon branches nearby into rosettes of its own, so the cell manufactures new mossy fibres inside the cortex.

SIZE:

The cell body is nine to twelve micrometres across, a tenth the width of a human hair, with a capacitance of ten to twenty picofarads and an axon rarely longer than two millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• ON cells carry metabotropic glutamate receptor type 1 alpha (mGluR1 alpha), a slow chemical detector rather than a fast pore, and answer with a delayed burst.

• OFF cells carry mGluR2 and mGluR3, which open potassium leaks, so they answer with a pause.

• Intermediate cells carry both and pause before accelerating, giving the population a continuum of delays.

WHERE IT LIVES:

In the granular layer, densest in the nodulus (lobule ten), ventral uvula (lobule nine c) and flocculus, moderate in ventral paraflocculus and lingula, nearly absent from the hemispheres.

Those lobules form the vestibulocerebellum, the interface where inner ear balance fibres meet cerebellar tissue, and the same cell reappears in the dorsal cochlear nucleus.

NUMBER:

No human count exists, so rodent ratios must serve: these cells roughly equal Purkinje cells in number and outnumber Golgi cells three to one.

Against fifteen million human Purkinje cells that gives fifteen to thirty million, bounded at ten to fifty million, moderate confidence in the order of magnitude, three hundredths of one percent of cerebellar neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

It is a quiet pacemaker at one to thirty spikes per second whose input resistance is so high that a single synapse dominates it.

Its signature is a current tail lasting hundreds of milliseconds, after which ON cells open TRPC3 pores admitting sodium and calcium while OFF cells open silencing GIRK potassium pores.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input is one mossy fibre rosette with hundreds of release sites, plus Golgi cells, the inhibitory gatekeepers of this layer, plus Purkinje collaterals inhibiting about twenty nine percent of mGluR1 cells.

Output reaches hundreds of granule cells and other brush cells, forming chains in which every link adds delay.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin at zero point two to zero point five micrometres and confined to its own lobule, it forms two to ten rosettes indistinguishable from true mossy fibre endings.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glutamate, the brain's main excitatory chemical, through the transporters VGLUT1 and VGLUT2, and listens with AMPA, NMDA, metabotropic glutamate, GABA type A and dopamine receptors.

MYELINATION:

None worth counting, because myelin, the fatty insulation that speeds conduction, is not worth buying for so short an axon, and the slowness adds yet more delay.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate but unusual, since the slow cascade refills calcium stores continuously and spends energy as a trickle, with heavy calretinin to mop up the calcium TRPC3 admits.

PLASTICITY:

Its mossy fibre input changes strength with use, and in the flocculus the mGluR1 to inositol trisphosphate to ERK pathway drives vestibular compensation, the recovery of balance after one inner ear is damaged.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Velate astrocytes, the sheet like support cells of the granular layer, wrap the glomerulus and clear glutamate unusually slowly.

Everywhere else fast clearance is prized; here glial restraint is the computation.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the vestibulocerebellum loses its echo: head velocity signals that normally persist for seconds collapse to the raw pulse, and balance turns jerky and reactive.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Glutamate spills onto receptors on non synaptic appendages of the brush, which is volume transmission, and metabotropic receptors release internal calcium to gate TRPC3 or GIRK.

The cell computes with a chemical cascade lasting hundreds of milliseconds, and being intrinsically rhythmic it has each input shift a running oscillator rather than start one.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: one mossy fibre rosette at zero to three hundred hertz; Golgi inhibition zero to two nanosiemens; Purkinje collateral inhibition in about a third of ON cells.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto one hundred to five hundred granule cells and neighbouring brush cells, zero to one hundred hertz.

• STATE: membrane potential; cleft glutamate; AMPA occupancy; metabotropic activation; internal calcium; TRPC3 and GIRK conductances.

• PARAMETERS: subtype flag ON, OFF or intermediate; capacitance ten to twenty picofarads; resting rate one to thirty hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS: synaptic current one to five milliseconds; cleft clearance fifty to two hundred milliseconds; metabotropic current two hundred to one thousand milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: losing the channel ASIC5 causes ataxia, meaning uncoordinated movement, in mice; losing the transcription factor Tbr2 deletes the cells; their progenitors are implicated in medulloblastoma, a childhood cerebellar tumour.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a brief mossy fibre burst into the long delayed response of an ON type unipolar brush cell.
Create a number variable called glutamate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called current with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called rate with initial value 5.
Create a number variable called time with initial value 0.
While time is less than 3000 is true, repeat the following steps.
    If time is less than 50 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set glutamate to the sum of glutamate and 0.2.
    End the conditional block.
    Set glutamate to the difference of glutamate and the quotient of glutamate divided by 120.
    Set current to the difference of current and the quotient of current divided by 400.
    Set current to the sum of current and the product of glutamate and 0.02.
    Set rate to the sum of 5 and the product of current and 45.
    Set time to the sum of time and 1.
End the loop.
Display rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this is a small set of coupled first order equations where readability matters more than speed.

# ON type unipolar brush cell: brief input, very long output.
DT = 1.0            # ms per step
TAU_GLUT = 120.0    # slow clearance from the sealed cleft
TAU_SLOW = 400.0    # mGluR1 to TRPC3 cascade
BASE, GAIN = 5.0, 45.0

def simulate(on_cell=True, burst=(100.0, 150.0), duration=3000.0):
    glut, slow, trace = 0.0, 0.0, []
    for i in range(int(duration / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        glut += DT * (-glut / TAU_GLUT) + (0.2 if burst[0] <= t < burst[1] else 0.0)
        slow += DT * (-slow / TAU_SLOW + 0.02 * glut)
        sign = 1.0 if on_cell else -1.0     # OFF cells open potassium instead
        trace.append(max(BASE + sign * GAIN * slow, 0.0))
    return trace

on_trace = simulate(True)
print("ON peak %.1f Hz at %d ms" % (max(on_trace), on_trace.index(max(on_trace))))
print("ON still %.1f Hz at 1000 ms" % on_trace[1000])
print("OFF minimum %.1f Hz" % min(simulate(False)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

One dendrite ending in a brush of fine tips, buried in a giant mossy fibre ending in the nodulus, uvula or flocculus, answering a five millisecond question with a five hundred millisecond answer.

CHAPTER 120. STELLATE CELLS (COG)

Float a tiny star in the outermost skin of the cerebellum, hang it on the branches of the brain's largest neuron, and you have the cell that decides which Purkinje dendrites may listen.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A stellate cell is a small inhibitory interneuron of the cerebellar molecular layer, inhibitory meaning it makes targets less likely to fire and interneuron meaning it never leaves the cortex.

Parallel fibres, the millimetre long axons of granule cells, excite it, and it turns that excitation into inhibition of Purkinje dendrites, sharpening their response in time and narrowing it in space.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small round cell body with four to eight thin dendrites radiating like the points of a star, all cutting across the parallel fibre beam so the cell samples a wide swathe of traffic.

Its axon stays in the molecular layer as a local cloud of boutons and, unlike its cousin the basket cell, never descends to wrap a Purkinje cell body.

SIZE:

The cell body is eight to twelve micrometres across with a capacitance of only four to twelve picofarads, a dendritic field near one hundred and fifty micrometres, and an axon usually within two hundred.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• By position, superficial cells sit in the outer third of the molecular layer with the smallest dendritic trees, while deeper cells are larger and grade into basket cells.

• By gene expression, mouse sequencing splits molecular layer interneurons into MLI1, carrying Sorcs3 and Gjd2, the gene for the coupling protein connexin 36, and MLI2, carrying Nxph1 and no Gjd2.

• Stellate shape occurs in both, and because MLI2 cells inhibit MLI1 cells this apparently uniform star field is really a two layer network capable of disinhibition.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Only in the molecular layer of the cerebellar cortex, preferentially its outer two thirds, in every lobule of the vermis, the paravermis, both hemispheres and the flocculonodular lobe.

That layer is itself an interface, the sheet where parallel fibres running left to right cross Purkinje dendritic fans standing front to back, and this cell referees the crossing.

NUMBER:

The human molecular layer interneuron population is on the order of one hundred million and stellate forms are the majority, so a defensible allocation is fifty five to seventy million, roughly four per Purkinje cell.

Confidence is moderate for the order of magnitude and low for the stellate to basket split, since no human study separates them cleanly; this is a tenth of one percent of cerebellar neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

It fires spontaneously at five to thirty spikes per second with all input blocked, and its input resistance near one gigaohm lets a few tens of picoamps move it measurably.

A type potassium channels, fast opening potassium pores, hold it back between spikes, so identical inputs can produce different spike latencies depending on recent history.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are parallel fibres, glutamate spilling from nearby climbing fibre contacts, and inhibition from other molecular layer interneurons.

Its few hundred output contacts land mostly on Purkinje dendrites, and because its axon spreads across the beam rather than along it, it inhibits Purkinje cells just off the beam that excited it.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin at zero point two to zero point five micrometres and conducting well under one metre per second, over distances so short that inhibition still lands within two milliseconds of the spike.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main inhibitory chemical, packaged by the transporter VGAT and read by GABA type A receptors, while listening through unusual calcium permeable AMPA receptors.

MYELINATION:

None, because the axon is short and local, and the cerebellum reserves myelin for fibres that must leave the cortex.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low in absolute terms because the cell is tiny, but high per unit volume because it never stops firing, dominated by the sodium pump restoring gradients spent on tonic spiking.

PLASTICITY:

Its parallel fibre input strengthens and weakens with use and can swap calcium permeable AMPA receptors for calcium impermeable ones, while its output shows rebound potentiation after climbing fibre activity.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Bergmann glia, the radial astrocytes of this layer, clamp glutamate spillover, which sets how much crosstalk excitation the stellate cell receives, and their processes define the narrow corridors in which its axon finds a Purkinje dendrite.

They carry calcium permeable AMPA receptors and change shape with activity, so this glial sheet is a moving part of the circuit rather than packing material.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove stellate cells and the molecular layer loses its contrast control: Purkinje responses would still occur but broad, smeared across the beam and slow to stop, blurring the millisecond edges that time a movement.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

MLI1 stellate cells are joined by connexin 36 gap junctions, protein tunnels passing current directly between cells, so groups behave partly as one synchronised unit.

Calcium admitted by calcium permeable AMPA receptors stays confined to single dendritic branches and drives branch specific plasticity, and endocannabinoids released backwards by the Purkinje cell silence these terminals for seconds.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: several hundred parallel fibres at zero to two hundred hertz; climbing fibre glutamate spillover; GABA from other interneurons; gap junction current in MLI1 cells.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto a few hundred Purkinje dendritic contacts and onto neighbouring interneurons, zero to two nanosiemens each.

• STATE: membrane potential; A type potassium inactivation; sodium channel availability; per branch calcium; short term depression of the output.

• PARAMETERS: capacitance four to twelve picofarads; input resistance about one gigaohm; spontaneous rate five to thirty hertz; coupling nonzero for MLI1 only.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane ten to twenty milliseconds; excitatory current one to three milliseconds; inhibitory output five to ten milliseconds; endocannabinoid suppression five to twenty seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: weakened molecular layer inhibition unleashes Purkinje dendritic calcium and broadens Purkinje firing, a pattern seen in ataxia models, and this synapse is among the first altered by alcohol.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute how a stellate cell turns an on beam parallel fibre burst into off beam inhibition of Purkinje cells.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called excitation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spikes with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called time with initial value 0.
While time is less than 200 is true, repeat the following steps.
    If both time is greater than or equal to 50 and time is less than 100 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set excitation to the sum of excitation and 0.35.
    End the conditional block.
    Set excitation to the difference of excitation and the quotient of excitation divided by 2.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the product of excitation and 8.
    Set voltage to the difference of voltage and the quotient of the sum of voltage and 60 divided by 15.
    If voltage is greater than -45 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set spikes to the sum of spikes and 1.
        Set voltage to -65.
    End the conditional block.
    Set time to the sum of time and 1.
End the loop.
Display spikes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the useful output is both a spike train and a list of which Purkinje columns get inhibited.

# Stellate cell: on-beam excitation produces off-beam inhibition.
DT = 1.0                     # ms
TAU_M, TAU_E = 15.0, 2.0     # membrane and synaptic time constants
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -60.0, -45.0, -65.0
SPREAD = 3                   # columns reached each side of the beam

def stellate(beam_hz, duration=200.0, beam=(50.0, 100.0)):
    v, ge, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, []
    for i in range(int(duration / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        if beam[0] <= t < beam[1]:
            ge += (beam_hz * DT / 1000.0) * 0.7    # quanta per step
        ge -= DT * ge / TAU_E
        v += DT * (-(v - V_REST) / TAU_M) + ge * 8.0 * DT / TAU_M
        if v > V_TH:
            spikes.append(t)
            v = V_RESET
    return spikes

s = stellate(120.0)
print("spikes:", len(s), "first at", s[0] if s else None, "ms")
print("columns inhibited:", [c for c in range(-SPREAD, SPREAD + 1) if c != 0])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A four to twelve picofarad star in the outer molecular layer, dendrites cutting across the parallel fibre beam, never touching a Purkinje cell body, inhibiting the dendrites just beside the beam that excited it.

CHAPTER 121. CEREBELLAR BASKET CELLS (COG)

This is the only neuron in the human brain that can silence another without using a chemical at all, by throwing an electrical shadow across the spot where its target's spike is born.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A basket cell is an inhibitory interneuron of the deep molecular layer, excited by parallel fibres exactly as a stellate cell is.

It aims its output at the Purkinje cell body and axon initial segment, the short stretch of output cable where every spike is generated, so its inhibition vetoes the whole cell instead of trimming one dendrite.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Its axon runs horizontally front to back just above the row of Purkinje cell bodies, dropping collaterals that weave a dense cage, the basket, around each soma it passes, and at the foot of each cage the branches converge into the pinceau, French for paintbrush, a tight brush of terminals gripping the axon initial segment and almost devoid of chemical synapses.

SIZE:

The cell body is ten to twenty micrometres across, the main axon runs five hundred to one thousand micrometres past about ten Purkinje cells, and the pinceau is twenty to forty micrometres long.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• By pinceau size, basket cells form parasagittal zonal modules, and blocking Purkinje transmitter release changes that size, so the target patterns its own input.

• By molecular class, basket morphology occurs in both the MLI1 and MLI2 families, only the first carrying connexin 36 gap junctions.

• By depth, the lowest cells build the most complete baskets and pinceaux while higher ones grade toward stellate form.

WHERE IT LIVES:

In the lower third of the molecular layer throughout the vermis, both hemispheres and the flocculonodular lobe, with its axon straddling an interface: the trunk lies in the molecular layer while the baskets and pinceaux occupy the Purkinje cell layer, the point where all cortical computation funnels into one output cell.

NUMBER:

Within the roughly one hundred million human molecular layer interneurons, basket cells are the minority form, allocated here at thirty to forty five million, or two to three per Purkinje cell, at moderate confidence for the order of magnitude and low confidence for the figure, since human counts do not separate basket from stellate cells; that is five hundredths of one percent of cerebellar neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

It fires spontaneously at ten to thirty spikes per second, shaped by L type calcium channels and by calcium activated potassium channels, while its pinceau terminals are packed with the Kv1.1 and Kv1.2 potassium channels that generate the inhibitory electric field.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives parallel fibres, climbing fibre spillover and other interneurons, and delivers both large fast GABA currents onto the Purkinje soma and a transmitter free ephaptic effect, meaning one carried by the electric field, that arrives with zero synaptic delay.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The main axon is zero point five to one micrometre wide and runs a long straight parasagittal course, so one cell inhibits a strip of Purkinje cells lying within a single zone.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), packaged by the transporter VGAT and read by GABA type A receptors on the Purkinje soma, supplemented by the pinceau's potassium driven electrical inhibition, which uses no transmitter at all.

MYELINATION:

None, because the axon never leaves the cortex, and the cerebellum compensates for the resulting slow conduction by making pinceau inhibition instantaneous rather than merely fast.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and concentrated at the pinceau, where a dense cluster of terminals must pump sodium and potassium back across the membrane after every spike and mitochondria are correspondingly crowded.

PLASTICITY:

Parallel fibre input is plastic, the basket to Purkinje synapse undergoes rebound potentiation, a lasting strengthening of inhibition after climbing fibre activity, and the pinceau itself is structurally remodelled across a lifetime.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

At the pinceau, Bergmann glia leave a very narrow sealed extracellular space around the axon initial segment, and that confinement is what lets a small ionic current make a large local voltage, so here the glia act as the insulation of a capacitor rather than as housekeepers.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove basket cells and the cortex loses its off switch and its clock: Purkinje cells would keep firing, but nothing could stop them quickly or synchronise their pauses, and it is the precisely timed pause that releases the deep nuclei to launch a movement.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The ephaptic pinceau is an entire mode of inhibition that no integrate and fire model contains, faster than any chemical synapse because there is no synapse.

MLI1 basket cells are coupled by connexin 36 gap junctions into synchronised groups, they are silenced for seconds by endocannabinoids released backwards from the Purkinje cell, and their own presynaptic architecture is dictated by that same target.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: parallel fibres at zero to two hundred hertz; climbing fibre glutamate spillover; interneuron GABA; gap junction current in MLI1 cells.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto the Purkinje soma up to about five nanosiemens; an ephaptic field of roughly one to several millivolts at the axon initial segment, with zero delay.

• STATE: membrane potential; calcium; calcium activated potassium conductance; presynaptic Kv1 current; short term depression of the somatic synapse.

• PARAMETERS: spontaneous rate ten to thirty hertz; ten to thirty Purkinje targets; pinceau length twenty to forty micrometres; zone identity setting pinceau size.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane ten to twenty milliseconds; GABA type A decay five to ten milliseconds; ephaptic effect under one millisecond; rebound potentiation tens of minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: in episodic ataxia type one, caused by mutations in KCNA1, the gene for Kv1.1, this ephaptic coupling is abolished and attacks of incoordination follow; in essential tremor, dense tangled hairy baskets are scored high in about a quarter of cases and almost never in controls, rising with Purkinje axonal swellings called torpedoes.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to combine chemical and ephaptic basket cell inhibition of one Purkinje cell and report the deepest pause produced.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called field with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called rate with initial value 60.
Create a number variable called lowest with initial value 60.
Create a number variable called time with initial value 0.
While time is less than 100 is true, repeat the following steps.
    Set field to 0.
    If either time is equal to 20 or time is equal to 24 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set inhibition to the sum of inhibition and 2.5.
        Set field to 3.
    End the conditional block.
    Set inhibition to the difference of inhibition and the quotient of inhibition divided by 7.
    Set rate to the difference of 60 and the product of inhibition and 9.
    Set rate to the difference of rate and the product of field and 6.
    If rate is less than lowest is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set lowest to rate.
    End the conditional block.
    Set time to the sum of time and 1.
End the loop.
Display lowest to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because the field effect must be applied inside the same time step as the presynaptic spike, and C makes that strict ordering explicit.

#include <stdio.h>

#define TAU_GABA 7.0     /* ms, decay of somatic inhibition */
#define BASE 60.0        /* Purkinje spikes per second */

int main(void) {
    int spikes[3] = {20, 24, 28};   /* basket cell spike times, ms */
    double g = 0.0, field, rate, low = BASE;
    for (int t = 0; t < 100; t++) {
        field = 0.0;                /* the field lasts one step only */
        for (int k = 0; k < 3; k++)
            if (spikes[k] == t) { g += 2.5; field = 3.0; }
        g -= g / TAU_GABA;
        rate = BASE - 9.0 * g - 6.0 * field;
        if (rate < 0.0) rate = 0.0;
        if (rate < low) low = rate;
    }
    printf("deepest pause: %.2f Hz\n", low);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A horizontal axon running just above the Purkinje row, dropping woven cages around cell bodies and ending in a paintbrush of terminals that grips the axon initial segment and inhibits it with an electric field.

CHAPTER 122. LARGE GLUTAMATERGIC PROJECTION NEURONS (Movement-Dispatching Output Neuron) (COG)

Sixty nine billion cerebellar neurons compute in silence, and everything they work out leaves through fewer than a million cells, of which this is the main one.

The old label is a committee minute, stating size, transmitter and projection while saying nothing a student could use.

Movement-Dispatching names what the message is about and the act of sending it, since these cells drive the red nucleus, reticular formation, vestibular nuclei and motor thalamus, and the entire computation of the cerebellar cortex leaves through this small population and nowhere else.

Output states the plain structural truth that these few cells are the only means by which the cerebellum influences behaviour.

Neuron marks it as a projection cell of the deep cerebellar nuclei.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A large glutamatergic projection neuron is an excitatory output cell of the cerebellar nuclei, the grey clusters buried in the white matter at the core of the cerebellum, and projection means its axon leaves the region for distant targets.

It fires fast and without pause, so its message is carried by the moments when Purkinje inhibition makes it fall silent and by the surge that follows.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A large multipolar cell body carries six to ten thick dendrites in a roughly spherical field so densely caked in Purkinje terminals that the cell almost disappears beneath its own inhibitory input, and one thick axon leaves through the superior cerebellar peduncle, the great outflow cable of the cerebellum.

SIZE:

The cell body is twenty to thirty five micrometres across, with a typical large nuclear soma measured near twenty two micrometres, although the sizes of GABA making and glutamate making nuclear cells overlap so much that only molecular markers identify the type.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Dentate large neurons project to thalamus and the parvocellular red nucleus, serving dexterity and cognition.

• Interposed large neurons project to the magnocellular red nucleus and thalamus, serving limb reflex timing.

• Fastigial large neurons project to vestibular nuclei, reticular formation and spinal premotor regions, and separate into distinct motor and non motor output modules.

WHERE IT LIVES:

In the dentate, emboliform, globose and fastigial nuclei of each side, with the lateral vestibular nucleus of the brainstem behaving as a displaced fifth nucleus, each of them sitting at an interface inside cerebellar white matter where passing mossy and climbing fibres shed collaterals, so the nucleus receives the raw input and the cortex's verdict together.

NUMBER:

This manuscript works to an allowance of one to two million neurons for the cerebellar nuclei and gives this type the largest share, seven hundred thousand to one point two million at moderate confidence, while noting honestly that a stereological study of human brains reported about three point four to three point seven million neurons in the dentate nucleus alone on one side, so the allowance is conservative; either way this is about one thousandth of one percent of cerebellar neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

It is a tonic pacemaker averaging around seventy spikes per second in the awake animal, carrying T type calcium channels that recover only when the cell is hyperpolarised and HCN channels that open on hyperpolarisation, which together produce a rebound burst after inhibition whose real size in behaving animals is debated and should stay tunable.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Tens of Purkinje cells converge on each nuclear neuron with inhibitory currents decaying in about two milliseconds, mossy and climbing fibre collaterals supply excitation, and the output is glutamate onto ventrolateral thalamus, red nucleus, zona incerta, superior colliculus, reticular formation, vestibular nuclei and neighbouring nuclear cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thick and fast at one to five micrometres and tens of metres per second, ascending in the superior cerebellar peduncle and crossing the midline in the midbrain, which is why one cerebellar hemisphere ends up serving the same side of the body.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate loaded by the vesicular transporter VGLUT2, with GABA type A receptors for Purkinje input, AMPA and NMDA receptors for collateral excitation, and modulation by acetylcholine, serotonin and noradrenaline from the brainstem.

MYELINATION:

Heavily myelinated by oligodendrocytes, the cells that make insulating wraps in the central nervous system, because the value of the entire cerebellar computation depends on the answer arriving on time.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high, since firing seventy times a second without pause runs the sodium pump continuously, so these neurons are packed with mitochondria and are acutely vulnerable when blood flow fails.

PLASTICITY:

The mossy fibre input strengthens lastingly when excitation is paired with the hyperpolarisation and rebound caused by Purkinje inhibition, which is thought to be how a motor memory first learned in the cortex is consolidated for long term storage.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The distinguishing feature is the perineuronal net, a dense lattice of sugar rich extracellular matrix encasing the soma like a string bag, which stabilises an enormous inhibitory synapse load, buffers ions around a cell that never stops firing, and restricts new synapse formation.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the cerebellum becomes a beautiful machine wired to nothing: the cortex would still compute, but nothing would reach thalamus, red nucleus or spinal cord, and movement would become slow, broken into separate joint motions and dysmetric, meaning it overshoots or undershoots.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Rebound makes the output depend on the history of inhibition rather than its present level, so the cell differentiates in time instead of merely summing.

Synchronous Purkinje pauses are far more effective than the same amount of scattered inhibition, so it reads the correlation structure of its inputs, while its activity drives local blood flow, instructs myelination of its own axon, and remodels its perineuronal net.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: Purkinje GABA from tens of sources at zero to two hundred hertz with two millisecond decay; mossy fibre collateral glutamate at zero to three hundred hertz; climbing fibre collaterals at about one hertz.

• OUTPUTS: a glutamate spike train resting near seventy hertz and ranging zero to two hundred hertz, to thalamus, red nucleus, reticular formation, colliculus, vestibular nuclei and local nucleo olivary cells.

• STATE: membrane potential; T type inactivation; HCN activation; internal calcium; short term depression at the Purkinje input.

• PARAMETERS: baseline rate sixty to ninety hertz; rebound gain zero to one, tunable; soma diameter twenty to thirty five micrometres; conduction velocity ten to fifty metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane ten to twenty milliseconds; inhibitory current two milliseconds; T type recovery fifty to two hundred milliseconds; rebound burst one hundred to three hundred milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: damage to the dentate nucleus or superior cerebellar peduncle in children causes cerebellar mutism syndrome, a temporary loss of speech, and disturbance of this pathway produces intention tremor and dysmetria, which is why cerebellar strokes disable so much despite an intact cortex.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert a synchronous Purkinje cell pause into a rebound burst in a large glutamatergic nuclear neuron.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 40.
Create a number variable called availability with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called rate with initial value 70.
Create a number variable called time with initial value 0.
While time is less than 600 is true, repeat the following steps.
    If both time is greater than or equal to 100 and time is less than 200 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set inhibition to 0.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set inhibition to 40.
    End the conditional block.
    If inhibition is less than 10 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set availability to the sum of availability and the quotient of the difference of 1 and availability divided by 80.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set availability to the difference of availability and the quotient of availability divided by 25.
    End the conditional block.
    Set rate to the difference of 70 and inhibition.
    Set rate to the sum of rate and the product of availability and 55.
    Set time to the sum of time and 1.
End the loop.
Display rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the point is the shape of a rate trace over time, and its three phases are easy to read off and check.

# Large glutamatergic nuclear neuron: pause in, rebound out.
DT = 1.0            # ms
BASE, INHIB = 70.0, 40.0
TAU_DEINACT = 80.0  # T-type channels recover while hyperpolarised
TAU_INACT = 25.0    # and inactivate again once depolarised
GAIN = 55.0         # tunable: in vivo rebound size is debated

def run(pause=(100.0, 200.0), duration=600.0):
    h, trace = 0.0, []          # h = fraction of T-type channels available
    for i in range(int(duration / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        inhib = 0.0 if pause[0] <= t < pause[1] else INHIB
        if inhib < 10.0:
            h += DT * (1.0 - h) / TAU_DEINACT
        else:
            h -= DT * h / TAU_INACT
        trace.append(max(BASE - inhib + GAIN * h, 0.0))
    return trace

trace = run()
print("baseline %.1f Hz, in pause %.1f Hz" % (trace[50], trace[150]))
print("rebound  %.1f Hz at %d ms" % (max(trace), trace.index(max(trace))))
print("recovered %.1f Hz" % trace[-1])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A big multipolar neuron buried in cerebellar white matter, caked in Purkinje terminals, wearing a perineuronal net, firing seventy times a second forever, with one thick myelinated axon that leaves for good.

CHAPTER 123. GABAERGIC NUCLEO-OLIVARY NEURONS (Climbing-Input Damping Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that tells the cerebellum's teacher to be quiet, and it is how a brain learns that nothing surprising happened.

The old name is a transmitter barcode bolted to two Latin addresses.

Climbing-Input names what it acts upon, the climbing fibre error signal from the inferior olive that instructs cerebellar learning.

Damping names the action, an inhibitory projection back onto the olive that closes a loop within each narrow zone, and experiments show that driving this cerebello-olivary inhibition alone is sufficient to extinguish an already learned conditioned eyeblink response.

Neuron marks it as a cell whose job is to tell the teacher to stop teaching once the lesson is learned.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A GABAergic nucleo olivary neuron is a small inhibitory cell of the cerebellar nuclei whose axon runs back down to the inferior olive, the brainstem nucleus that generates climbing fibres.

Climbing fibres are the cerebellum's teaching signal, so by silencing the olive when a predicted error fails to arrive, this cell turns silence itself into the message that the prediction was right.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small sparsely branched neuron with three to five smooth dendrites, scattered among the large output cells, whose axon ends inside the olivary glomerulus, a knot in which olivary dendrites are already joined electrically.

SIZE:

The cell body is ten to eighteen micrometres across, smaller than the large projection neurons but overlapping them, with a thin axon running several millimetres to a few centimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• By target microzone, these cells occupy the same narrow parasagittal strips as Purkinje cells and climbing fibres, forming closed loops.

• By nucleus of origin, dentate, interposed and fastigial cells target the principal, dorsal accessory and medial accessory olives respectively.

• A separate excitatory nucleo olivary pathway also exists, but that is a different cell type and is not counted here.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Scattered through all four cerebellar nuclei on both sides, with terminals in the contralateral inferior olive of the medulla, forming one arm of the Guillain Mollaret triangle that joins dentate nucleus, red nucleus and olive.

NUMBER:

Within the one to two million neuron allowance for the cerebellar nuclei, one hundred and fifty thousand to three hundred thousand is defensible at low to moderate confidence, since rodent work makes these cells roughly one in five to one in eight nuclear neurons and no human count exists; that is a few ten thousandths of one percent of cerebellar neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

It fires tonically but slowly at a few to about twenty spikes per second, and Purkinje evoked inhibitory currents in it decay in about twenty five milliseconds, more than ten times slower than in large nuclear cells, so it reports an average rather than an instant.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives slow Purkinje inhibition, mossy fibre collaterals, local excitation from large nuclear cells and climbing fibre collaterals, and it releases GABA onto olivary dendrites inside the glomerulus, right beside the gap junctions that couple olivary cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin at zero point five to one micrometre and only lightly myelinated, and its slowness is not a flaw but part of the roughly one hundred millisecond clock of the olivo cerebellar loop.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) alone, released asynchronously, meaning vesicles keep fusing for tens to hundreds of milliseconds after the spike, so a brief burst becomes a long smeared cloud acting on GABA type A receptors.

MYELINATION:

Thin at best, with much of the terminal arbor bare, because this system wants the signal slow, spread out and timed to the loop rather than fast.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest, since the cell is small and slow, but unusual at the terminals, which must sustain asynchronous release and therefore keep large recycling vesicle pools and high residual calcium.

PLASTICITY:

Nucleo olivary inhibition strengthens as a conditioned response is learned, and activating this cerebello olivary signal alone is enough to extinguish a conditioned eyeblink, one of the clearest negative prediction error signals known in any brain.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes seal each olivary glomerulus into a tiny chamber, so GABA lingers and shunts the electrical coupling between olivary cells, which means the glial wrapping converts a chemical signal into a change of connectivity.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the cerebellum can learn but cannot stop learning: the olive would fire unrestrained and in unnatural synchrony, error signals would keep arriving after the error was corrected, and conditioned responses would never extinguish.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Asynchronous release makes the output a low pass filtered version of the spike train rather than a copy of it.

Its main postsynaptic effect is not hyperpolarisation but modulation of gap junction coupling, so this cell edits a network's wiring rather than only its excitability, and its climbing fibre collateral input makes the whole loop self limiting.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: Purkinje GABA from one microzone with twenty five millisecond decay; mossy fibre collateral glutamate; climbing fibre collaterals at about one hertz; local nuclear excitation.

• OUTPUTS: asynchronous GABA into contralateral olivary glomeruli, as a slow conductance envelope and a multiplicative cut in olivary gap junction coupling.

• STATE: membrane potential; slow inhibitory conductance; residual presynaptic calcium; asynchronous release pool; running estimate of recent Purkinje drive.

• PARAMETERS: baseline rate two to twenty hertz; asynchronous release time constant fifty to two hundred milliseconds; maximum coupling reduction up to about half; microzone identity.

• TIME CONSTANTS: inhibitory input twenty five milliseconds; asynchronous output fifty to two hundred milliseconds; loop period near one hundred milliseconds; learning minutes to days.

• FAILURE MODE: interrupting the dentato rubro olivary pathway causes hypertrophic olivary degeneration and palatal tremor, a rhythmic involuntary movement of the soft palate that can last years, and losing this inhibition removes the ability to extinguish maladaptive learned responses.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the asynchronous inhibition a nucleo olivary neuron delivers and the resulting drop in olivary coupling.
Create a number variable called pool with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called coupling with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called released with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called time with initial value 0.
While time is less than 500 is true, repeat the following steps.
    If either time is equal to 10 or time is equal to 30 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set pool to the sum of pool and 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set released to the quotient of pool divided by 120.
    Set pool to the difference of pool and released.
    Set inhibition to the difference of inhibition and the quotient of inhibition divided by 60.
    Set inhibition to the sum of inhibition and released.
    Set coupling to the difference of 1 and the product of inhibition and 3.
    Set time to the sum of time and 1.
End the loop.
Display coupling to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because this signal is naturally described as events queued for delayed delivery, which is how JavaScript programmers already think.

// Nucleo-olivary neuron: asynchronous GABA release onto the inferior olive.
const TAU_RELEASE = 120.0; // vesicles keep leaving the pool for 100+ ms
const TAU_GABA = 60.0;     // decay of the inhibitory conductance
const GAIN = 3.0;          // how strongly GABA shunts olivary gap junctions

function run(spikeTimes, duration = 500) {
  let pool = 0, g = 0, minCoupling = 1.0, peak = { t: 0, g: 0 };
  for (let t = 0; t < duration; t++) {
    if (spikeTimes.includes(t)) pool += 1;   // a spike loads the pool
    const released = pool / TAU_RELEASE;     // slow, smeared release
    pool -= released;
    g += released - g / TAU_GABA;
    const coupling = Math.max(1 - GAIN * g, 0.5);  // reduced, not abolished
    if (coupling < minCoupling) minCoupling = coupling;
    if (g > peak.g) peak = { t, g };
  }
  return { minCoupling, peak, residual: g };
}

const out = run([10, 30, 50]);
console.log("peak inhibition at", out.peak.t, "ms");
console.log("lowest coupling", out.minCoupling.toFixed(3));
console.log("inhibition remaining at end", out.residual.toFixed(4));

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small cell hiding among giants in the cerebellar nuclei, receiving Purkinje inhibition ten times slower than its neighbours, dribbling GABA into a sealed glial chamber in the olive for a tenth of a second after every spike.

CHAPTER 124. GLYCINERGIC NEURONS (Same-Side Restraint Output Neuron) (COG)

For a century the cerebellum was said to speak two chemical words, glutamate for yes and GABA for no, until a mouse engineered to glow green wherever glycine is made lit up a hidden population of output cells.

The old label names only the chemical the cell releases, glycine, which tells a student nothing about what the cell does.

Same-Side names the one anatomical fact that separates this population from every other cerebellar output cell, since these cells send their axons to vestibular and reticular targets on the same side of the brainstem while their glutamate-releasing neighbours in the very same nucleus cross the midline to the opposite side.

Restraint names the work, because glycine opens chloride channels that hold the target cell below its firing threshold, so this is the cerebellum's braking line rather than its driving line.

Output records that these are projection cells leaving the cerebellum rather than local circuit cells.

Neuron marks it as the reason the cerebellum can push posture on one side and hold it back on the other through two parallel and oppositely directed channels.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A glycinergic neuron inhibits its targets with glycine, the smallest amino acid in biology, which opens chloride channels called glycine receptors that the poison strychnine blocks.

The cerebellum has two families, projection neurons of the fastigial nucleus and cortical interneurons that co release glycine with gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), and the first matters for a reason of pure geometry: their glutamate releasing neighbours cross the midline while they stay on the same side.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The nuclear cells are medium to large multipolar neurons indistinguishable by eye from the glutamatergic output cells beside them, while the cortical ones are Golgi cells of the granular layer and spindle shaped Lugaro cells lying just beneath the Purkinje layer.

SIZE:

Fastigial glycinergic projection neurons are fifteen to thirty micrometres across with axons one to three micrometres wide, Lugaro cells are ten to twenty micrometres with dendrites running three hundred micrometres along the Purkinje row, and Golgi cells are fifteen to twenty five micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Fastigial glycinergic projection neurons, sending inhibitory axons to the ipsilateral vestibular nuclei and reticular formation through the juxtarestiform body.

• Cortical interneurons positive for the glycine transporter GlyT2, chiefly Golgi and Lugaro cells, which co release glycine and GABA.

• Small mixed neurons inside the cerebellar nuclei that contain both glycine and GABA and act as local interneurons.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The projection type is concentrated in the fastigial nucleus beside the roof of the fourth ventricle with fewer in the interposed nucleus, while the cortical type occupies the granular layer and its boundary with the Purkinje layer throughout the vermis and hemispheres, and the defining interface is the border between cerebellum and vestibular brainstem.

NUMBER:

Within the one to two million neuron allowance for the cerebellar nuclei, one hundred thousand to two hundred thousand is defensible at low confidence, based on mouse evidence that a large share of fastigial output neurons are glycinergic and on the absence of any human count; the cortical glycine releasing cells are Golgi and Lugaro cells already counted inside the ten million Golgi allowance, so they are not added again, and this leaves about two ten thousandths of one percent of cerebellar neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Fastigial glycinergic cells fire tonically at tens of spikes per second, indistinguishable electrically from their glutamatergic neighbours, while Golgi and Lugaro cells fire at a few to about ten hertz and Lugaro cells are switched from near silence into steady firing by serotonin.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Nuclear glycinergic cells take direct Purkinje inhibition and mossy and climbing fibre collateral excitation and inhibit ipsilateral vestibular and reticular neurons, while Golgi and Lugaro cells inhibit granule cells and each other, producing mixed events that carry both GABA and glycine.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Nuclear axons are myelinated at one to three micrometres and descend on the same side while their glutamatergic siblings cross, and Lugaro cell axons run transversely for one to two millimetres across many parasagittal zones.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glycine, recaptured by GlyT2 and loaded by the same vesicular transporter that loads GABA, so one vesicle can carry both; glycine is also an obligatory co agonist at NMDA glutamate receptors, meaning the same molecule inhibits some cells while licensing excitation in others.

MYELINATION:

The nuclear projection axons are well myelinated so they arrive in register with the crossed glutamatergic pathway, while cortical Golgi and Lugaro axons are unmyelinated like all intracortical cerebellar axons.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate for the tonically firing nuclear cells and low for the slow cortical ones, and glycine itself is cheap, made in one step from serine, which makes this among the least expensive signalling systems in the brain.

PLASTICITY:

Developing hindbrain neurons shift the balance of GABA and glycine they release as they mature, the ratio stays adjustable in adults, and GlyT2 positive interneurons have been shown to regulate the timing and trial to trial variability of a cerebellar behavioural loop.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here express glycine transporter 1, GlyT1, which sets ambient glycine and therefore simultaneously ends an inhibitory signal and sets the gain of NMDA receptor excitation nearby, and they also supply the serine from which glycine is made.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove glycinergic neurons and the fastigial nucleus loses the ability to say no on its own side of the body, so posture would become symmetric and unstable and the reciprocal eye and head control that keeps the visual world still while you walk would degrade.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Co release of two transmitters from one vesicle means the same spike means different things to different partners, depending on which receptors each target carries.

Glycine escaping the cleft acts by volume transmission as a co agonist at nearby NMDA receptors, GlyT2 can run backwards and release glycine with no vesicle at all, and serotonin decides whether the Lugaro cell layer of inhibition exists at any given moment.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: Purkinje GABA for the nuclear type; mossy and climbing fibre collateral glutamate; parallel fibre glutamate for the cortical type; serotonin level as a gate for Lugaro cells.

• OUTPUTS: glycine, optionally with GABA in the same vesicle, onto ipsilateral vestibular and reticular neurons or onto Golgi cells, plus a contribution to ambient glycine near NMDA receptors.

• STATE: membrane potential; vesicular glycine to GABA ratio; cytoplasmic glycine set by GlyT2; short term depression; serotonin gate state.

• PARAMETERS: glycine fraction of the mixed vesicle zero to one; strychnine sensitive conductance up to two nanosiemens per contact; rate tens of hertz for nuclear cells, a few hertz for cortical cells.

• TIME CONSTANTS: glycine receptor decay ten to thirty milliseconds, slower than the GABA component of the same event; GlyT2 refilling hundreds of milliseconds; serotonergic gating seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: mutations in the glycine receptor gene GLRA1 cause hyperekplexia, or startle disease, in which any small surprise triggers whole body stiffening; antibodies against the same receptor cause progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus; strychnine poisoning blocks these receptors and causes fatal convulsions.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to build the mixed inhibition produced by a neuron that co releases glycine and gamma aminobutyric acid, and to show what strychnine does to it.
Create a number variable called gaba with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called glycine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called peak with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called strychnine with initial value false.
Create a number variable called time with initial value 0.
While time is less than 200 is true, repeat the following steps.
    If time is equal to 20 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set gaba to 0.8.
        Set glycine to 1.2.
    End the conditional block.
    Set gaba to the difference of gaba and the quotient of gaba divided by 7.
    Set glycine to the difference of glycine and the quotient of glycine divided by 20.
    If strychnine is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set total to gaba.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set total to the sum of gaba and glycine.
    End the conditional block.
    If total is greater than peak is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set peak to total.
    End the conditional block.
    Set time to the sum of time and 1.
End the loop.
Display peak to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the useful result is a comparison of three drug conditions, which sit side by side in a few readable lines.

# Mixed glycine plus GABA inhibition from a co-releasing cerebellar neuron.
TAU_GABA, TAU_GLY = 7.0, 20.0   # ms; the glycine component is slower
AMPLITUDE = 2.0                 # nS delivered by one release event

def mixed_ipsc(gly_fraction=0.6, strychnine=False, bicuculline=False, dur=200):
    g_gaba = g_gly = 0.0
    trace = []
    for t in range(dur):
        if t == 20:                            # one co-release event
            g_gaba += AMPLITUDE * (1.0 - gly_fraction)
            g_gly += AMPLITUDE * gly_fraction
        g_gaba -= g_gaba / TAU_GABA
        g_gly -= g_gly / TAU_GLY
        a = 0.0 if bicuculline else g_gaba     # bicuculline blocks GABA-A
        b = 0.0 if strychnine else g_gly       # strychnine blocks glycine
        trace.append(a + b)
    return trace

def summarise(name, trace):
    peak = max(trace)
    above = [i for i, v in enumerate(trace) if v >= peak / 2.0]
    print("%-12s peak %.3f nS, half-width %d ms" % (name, peak, above[-1] - above[0]))

summarise("control", mixed_ipsc())
summarise("strychnine", mixed_ipsc(strychnine=True))
summarise("bicuculline", mixed_ipsc(bicuculline=True))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

An inhibitory cerebellar neuron whose current is only half abolished by blocking GABA receptors and whose remaining half vanishes under strychnine, and in the fastigial nucleus it is the one output cell that stays on its own side of the body.

CHAPTER 125. SMALL LOCAL INTERNEURONS (Close-Quarters Inhibiting Neuron) (COG)

Deep in the cerebellum, among giant cells wrapped in armour, sit tiny neurons that never leave home.

The old label is a size note and a placeholder rather than a name, and honesty requires admitting that the function of these cells is not established.

Close-Quarters records the one solid fact that is beyond dispute, that their somata are small and their axonal territory stays within a narrow patch of cortex rather than reaching across lobules.

Inhibiting records the second solid fact, that they release glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), so whatever computation they serve, their effect on neighbours is to hold firing down.

Neuron marks it as a granular layer interneuron of a group not characterised physiologically at all until 2012, each of these small classes accounting for at least fifteen percent of granular layer interneurons.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a small braking cell of the cerebellar nuclei whose axon, its output cable, never leaves the nucleus.

It releases two brakes at once, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine, onto the giant cells that carry cerebellar output to the brain.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small round body carries three to six short dendrites, the branches that gather signals, all inside the nucleus.

Its endings crowd giant-cell dendrites at contacts packed with glycine receptors and nearly free of the usual GABA receptor subunits.

SIZE:

Cell bodies here span 14.7 to 50 micrometres, and this class sits below about 21.

A micrometre is a thousandth of a millimetre, so forty of these would span a page.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two of the five conserved neuron types in every cerebellar nucleus are local GABA and glycine interneurons.

One fires slowly and carries glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 (GAD67), the enzyme that makes GABA, while the other rests silent and bursts when pushed.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It is scattered among the giant cells of all four nuclei: dentate, emboliform, globose and fastigial.

Two interfaces matter: where nuclear grey meets the white matter carrying Purkinje axons, and where the fastigial nucleus abuts the brainstem vestibular nuclei.

NUMBER:

Of the one to two million neurons allotted to the human cerebellar nuclei, rodent proportions make a third to a half these interneurons, so 300,000 to 600,000.

Confidence is low, and this is roughly 0.0005 percent of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Its action potential, the brief pulse a neuron fires, is over a millisecond wide, twice its neighbours'.

Slow pulses cap it near thirty per second while those neighbours run past a hundred.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Side branches of mossy fibres, the cerebellum's main input cables, and of climbing fibres from the inferior olive excite it.

Its glycine receptor clusters are about 5 percent of the inhibitory receptor clusters on a giant cell.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Under a micrometre thick, it branches within a few hundred micrometres, so conduction is slow yet delays stay under a millisecond.

One group, carrying glycine transporter type 2 (GlyT2), instead sends a long axon to the cortex.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter loads GABA and glycine into one vesicle, so both leave together, glycine acting faster.

Glycine is common below the brain and rare above it, which makes these cells chemical outsiders.

MYELINATION:

The local axon is unmyelinated, lacking the fatty wrap that speeds conduction, because over such short distances insulation buys nothing.

Only the long nucleocortical axons are partly wrapped.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest, since twenty pulses a second cost a fraction of a neighbour's hundred.

The steady bill is transport, because pumping chloride and recapturing glycine draw on sodium gradients.

PLASTICITY:

Inhibitory synapses in these nuclei do change strength with experience, and stripping the surrounding matrix alters them measurably.

Whether its own glycine synapse has a learning rule is unknown, so model slow activity-dependent scaling and say so.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Glia here help build perineuronal nets, cages of sugar and protein rich in aggrecan, around the giant cells only.

So this cell works bare among armoured neighbours, and digesting the cages strengthens Purkinje inhibition and impairs eyeblink learning.

Local astrocytes also recover glycine, not just GABA.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and the nucleus loses its private, selective brake, leaving every output cell inhibited on one common timetable.

The nucleus would still relay, but it would dim and brighten as one, losing the contrast that lets a single channel speak.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

One pulse writes a two-part waveform, fast glycine then slower GABA, both depending on the chloride gradient held by the KCC2 pump.

Spilled glycine reaches neighbours as volume transmission, and trimming spike jitter sets how tightly cerebellar output is synchronised.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: mossy fibre collaterals 0 to 200 per second, climbing fibre collaterals 0 to 10, Purkinje inhibition 20 to 100.

• OUTPUTS: mixed glycine and GABA conductance onto giant cells, 0.2 to 1.0 nanosiemens per contact.

• STATE: voltage, refractory countdown, glycine conductance, GABA conductance, internal chloride.

• PARAMETERS: soma 8 to 21 micrometres, input resistance 400 to 1000 megaohms, spike width 1.0 to 1.5 milliseconds, ceiling near 30 per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds, glycine decay 10, GABA decay 30 to 50, refractory 25.

• FAILURE MODE: without this brake the giant cells fire in unison, the burst signature of dystonia and tremor models.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire one small local interneuron and release glycine onto a giant output cell.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called glycine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
While clock is less than 1000 remains true, repeat the following steps.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and 0.7.
    Set glycine to the product of glycine and 0.99.
    Check if voltage is greater than or equal to -48.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to -70.
        Set glycine to the sum of glycine and 0.8.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 1.
End the loop.
Display glycine to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because this cell is slow and simple and needs no framework.
DT, TAU, VR, VTH, VRESET, REFRAC, RIN = 0.1, 25.0, -65.0, -48.0, -70.0, 25.0, 700.0

def run(pa, ms=1000.0):
    v, refr, gly, t, spikes = VR, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0
    while t < ms:
        gly -= gly * DT / 10.0        # glycine decays in about 10 ms
        if refr > 0.0:
            refr -= DT
            v = VRESET
        else:
            drive = RIN * pa * 1e-3   # megaohms times picoamps gives millivolts
            v += DT * (-(v - VR) + drive) / TAU
            if v >= VTH:
                v, refr, spikes = VRESET, REFRAC, spikes + 1
                gly += 0.8            # glycine dominant release
        t += DT
    return spikes, gly

for pa in (20.0, 40.0, 80.0):
    n, g = run(pa)
    print("%4.0f pA gives %2d spikes, glycine %.2f" % (pa, n, g))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A body under 21 micrometres among giants of 50, a spike over a millisecond wide, a ceiling near thirty per second.

It alone puts glycine receptors on the output cells, its axon never leaves home, and it alone wears no aggrecan cage.

CHAPTER 126. HUSH-LIFTING LEARNING NEURON (COG) (PUC)

This is the cell that learns from silence, writing a memory in the instant a long hush is lifted off it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a Previously Unnamed Construct, a name for something real but unlabelled: the cerebellar nuclear output neuron in its learning mode.

Purkinje cells, the cortex's only output, do nothing but inhibit, and Pugh and Raman showed in 2006 that this cell learns only when excitation is followed by deep inhibition and release.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A large neuron with five to fifteen thick dendrites radiating like a sea urchin, its body blanketed by Purkinje endings.

Low threshold calcium channels are denser on the dendrites, so the learning signal is born where the excitation lands.

SIZE:

The body is 25 to 50 micrometres across, among the cerebellum's largest, and the dendritic tree spans 300 to 600.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The construct is strongest in the large glutamate-releasing output neurons, of two conserved forms called class A and class B.

Interposed variants time reflexes, dentate variants time skilled sequences, fastigial variants time balance.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives in the dentate, emboliform, globose and fastigial nuclei, the anterior interposed best studied for eyeblink timing.

The defining interface is where Purkinje axons leave the white matter for the nuclear grey.

NUMBER:

This is not an extra population but a mode of the one to two million neurons already allotted to the cerebellar nuclei.

Perhaps half to three quarters show it, so 500,000 to 1,000,000, about 0.0009 percent of all neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Left alone it paces itself at 30 to over 100 narrow pulses a second.

Purkinje inhibition drags it to minus 75 millivolts, and 150 milliseconds there resets the T-type calcium channels built on CaV3.1, so release fires a burst.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are Purkinje inhibition on the body and mossy fibre excitation on the dendrites, through AMPA and calcium-passing NMDA receptors.

Outputs reach the ventrolateral thalamus, red nucleus and vestibular nuclei, and a nucleo-olivary branch quietens the inferior olive.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

One to three micrometres thick, it leaves through the superior cerebellar peduncle, the cerebellum's outflow cable.

At roughly 10 to 40 metres per second, a correction reaches the thalamus in milliseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glutamate, the brain's main accelerator, and receives GABA from Purkinje cells plus glycine from local interneurons.

MYELINATION:

Its outgoing axon is among the most heavily myelinated in the brain, which is why cerebellar timing is measured in single milliseconds.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high, because it fires 50 to 100 times a second whether or not anything happens, and repeated calcium loads are met by astrocyte lactate.

PLASTICITY:

Mossy fibre stimulation at 100 per second, paired with a 150 to 250 millisecond hyperpolarisation and rebound, potentiated its currents by 43 percent.

Calcium arrives first through NMDA receptors, then through low threshold channels during rebound, so the cell multiplies two signals separated in time.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

These neurons, not their small neighbours, wear perineuronal nets rich in aggrecan, built by neuron and glia together.

Removing the nets enlarges Purkinje currents and impairs eyeblink conditioning, so the cage is learning machinery.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this mode and the nuclei become a relay: fast, accurate and permanently naive.

A conditioned blink would never shift to land before the puff, and a skill would fade when the cortex fell silent.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The dendrites compute, holding a chemical tag of recent excitation and multiplying it by a rebound hundreds of milliseconds later.

One caveat: rebounds are robust in slices but hard to find in intact animals, so make rebound strength tunable.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: Purkinje inhibition 20 to 100 per second, mossy fibre excitation 0 to 200, climbing fibres 0 to 10.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate spikes 0 to 300 per second to thalamus, red nucleus and vestibular nuclei, plus a nucleo-olivary branch.

• STATE: voltage, T-type availability 0 to 1, calcium tag, hush counter, synaptic weight.

• PARAMETERS: soma 25 to 50 micrometres, resting rate 30 to 100 per second, spike width 0.5 to 1.0 milliseconds, hush threshold 150 milliseconds, gain 0.43.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, calcium tag 100, channel recovery 150 to 250.

• FAILURE MODE: CACNA1G mutations cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 42, and disordered nuclear firing underlies ataxia, dystonia and tremor.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to strengthen a mossy fibre synapse only after a long Purkinje hush is lifted.
Create a number variable called weight with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called calcium_tag with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called hush_length with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
While clock is less than 1000 remains true, repeat the following steps.
    Set calcium_tag to the sum of calcium_tag and 1.
    Check if both clock is greater than 300 and clock is less than 550 are true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set hush_length to the sum of hush_length and 1.
    Else if both hush_length is greater than 150 and calcium_tag is greater than 1 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set weight to the product of weight and 1.43.
        Set hush_length to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 1.
End the loop.
Display weight to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
/* C is chosen because a cerebellum simulator runs this rule millions of times a second. */
int main(void) {
    double weight = 1.0, tag = 0.0, hush = 0.0;
    int t;
    for (t = 0; t < 1000; t++) {
        int mf = (t >= 100 && t < 600);   /* mossy fibre burst */
        int pc = (t >= 300 && t < 550);   /* Purkinje hush, 250 ms */
        if (mf) tag += 1.0;               /* NMDA calcium tag */
        tag *= 0.99;
        if (pc) { hush += 1.0; continue; }
        if (hush >= 150.0 && tag > 1.0) { /* 43 percent gain, Pugh and Raman 2006 */
            weight += 0.43 * (1.0 - exp(-(hush - 150.0) / 100.0)) * tag / (tag + 5.0);
            printf("t=%d ms: hush lifted, synapse grew\n", t);
        }
        hush = 0.0;
    }
    printf("final weight=%.3f\n", weight);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron known that refuses to learn from excitation alone and insists on being silenced first.

Look for a large pacemaker caged in aggrecan, answering a released silence with a burst and a stronger synapse.


PART NINE: BRAINSTEM - MIDBRAIN, PONS, AND MEDULLA

CHAPTER 127. GENERAL SOMATIC EFFERENT MOTOR NEURONS (Eye-And-Tongue Aiming Neuron) (NON-COG)

Every time your eyes flick across this line of text, a few thousand cells buried in your brainstem fire in a precisely graded chorus, and the world obligingly stays still.

The existing label is a committee minute built from embryology, so it tells a student nothing about what the cell does.

Eye-And-Tongue names the only two territories this column serves, because the general somatic efferent nuclei, the oculomotor, trochlear, abducens and hypoglossal, drive just the six extraocular muscles of each eye and the muscles of the tongue, all of them descended from somites rather than from the pharyngeal arches.

Aiming names the work, since both jobs are acts of pointing, the eyeball at a target and the tongue tip at a sound or a morsel.

Neuron marks it as the final common path, so that when one dies the eye or the tongue simply cannot be aimed.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A general somatic efferent (GSE) motor neuron is a brainstem nerve cell whose long output fibre leaves the skull and ends directly on a skeletal muscle fibre.

Efferent simply means carrying signals outward, away from the brain, and somatic means the muscle it controls is one you can in principle move on purpose.

These cells drive the six muscles that aim each eye, the muscle that lifts the upper eyelid, and the muscles that shape the tongue.

They are the final common path: no matter how clever the decision upstream, the eye moves only if these cells fire.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is a plump multipolar shape, meaning many branches radiate from it in several directions.

Ten to twenty stout dendrites, the tree-like input branches, spread across the nucleus and often bundle together with the dendrites of neighbours into cables that share incoming signals.

A single thick axon, the output cable, leaves the base of the cell and heads straight for the skull base.

The cytoplasm is packed with dark-staining Nissl substance, which is stacked protein-making machinery, betraying the enormous manufacturing load of a cell that must keep a metre-long-scale process supplied.

SIZE:

Cell bodies measure roughly 25 to 60 micrometres across, where a micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre.

That makes them among the largest neurons in the brainstem, comparable to spinal motor neurons.

Axons are 5 to 15 micrometres in diameter including their fatty sheath, and run 3 to 8 centimetres from brainstem to muscle.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two families exist in every extraocular pool.

Singly innervated fibre motor neurons are large, fast, and end in one compact contact per muscle fibre, generating twitch force for saccades, the rapid darting eye movements.

Multiply innervated fibre motor neurons are smaller, end in strings of small contacts along a muscle fibre, and produce slow graded tension for steady gaze holding.

Tongue motor neurons split into protrusor and retrusor pools, plus a small population driving the tongue open during breathing.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Four nuclei hold them: the oculomotor nucleus in the midbrain at the level of the superior colliculus, the trochlear nucleus in the midbrain at the inferior colliculus, the abducens nucleus in the pons beneath the facial colliculus, and the hypoglossal nucleus in the medulla beside the midline.

All four sit in a column immediately next to the midline, the most medial position in the brainstem, which is the anatomical signature of this class.

The abducens nucleus sits at a genuine interface: the axon bundle of the facial nerve loops over it, so pons motor territory and branchial motor territory are physically wrapped around each other there.

NUMBER:

The human abducens nucleus contains about 6,454 cells per side by classical counting, and cell number does not change appreciably after birth.

Adding oculomotor, trochlear and hypoglossal pools, a defensible total is 30,000 to 45,000 GSE motor neurons across both sides, and confidence is moderate because modern unbiased stereology has not been applied to all four nuclei in humans.

That is roughly one in two million of the body's neurons, and well under one thousandth of one percent of the brainstem's approximately 200 million neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage sits near minus 65 millivolts, and threshold near minus 50 millivolts.

Extraocular motor neurons are extraordinarily fast, sustaining 300 to 500 spikes per second during a saccade, far above the 50 spikes per second ceiling of most limb motor neurons.

Their firing rate encodes two things added together: a rate step proportional to where the eye is being held, and a rate pulse proportional to how fast it is moving.

Hypoglossal motor neurons are slower, firing 10 to 60 spikes per second, and are strongly modulated by the breathing rhythm.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from the paramedian pontine reticular formation for horizontal saccade pulses, from the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi and medial vestibular nucleus for the position step, from the vestibular nuclei for reflex gaze stabilisation, and from the superior colliculus indirectly.

A typical extraocular motor neuron carries several thousand synapses, the tiny junctions where one neuron speaks to another.

Output is a single kind of junction, the neuromuscular junction, one per muscle fibre for twitch fibres.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thick, straight and almost unbranched until its terminal arbour.

Conduction speed reaches 60 to 80 metres per second, so the command arrives at the eye muscle in about one millisecond.

An extraocular motor neuron contacts only 3 to 10 muscle fibres, the smallest motor unit in the body, which is why eye position can be set so finely.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine, the classic muscle-commanding chemical messenger, released onto nicotinic acetylcholine receptors on the muscle fibre.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is co-released and helps maintain the junction.

There is no known inhibitory transmitter released by these cells.

MYELINATION:

Heavily myelinated, meaning the axon is wrapped in a fatty insulating sheath that makes signals jump between gaps rather than crawl.

Oligodendrocytes make the sheath inside the brainstem, and Schwann cells take over the moment the axon leaves at the nerve root, at a boundary called the Obersteiner-Redlich zone.

Internodes, the insulated stretches between gaps, run 800 to 1,500 micrometres.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high, and unusual in kind.

Sustaining 400 spikes per second means pumping sodium and potassium back across the membrane relentlessly, and extraocular motor neurons carry mitochondrial densities among the highest of any neuron.

They rely heavily on oxidative phosphorylation, the oxygen-using energy pathway, which is one reason they fail early in mitochondrial diseases.

PLASTICITY:

Modest but real.

The position-holding gain is recalibrated continuously by the cerebellar flocculus, so that if you wear magnifying spectacles the reflex gain adjusts over days.

Neuromuscular junctions remodel after nerve injury, sprouting to reoccupy vacated muscle fibres.

Long-term potentiation of the classic hippocampal kind is not a feature here.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes around these nuclei are unusually rich in glutamate transporters, because the excitatory input rates are extreme and spillover would be catastrophic for gaze accuracy.

At the neuromuscular junction a specialised glial cell, the terminal Schwann cell, caps each junction, senses transmitter release, and repairs the junction after damage.

Microglia in the hypoglossal nucleus are famously reactive, clustering around injured motor neurons within hours in a response called synaptic stripping.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the midline brainstem loses its only direct line to the outside world.

The oculomotor nucleus becomes a silent map with no eyes to move: the eye drifts outward and downward, the eyelid drops, and reading, tracking and even balance degrade because gaze can no longer be stabilised.

The medulla without hypoglossal motor neurons is a brain that can plan speech and swallowing perfectly and execute neither.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Dendrites of neighbouring motor neurons bundle into shared cables, so excitation leaks sideways between cells and helps a pool fire as a unit.

Some pairs are electrically coupled through gap junctions, tiny protein tunnels that let current pass directly.

The axon terminal instructs the muscle fibre what kind of fibre to become, controlling its gene expression from a distance through activity pattern and released peptides.

These cells also signal retrogradely to their own inputs using nitric oxide, a gas that diffuses backwards across the synapse.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: burst signal from paramedian pontine reticular formation, 0 to 800 spikes per second; position signal from nucleus prepositus hypoglossi, 0 to 200 spikes per second; vestibular head-velocity signal, plus or minus 150 spikes per second; inhibitory gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) input from omnipause neurons.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine onto 3 to 10 extraocular muscle fibres, or 20 to 100 tongue muscle fibres; recurrent collaterals are sparse or absent in extraocular pools.

• STATE: membrane voltage; spike-frequency adaptation variable; calcium-activated potassium activation; synaptic conductance per input class.

• PARAMETERS: recruitment threshold minus 15 to plus 10 degrees of eye position; position sensitivity 2 to 8 spikes per second per degree; velocity sensitivity 0.5 to 1.5 spikes per second per degree per second; maximum rate 400 to 500 spikes per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 3 to 6 milliseconds; synaptic 1 to 2 milliseconds; muscle mechanical filter 8 to 12 milliseconds; neural integrator leak 20 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) the hypoglossal pool degenerates early, giving slurred speech and a wasted tongue, while the oculomotor pool is famously resistant; in myasthenia gravis the junction fails and the eyelid droops; in mitochondrial disease the eye muscles freeze in chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert a desired eye position and eye velocity into the firing rate of one extraocular motor neuron using the pulse and step rule.
Create a number variable called recruitment threshold with initial value -10.
Create a number variable called position sensitivity with initial value 4.
Create a number variable called velocity sensitivity with initial value 0.9.
Create a number variable called maximum rate with initial value 400.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called rate history with initial value empty list.
Define a function called compute rate that performs the following operations.
    Check if desired position is less than or equal to recruitment threshold.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 0.
        Return firing rate to the calling function.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of desired position and recruitment threshold.
    Set position term to the product of that difference and position sensitivity.
    Set velocity term to the product of desired velocity and velocity sensitivity.
    Set firing rate to the sum of position term and velocity term.
    Check if firing rate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if firing rate is greater than maximum rate.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to maximum rate.
    End the conditional block.
    Return firing rate to the calling function.
End the function definition.
For each sample in the movement plan, perform the following operations.
    Call the function named compute rate.
    Add firing rate to the end of rate history.
    Display firing rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the pulse-step rule is arithmetic, and a reader with no programming background can follow it line by line.

# Extraocular motoneuron: firing rate carries eye position and eye velocity.
def motoneuron_rate(position_deg, velocity_deg_per_s,
                    threshold_deg=-10.0, k=4.0, r=0.9, max_rate=400.0):
    """Firing rate in spikes per second for one extraocular motor neuron."""
    if position_deg <= threshold_deg:
        return 0.0                      # below recruitment threshold, the cell is silent
    rate = k * (position_deg - threshold_deg) + r * velocity_deg_per_s
    if rate < 0.0:
        rate = 0.0                      # a cell cannot fire at a negative rate
    if rate > max_rate:
        rate = max_rate                 # ceiling set by the refractory period
    return rate

def saccade_then_hold(start_deg, end_deg, peak_velocity):
    """Three snapshots: old fixation, mid-saccade pulse, new fixation step."""
    midpoint = (start_deg + end_deg) / 2.0
    return [("old fixation",   motoneuron_rate(start_deg, 0.0)),
            ("saccade pulse",  motoneuron_rate(midpoint, peak_velocity)),
            ("new fixation",   motoneuron_rate(end_deg, 0.0))]

for phase, rate in saccade_then_hold(0.0, 20.0, 400.0):
    print("%-15s %6.1f spikes per second" % (phase, rate))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A very large multipolar cell sitting almost on the brainstem midline, stuffed with mitochondria, stained strongly for choline acetyltransferase, the enzyme that makes acetylcholine, with a thick fast axon that leaves the brain entirely and a motor unit so tiny that a handful of muscle fibres is its whole world.

CHAPTER 128. SPECIAL VISCERAL EFFERENT, ALSO CALLED BRANCHIAL MOTOR, NEURONS (Face-And-Throat Moving Neuron) (NON-COG)

Your smile, your voice and your swallow are all commanded by cells that descend from the machinery ancient fish used to work their gills.

The old name records an embryological filing category, the pharyngeal or branchial arches, and no student hearing it learns which muscles move.

Face-And-Throat names the actual territory, because these cells sit in the trigeminal motor nucleus, the facial motor nucleus and the nucleus ambiguus and supply the muscles of chewing, the muscles of facial expression, and the palate, pharynx and larynx across five cranial nerves.

Moving names the work plainly, since every chew, smile, swallow and spoken syllable is executed by this one small population.

Neuron marks it as the cell whose loss makes a facial palsy droop and a voice go hoarse.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A special visceral efferent (SVE) neuron, better called a branchial motor neuron, is a brainstem cell that drives a skeletal muscle derived from the embryonic pharyngeal arches, the tissue blocks that became gill supports in fish and became jaws, face, larynx and pharynx in us.

Visceral in the old name is misleading, because these muscles are fully voluntary striated muscle, not gut muscle.

They chew, blink, smile, speak, swallow, tense the eardrum and turn the head.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Large multipolar cells with 6 to 15 thick dendrites that often stay within their own subnucleus rather than spreading widely, which keeps each muscle's command pool electrically separate.

The cell body is rich in Nissl substance and has a large pale nucleus with a single prominent nucleolus.

Their axons take famously roundabout courses, the facial nerve axons looping right over the abducens nucleus before turning forward.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 25 to 55 micrometres across.

Axons are 6 to 14 micrometres in diameter with sheath, and travel 4 to 15 centimetres, the longest reaching the larynx and the sternocleidomastoid muscle of the neck.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The facial nucleus divides into at least four subnuclei, each for one facial territory, with the dorsal subnuclei driving the forehead and the lateral subnuclei driving the lower face.

The trigeminal motor nucleus has a jaw-closing division for masseter and temporalis and a jaw-opening division for digastric and mylohyoid.

The nucleus ambiguus is organised head to tail by target: pharynx first, then larynx, and it also contains a completely different cell class, cardiac vagal neurons, that is described under preganglionic parasympathetic neurons.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The trigeminal motor nucleus in the mid pons, the facial motor nucleus in the caudal pons, the nucleus ambiguus in the ventrolateral medulla, and the spinal accessory nucleus in the upper cervical spinal cord.

All sit in a column just lateral and ventral to the general somatic efferent column, having migrated away from the midline during development.

The nucleus ambiguus lies at an important interface: it is embedded in the ventrolateral medullary reticular formation, so respiratory rhythm generators and swallowing pattern generators surround its cells directly.

NUMBER:

The human facial motor nucleus contains about 10,000 neurons per side by comparative stereological counting.

Adding the trigeminal motor nucleus, nucleus ambiguus and the cranial accessory pool, a defensible total is 50,000 to 70,000 across both sides, with moderate confidence for the facial nucleus and low confidence elsewhere.

That is about one in one and a half million of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the nervous system, and about 0.03 percent of the brainstem's 200 million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 68 millivolts, threshold near minus 50 millivolts, input resistance 3 to 12 megohms.

They obey the size principle, meaning small cells with high input resistance are recruited first and large cells later as demand grows.

Sustained rates run 10 to 60 spikes per second, with brief bursts to 100 spikes per second during a swallow or a startle blink.

Laryngeal cells of the nucleus ambiguus fire in tight bursts locked to the breathing cycle.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from the reticular formation pattern generators for chewing, blinking, swallowing and vocalising, from the sensory trigeminal nuclei for reflexes, from the red nucleus and, in humans uniquely strongly, directly from the motor cortex onto lower facial and laryngeal pools.

Each cell carries several thousand synapses, roughly 60 percent inhibitory using GABA and glycine.

Outputs go exclusively to neuromuscular junctions on branchiomeric muscle.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thick and fast, conducting at 50 to 70 metres per second.

Motor unit size varies enormously: about 25 muscle fibres per neuron for the delicate muscles around the eye, and over 1,000 for the powerful masseter.

Axon collaterals within the nucleus are sparse, so there is little of the recurrent inhibition seen in the spinal cord, one reason branchial motor pools can fire so synchronously.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction, acting on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is co-stored and released with heavy use, promoting receptor clustering.

MYELINATION:

Thickly myelinated by oligodendrocytes centrally and Schwann cells peripherally.

The facial nerve is unusual in having a very long bony canal, so its myelinated axons are uniquely vulnerable to swelling, which is the basis of Bell palsy, a sudden one-sided facial paralysis.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High but not extreme, lower than extraocular motor neurons because sustained rates are lower.

Chewing muscles impose long duty cycles, so trigeminal motor neurons maintain large mitochondrial pools and depend on lactate handed over by neighbouring astrocytes during prolonged activity.

PLASTICITY:

Considerable at the periphery and modest centrally.

After facial nerve injury, surviving axons sprout and reinnervate wrong targets, producing synkinesis, in which a person blinks and the corner of the mouth twitches.

Central synaptic strength onto facial motor neurons is adjusted during motor learning of speech, and infants remodel these pools heavily during babbling.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The facial nucleus is the classic laboratory model for microglial behaviour: after axon injury, microglia proliferate within 24 hours, insert themselves between synapses and the cell body, and physically detach inputs, a process called synaptic stripping that is far more vigorous here than in most brain regions.

Astrocytes in the nucleus ambiguus are tightly coupled to local blood vessels and help match blood flow to the bursts of a swallow.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take them away and the pons and medulla become a brain that thinks and feels and can show none of it.

The face goes slack and expressionless, the jaw hangs, the voice disappears, and swallowing fails so that saliva enters the lungs.

The region loses its entire capacity for social signalling, which in humans is arguably as important as limb movement.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Dendrites of facial motor neurons bundle into shared cables that let a subnucleus behave as a coherent unit for expression.

Motor neurons in the nucleus ambiguus release nitric oxide that dilates nearby capillaries, tuning their own blood supply.

They perform local protein synthesis in dendrites during recovery from injury, and they release neuregulin at the axon surface, a signal that instructs Schwann cells how thick to build the myelin sheath.

They also express receptors for immune signals, so systemic inflammation directly changes facial motor excitability.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: descending corticobulbar drive, 0 to 100 spikes per second; central pattern generator drive from the pontomedullary reticular formation with chewing at 1 to 2 hertz and swallowing as single 0.5 second bursts; trigeminal sensory reflex input; inhibitory GABA and glycine input.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine onto 25 to 1,000 muscle fibres depending on the target muscle.

• STATE: membrane voltage; recruitment status; calcium-dependent afterhyperpolarisation; fatigue variable of the motor unit.

• PARAMETERS: recruitment threshold current 0.5 to 6.5 nanoamperes across the pool; firing gain 8 to 22 spikes per second per nanoampere; maximum sustained rate 60 to 120 spikes per second; twitch force per unit 0.4 to 8 millinewtons.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 5 to 10 milliseconds; afterhyperpolarisation 40 to 100 milliseconds; muscle twitch 20 to 40 milliseconds; tetanic fusion above about 25 spikes per second.

• FAILURE MODE: bulbar ALS destroys these pools, giving slurred speech, a weak cough and fatal aspiration; Möbius syndrome is congenital absence of facial and abducens nuclei, producing a face that cannot smile; Bell palsy is a reversible conduction block of their axons.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to recruit a pool of branchial motor neurons in size order and to convert the recruited firing into muscle force.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 3.
Create a number variable called active count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called total force with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called active rates with initial value empty list.
For each cell in the motor pool, perform the following operations.
    Check if drive is less than or equal to the threshold of cell.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of drive and the threshold of cell.
    Set cell rate to the product of that difference and the gain of cell.
    Check if cell rate is greater than 120.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set cell rate to 120.
    End the conditional block.
    Set fusion to the quotient of cell rate divided by the sum of cell rate and 25.
    Set unit force to the product of fusion and the twitch force of cell.
    Calculate the sum of total force and unit force.
    Set total force to that sum.
    Calculate the sum of active count and 1.
    Set active count to that sum.
    Add cell rate to the end of active rates.
End the loop.
Display active count to the console.
Display total force to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the size principle is best shown as a plain loop over a list of cells with different thresholds, which reads almost like the English version above.

# Facial motor pool: orderly recruitment by cell size, then rate coding to force.
pool = [{"id": i,
         "threshold_nA": 0.5 + 0.30 * i,      # bigger cell needs more drive
         "gain_hz_per_nA": 22.0 - 0.7 * i,    # bigger cell has a flatter rate curve
         "twitch_mN": 0.4 * (i + 1)}          # bigger cell pulls harder
        for i in range(20)]

def pool_output(drive_nA):
    """Return active unit count, summed firing rate and predicted muscle force."""
    active, summed_rate, force = 0, 0.0, 0.0
    for cell in pool:
        if drive_nA <= cell["threshold_nA"]:
            continue                          # not yet recruited
        rate = cell["gain_hz_per_nA"] * (drive_nA - cell["threshold_nA"])
        rate = min(rate, 120.0)               # firing ceiling
        fusion = rate / (rate + 25.0)         # twitches merge into smooth force
        active += 1
        summed_rate += rate
        force += cell["twitch_mN"] * fusion
    return active, summed_rate, force

for drive in (0.4, 1.5, 3.0, 6.0):
    n, r, f = pool_output(drive)
    print("drive %.1f nA -> %2d units, %7.1f Hz summed, %6.2f mN force"
          % (drive, n, r, f))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A large acetylcholine-making motor neuron that has migrated away from the midline into the lateral brainstem, whose axon takes a bizarre curving detour before leaving the skull, whose target muscle came from a gill arch, and whose nucleus responds to injury with the most dramatic microglial synaptic stripping anywhere in the nervous system.

CHAPTER 129. GENERAL VISCERAL EFFERENT PREGANGLIONIC PARASYMPATHETIC NEURONS (Rest-And-Digest Outflow Neuron) (NON-COG)

Between every heartbeat, a few thousand quiet cells in your medulla lean on the brake, and the reason a resting human heart beats 70 times a minute instead of 100 is that they never let go.

The old label is a committee minute of embryological categories that names no organ and no effect.

Rest-And-Digest names the branch of the autonomic nervous system these cells begin, the parasympathetic side that slows the heart, narrows the pupil, wets the mouth and pushes food along.

Outflow names the architecture and corrects the usual misconception that these neurons reach the organ themselves, because they do not, stopping short at a peripheral ganglion and handing the order on, which is exactly what preganglionic means.

Neuron marks it as one of a small and specific set, the Edinger-Westphal nucleus for pupil and lens, the superior and inferior salivatory nuclei for the tear, submandibular and parotid glands, and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, which alone supplies the heart, lungs and gut down to the transverse colon.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A general visceral efferent (GVE) preganglionic parasympathetic neuron is a brainstem cell whose axon leaves the brain and stops at a relay station called a ganglion, a small cluster of nerve cells outside the central nervous system, where a second neuron takes over and finishes the job.

Preganglionic means before that relay.

Parasympathetic means it belongs to the rest-and-digest half of the automatic nervous system.

These cells constrict the pupil, focus the lens, make tears and saliva, slow the heart, tighten the airways and drive the stomach and gut.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small to medium multipolar or fusiform cells, fusiform meaning spindle-shaped with a branch at each end.

Dendrites are long, thin and sparsely branched, and in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus they extend outward into the overlying nucleus of the solitary tract, where they collect sensory information directly.

That dendritic reach across a nuclear border is the structural signature of a reflex arc built into one cell.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 15 to 35 micrometres across, distinctly smaller than the somatic motor neurons beside them.

Axons are thin, 1.5 to 4 micrometres including sheath, and can be very long: a vagal preganglionic axon travels 30 to 40 centimetres to reach a ganglion in the wall of the stomach.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Four anatomical pools with distinct jobs.

Edinger-Westphal preganglionic neurons in the midbrain constrict the pupil and focus the lens through the ciliary ganglion.

Superior salivatory neurons in the pons make tears and submandibular saliva; inferior salivatory neurons in the medulla drive the parotid gland.

Dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus cells are the gut and airway pool, while a separate and physiologically distinct pool of cardiac vagal neurons sits in the nucleus ambiguus and produces the fast, breath-locked slowing of the heart.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Edinger-Westphal nucleus in the midbrain periaqueductal grey; superior salivatory nucleus in the caudal pons near the facial genu; inferior salivatory nucleus in the rostral medulla; dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus in the dorsal medulla in the floor of the fourth ventricle; and cardiac vagal neurons in the external formation of the nucleus ambiguus in the ventrolateral medulla.

The dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus sits at a critical interface with the nucleus of the solitary tract directly above it and the area postrema beside it, a spot where the blood-brain barrier is leaky, so circulating hormones and toxins reach these cells directly.

NUMBER:

Careful human counting gives 13,802 plus or minus 844 presumed motor neurons per side in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, within a total nuclear population of 16,826 plus or minus 967.

Adding Edinger-Westphal, both salivatory nuclei and the cardiac vagal pool, a defensible total is 40,000 to 60,000 across both sides, with high confidence for the vagal nucleus and low confidence for the others.

That is roughly one in 1.7 million of the body's neurons, and about 0.025 percent of the brainstem's 200 million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 65 millivolts and a very high input resistance of 200 to 800 megohms, meaning a tiny current makes a large voltage change.

They are slow, firing 0.5 to 15 spikes per second, and many are spontaneously active without any input at all.

A powerful A-type potassium current, an outward current that switches on when the cell depolarises and then slowly fades, delays the first spike and caps the maximum rate, which is why vagal output is inherently unhurried.

Cardiac vagal neurons in the nucleus ambiguus are the exception: they fire in sharp bursts and are silenced during each inspiration, which is the origin of respiratory sinus arrhythmia, the normal speeding of the heart on breathing in.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from the nucleus of the solitary tract carrying gut, lung, blood pressure and taste information, from the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus carrying stress and hunger state, from the central nucleus of the amygdala carrying emotion, and from respiratory neurons carrying the breathing rhythm.

Outputs are cholinergic synapses onto postganglionic neurons in the ciliary, pterygopalatine, submandibular and otic ganglia, and onto the thousands of small ganglia embedded in the walls of the heart, airways and gut.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin and slow, conducting at 3 to 15 metres per second, so a vagal command takes 30 to 100 milliseconds to reach the heart.

Each preganglionic axon branches to contact many postganglionic cells, a divergence of roughly 1 to 8 for precise pupil control but far higher for the gut.

Cardiac vagal axons are the faster subgroup, which is what allows beat-to-beat heart rate control.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine onto nicotinic acetylcholine receptors on the postganglionic cell.

Nitric oxide is co-released by many vagal preganglionic neurons and diffuses to modulate neighbours.

Peptides including vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) are co-released during strong activity and prolong the effect for seconds.

MYELINATION:

Thinly myelinated, classified as B fibres, with sheaths only two to eight wraps thick.

This is the reason the vagus is preferentially recruited at low stimulation currents in clinical vagus nerve stimulation, and the reason vagal conduction is slow.

Some gut-projecting axons lose their sheath entirely before reaching their ganglion.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low by neuronal standards because firing rates are low, but the axon is extremely long, so the cost of axonal transport, the conveyor system that carries proteins along the fibre, dominates the budget.

These cells are unusually dependent on mitochondrial health along the axon, and are among the first neurons to accumulate damage in Parkinson disease.

PLASTICITY:

Substantial and clinically important.

Baroreflex gain, the strength of the heart-slowing response to a rise in blood pressure, is reset over days by exercise training and over hours by illness.

Chronic vagus nerve stimulation for epilepsy and depression produces lasting changes in synaptic strength onto these cells.

Their peripheral targets remodel too: after gut inflammation, the number of contacts onto enteric ganglia changes measurably.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus are specialised glucose sensors, releasing lactate that directly changes vagal firing and thereby links blood sugar to gut motility, a job astrocytes elsewhere do not perform.

Because the neighbouring area postrema lacks a normal blood-brain barrier, microglia here are chronically primed and respond to circulating inflammatory signals faster than microglia in protected regions.

Around the axons in the neck, Schwann cells face constant mechanical strain from swallowing and pulsation and maintain unusually elastic sheaths.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the dorsal medulla becomes a listening post with no voice.

The nucleus of the solitary tract would still receive every signal from heart, lung and gut, and nothing could be done about any of it.

The pupil would sit wide and fixed, the mouth would go dry, the heart would race at its intrinsic pacemaker rate of about 100 beats per minute, and the stomach would stop emptying.

The medulla would lose its entire calming, restorative flavour.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Dendrites reach across into the solitary nucleus and receive sensory input directly, so a reflex can complete without an interneuron.

Nitric oxide released from these cells acts as a retrograde messenger, travelling backwards to change how strongly the solitary nucleus speaks to them.

They release peptides from the cell body and dendrites, not only from axon terminals, producing slow volume transmission through the local tissue.

They are targets for circulating hormones including leptin, insulin, ghrelin and glucagon-like peptide-1, so this is one of the few places where the bloodstream talks directly to a motor neuron.

Alpha-synuclein aggregates, the protein clumps of Parkinson disease, appear here earlier than almost anywhere else in the brain.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: excitatory glutamate from the nucleus of the solitary tract, 0 to 30 spikes per second; inhibitory GABA from local medullary interneurons, gated by the respiratory cycle; hormonal input including glucose 3 to 8 millimoles per litre, leptin, and cholecystokinin.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine onto postganglionic neurons of the ciliary, pterygopalatine, submandibular, otic, cardiac and enteric ganglia, at 0.5 to 15 spikes per second.

• STATE: membrane voltage; A-type potassium inactivation; calcium concentration; peptide vesicle pool; slow respiratory gate phase.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 200 to 800 megohms; A-current conductance 40 to 80 nanosiemens; spike threshold minus 45 millivolts; conduction velocity 3 to 15 metres per second; divergence ratio 1 to 8 or more.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 25 to 40 milliseconds; A-current recovery 100 to 200 milliseconds; respiratory gate 3 to 5 seconds per cycle; peptide action 5 to 60 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: early alpha-synuclein pathology here causes the constipation and gastroparesis that precede Parkinson disease motor symptoms by a decade; loss of cardiac vagal tone flattens heart rate variability and predicts cardiac death; damage to the Edinger-Westphal pathway gives a fixed dilated pupil, a warning sign of brain herniation.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to produce the slow, breath-gated output of a preganglionic parasympathetic neuron whose first spike is delayed by an A-type potassium current.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called a current availability with initial value 0.3.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.3.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 8000, repeat the following steps.
    Set breathing phase to the respiratory gate value at step.
    Set gated drive to the product of drive and breathing phase.
    Set potassium brake to the product of a current availability and the difference of membrane voltage and -90.
    Set leak to the product of 0.01 and the difference of membrane voltage and -65.
    Calculate the difference of gated drive and the sum of leak and potassium brake.
    Set voltage change to the quotient of that difference divided by 0.30.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and voltage change.
    Set membrane voltage to that sum.
    Set target availability to the availability value for membrane voltage.
    Calculate the difference of target availability and a current availability.
    Set recovery to the quotient of that difference divided by 150.
    Calculate the sum of a current availability and recovery.
    Set a current availability to that sum.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -45.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add step to the end of spike times.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to that sum.
        Set membrane voltage to -70.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of step and 1.
    Set step to that sum.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the A-current delay only makes sense when you watch voltage evolve step by step, and Python's readable loop makes each millisecond of that evolution visible.

import math

DT_MS = 1.0                                    # one millisecond per step
C, G_LEAK, E_LEAK = 0.30, 0.010, -65.0         # nanofarad, microsiemens, millivolts
G_A, E_K, TAU_H = 0.060, -90.0, 150.0          # A-current strength, reversal, recovery
V_TH, V_RESET = -45.0, -70.0

def a_inf(v):                                  # A-current activation, tiny at rest
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(v + 40.0) / 6.0))

def h_inf(v):                                  # A-current availability, high when hyperpolarised
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 70.0) / 6.0))

def simulate(ms=8000, drive_nA=0.30, resp_hz=0.25, gate_depth=0.8):
    """Vagal preganglionic cell: A-current delays spikes, breathing gates them."""
    v, h, spikes = E_LEAK, h_inf(E_LEAK), []
    for step in range(ms):
        t_s = step * DT_MS / 1000.0
        gate = 1.0 - gate_depth * max(0.0, math.sin(2.0 * math.pi * resp_hz * t_s))
        i_syn = drive_nA * gate                # inspiration silences the cell
        i_a = G_A * a_inf(v) * h * (v - E_K)   # the potassium brake
        v += DT_MS * (-G_LEAK * (v - E_LEAK) - i_a + i_syn) / C
        h += DT_MS * (h_inf(v) - h) / TAU_H    # brake re-arms only slowly
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes.append(step)
            v = V_RESET
    return spikes

sp = simulate()
gaps = [b - a for a, b in zip(sp, sp[1:])]
print("spikes in 8 s: %d, mean rate %.2f Hz" % (len(sp), len(sp) / 8.0))
print("longest silent gap: %d ms (the inspiratory pause)" % (max(gaps) if gaps else 0))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small, slow, thinly myelinated acetylcholine-making cell in the dorsal medulla or midbrain that never talks to a muscle directly but always hands off to a ganglion, whose dendrites poke into the sensory nucleus next door, whose firing pauses every time you breathe in, and which is one of the very first neurons in the entire brain to accumulate the protein clumps of Parkinson disease.

CHAPTER 130. SENSORY RELAY NEURONS OF THE TRIGEMINAL, SOLITARY, COCHLEAR, AND VESTIBULAR NUCLEI (First-Stop Sense-Sorting Neuron) (COG)

You can tell which ear a whisper came from because a cell in your brainstem can measure a time difference of ten millionths of a second, which is shorter than a single one of its own spikes.

The existing label is a list of four addresses that no one could speak aloud, yet the four share one job.

First-Stop names the position in the chain, since these are second-order cells, the first place inside the brain where a signal from the face, the tongue and gut, the ear or the balance organ is put down after leaving its ganglion.

Sense-Sorting names the work, because these nuclei do not merely pass signals on but split each stream into parallel channels before sending it upward, so touch on the face goes to the thalamus while pain and temperature branch also to the parabrachial nucleus for the emotional side of the message.

Neuron marks it as a second-order sensory cell, and naming it by function rather than by four Latin nuclei lets a student see the common plan.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are the brainstem's second-order sensory cells, the first cells inside the brain to receive news from the face, the tongue, the inner organs, the ear and the balance organs.

Second-order means the message has already passed through exactly one cell, the sensory nerve fibre coming in from the body.

They are marked cognitive here because they do not merely pass the message along: they sharpen it, compare it across two ears, subtract predictable self-generated signals, and decide what deserves to reach consciousness.

Every conscious sensation from the head, and every reflex that keeps your gaze steady while you walk, begins in this population.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Morphology is deliberately diverse because each computation needs a different shape.

Spherical bushy cells of the cochlear nucleus have one or two short, densely tufted dendrites and a round soma engulfed by a giant synapse.

Octopus cells have all their dendrites projecting from one side of the cell like tentacles, sweeping across the incoming nerve fibres in frequency order.

Vestibular nucleus cells are large multipolar neurons with wide dendritic fields, and solitary nucleus cells are small fusiform or ovoid cells packed tightly around the incoming sensory tract.

SIZE:

Soma diameters span 10 to 60 micrometres.

Solitary nucleus cells are the smallest at 10 to 20 micrometres; bushy cells are 20 to 25 micrometres; octopus cells reach 30 micrometres; and the giant Deiters cells of the lateral vestibular nucleus reach 60 micrometres, among the largest neurons in the brain.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The cochlear nucleus alone contains spherical bushy cells for sound timing, globular bushy cells for sound level comparison, octopus cells for detecting onsets, T-stellate cells for coding sound level over time, D-stellate cells for inhibition across frequencies, and fusiform cells of the dorsal cochlear nucleus for detecting where a sound is in the vertical plane.

The vestibular complex has four nuclei: superior, lateral, medial and inferior.

The trigeminal sensory complex has the principal nucleus for touch and the spinal nucleus in three parts, with the caudal part being effectively the dorsal horn of the face and handling pain and temperature.

The solitary nucleus has a rostral gustatory portion for taste and a caudal portion for heart, lung and gut.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Trigeminal principal nucleus in the mid pons; trigeminal spinal nucleus running from pons to the second cervical spinal segment in three subnuclei called oralis, interpolaris and caudalis; nucleus of the solitary tract in the dorsal medulla; cochlear nuclei on the lateral surface of the pontomedullary junction in dorsal and ventral divisions; vestibular nuclei in the floor of the fourth ventricle spanning pons and medulla.

Two interfaces matter greatly.

The trigeminal nucleus caudalis merges seamlessly into the spinal cord dorsal horn, so face pain and body pain are processed by one continuous sheet.

The nucleus of the solitary tract abuts the area postrema, where the blood-brain barrier is absent, letting circulating nausea-inducing chemicals meet sensory processing directly.

NUMBER:

The human ventral cochlear nucleus and its dorsal partner together hold on the order of 100,000 neurons per side.

The medial vestibular nucleus alone averaged 122,241 neurons in a morphometric study of younger adults, falling to about 75,959 by age 89, roughly a 3 percent loss per decade after forty.

Summing all four sensory families across both sides gives a defensible total of 1.5 to 2.5 million neurons, which is confident to within about a factor of two and represents roughly 1 percent of the brainstem's 200 million neurons and about 0.002 percent of the nervous system's 86 billion.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Extremely varied, and that variety is the point.

Bushy cells have a huge low-threshold potassium conductance that makes the membrane leak the moment it depolarises, giving a membrane time constant under 1 millisecond and forcing the cell to act as a coincidence detector rather than an adder.

Octopus cells are the most extreme neurons known in this respect, with input resistances under 5 megohms and time constants near 200 microseconds.

Medial vestibular neurons are spontaneous pacemakers firing 20 to 100 spikes per second at rest, so they can signal head rotation in both directions by speeding up or slowing down.

Solitary nucleus cells show delayed-onset firing from an A-type potassium current, matching the slow timescale of blood pressure and gut signals.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are the primary sensory fibres, and some of these are the largest synapses in the brain: the endbulb of Held wraps almost entirely around a spherical bushy cell and can drive it to threshold with a single release event.

Octopus cells take small inputs from more than 60 auditory nerve fibres spanning many frequencies.

Outputs go to the superior olivary complex and inferior colliculus for hearing, to the oculomotor nuclei and spinal cord for balance, to the thalamus for conscious touch and taste, and to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus for autonomic reflexes.

Descending feedback from cortex and from the cerebellum is heavy and continuous.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thick and very fast for the timing pathways, 4 to 8 micrometres and 40 to 70 metres per second for bushy and octopus cells, with axon lengths tuned so that signals from both ears arrive at the comparison point at matched times.

Vestibulospinal axons run the length of the spinal cord.

Trigeminothalamic axons cross the midline and ascend 8 to 10 centimetres.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Most are glutamatergic, using glutamate, the brain's main excitatory messenger, released onto AMPA receptors that in the timing pathways are built from unusually fast subunits so the synaptic current is over in under a millisecond.

A large minority are inhibitory, using glycine in the cochlear and vestibular nuclei and GABA in the solitary and trigeminal nuclei.

A distinct catecholaminergic group in the solitary nucleus, the A2 cell group, makes noradrenaline and co-releases glutamate.

Substance P and CGRP mark the pain-carrying inputs to trigeminal nucleus caudalis.

MYELINATION:

Their axons are among the most heavily myelinated in the brain, with unusually short internodes in the auditory timing pathway that make conduction speed precisely tunable.

Oligodendrocytes in the auditory brainstem adjust myelin thickness in response to sound experience during development, a rare case of glia being tuned by the environment to preserve microsecond accuracy.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Among the highest in the entire nervous system.

Auditory brainstem tissue has the highest cytochrome oxidase activity, a marker of oxygen-based energy production, of any region measured, because these cells fire continuously at high rates for a lifetime.

Vestibular pacemakers never rest, so their sodium-potassium pumps run permanently.

PLASTICITY:

Vestibular compensation is the most striking example in clinical neurology: after one balance organ is destroyed, the vestibular nuclei rebalance their resting firing over days to weeks and vertigo resolves even though the organ never recovers.

The dorsal cochlear nucleus behaves like a small cerebellum, with long-term potentiation and depression at its parallel fibre synapses, learning to subtract the sounds your own chewing and head movements produce.

Trigeminal caudalis undergoes central sensitisation, a lasting increase in gain, which underlies chronic facial pain and migraine.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in the auditory brainstem clear glutamate faster than anywhere else measured, which is essential because slow clearance would blur microsecond timing.

Specialised astrocytes form glial caps around the giant endbulb synapses, physically confining released transmitter.

In the nucleus of the solitary tract, loss of astrocytes alone abolishes normal responses to glutamate and disrupts blood pressure control, showing these glia are part of the circuit rather than merely supporting it.

Microglia in trigeminal caudalis become activated after nerve injury and release signals that sustain chronic facial pain.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Strip them out and the lateral brainstem stops being a sense organ for the head.

Sound would reach the ear and go nowhere, so the person would be deaf despite a perfect cochlea.

The head could rotate without the eyes compensating, so vision would smear with every step.

The face would be numb, taste would vanish, blood pressure would swing wildly, and the reflexive gag and cough that protect the airway would disappear.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Octopus cells perform an analogue computation with their dendrites, using the physical time it takes signals to travel along a dendrite to compensate for the delay of the travelling wave in the cochlea.

Bushy cells are electrically coupled to each other by gap junctions, so a network of them fires more coherently than any one alone.

Ephaptic effects are documented in the auditory brainstem, where the electrical field of one large synapse influences its neighbour without any synapse at all.

Solitary nucleus neurons control local blood flow through nitric oxide and sense glucose and hormones directly.

Vestibular neurons undergo intrinsic plasticity, changing their own ion channel gene transcription within hours after a balance lesion.

Dorsal cochlear nucleus fusiform cells receive volume-transmitted serotonin that shifts their gain with arousal.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: primary afferent spike trains, cochlear 0 to 400 spikes per second with phase locking up to about 4 kilohertz; vestibular 90 spikes per second at rest, plus or minus 300 for head rotation; trigeminal 0 to 200 spikes per second; solitary tract afferents 0 to 50 spikes per second.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate or glycine or GABA onto superior olive, inferior colliculus, thalamic ventral posteromedial nucleus, oculomotor nuclei, spinal cord, and dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus.

• STATE: membrane voltage; low-threshold potassium activation; synaptic depression level at the endbulb; adaptation variable; for vestibular cells, the resting pacemaker set point.

• PARAMETERS: bushy cell membrane time constant 0.3 to 1.0 milliseconds; input resistance 5 to 60 megohms; endbulb synaptic strength 5 to 20 millivolts per event; coincidence window 100 to 500 microseconds; vestibular resting rate 20 to 100 spikes per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: synaptic current decay 0.2 to 1 millisecond in auditory cells, 5 to 20 milliseconds elsewhere; synaptic depression recovery 20 to 200 milliseconds; vestibular adaptation 5 to 20 seconds; central sensitisation hours to months.

• FAILURE MODE: auditory neuropathy destroys timing and makes speech unintelligible in noise despite a normal audiogram; vestibular nucleus damage causes intractable vertigo and nystagmus; trigeminal caudalis sensitisation produces trigeminal neuralgia and migraine allodynia, in which even a light touch on the face hurts; solitary nucleus failure produces baroreflex failure with dangerous blood pressure swings.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make a bushy cell fire only when several auditory nerve inputs arrive within a few hundred microseconds of each other.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called synaptic drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called refractory steps with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 500, repeat the following steps.
    Set arrivals to the number of inputs landing at step.
    Set added drive to the product of arrivals and 12.
    Calculate the sum of synaptic drive and added drive.
    Set synaptic drive to that sum.
    Set decay to the product of synaptic drive and 0.1.
    Calculate the difference of synaptic drive and decay.
    Set synaptic drive to that difference.
    Check if refractory steps is greater than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of refractory steps and 1.
        Set refractory steps to that difference.
        Set membrane voltage to -65.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of membrane voltage and -65.
    Set depolarisation to that difference.
    Set potassium leak to the product of depolarisation and 0.09.
    Calculate the difference of synaptic drive and the sum of depolarisation and potassium leak.
    Set voltage change to the product of that difference and 0.0667.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and voltage change.
    Set membrane voltage to that sum.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -50.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add step to the end of spike times.
        Set membrane voltage to -65.
        Set synaptic drive to 0.
        Set refractory steps to 40.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of step and 1.
    Set step to that sum.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in spike times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole point is a side-by-side comparison of two input patterns, and Python lets that comparison sit in two readable lines at the end.

# Spherical bushy cell: a coincidence detector, not an integrator.
# A low-threshold potassium current makes the membrane leak as soon as it
# depolarises, so only near-simultaneous endbulb inputs can reach threshold.
DT = 0.02            # 20 microsecond steps: microsecond timing must be resolved
TAU_SYN = 0.25       # endbulb synaptic decay in milliseconds: extremely fast
TAU_FAST = 0.30      # membrane time constant in milliseconds
V_REST, V_TH = -65.0, -50.0
G_KLT = 0.30         # low-threshold potassium strength

def run(input_times_ms, duration_ms=10.0, weight_mV=20.0):
    """Return the times of any spikes produced by this pattern of inputs."""
    arrivals = {}
    for ti in input_times_ms:
        k = int(round(ti / DT))
        arrivals[k] = arrivals.get(k, 0) + 1
    v, g, spikes, refractory = V_REST, 0.0, [], 0
    for k in range(int(duration_ms / DT)):
        g += weight_mV * arrivals.get(k, 0)      # endbulb current arrives
        g -= g * DT / TAU_SYN                    # and vanishes almost at once
        if refractory > 0:
            refractory -= 1
            v = V_REST
            continue
        depol = v - V_REST
        klt = G_KLT * max(0.0, depol) / 5.0      # potassium opens as voltage rises
        v += DT * (-depol * (1.0 + klt) + g) / TAU_FAST
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes.append(round(k * DT, 2))
            v, g, refractory = V_REST, 0.0, int(0.8 / DT)
    return spikes

print("four endbulbs within 150 microseconds ->", run([2.0, 2.05, 2.1, 2.15]))
print("the same four spread over 3 ms       ->", run([2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0]))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A second-order sensory cell sitting in the lateral brainstem, wearing either the largest synapse in the brain wrapped around its cell body or a one-sided fan of tentacle dendrites, burning more oxygen than almost any other neuron, firing continuously from before birth until death, and built so leaky that it can only respond to events that happen at the same instant.

CHAPTER 131. MESENCEPHALIC TRIGEMINAL NUCLEUS NEURONS (Brain-Resident Jaw-Stretch Neuron) (NON-COG)

There is exactly one place in the entire human brain where a sensory cell from the body has taken up residence inside the central nervous system instead of outside it, and it is a thin string of cells that tells you how hard you are biting.

The old name is pure address, giving the midbrain location and the nerve number and nothing else.

Brain-Resident records the single most remarkable fact about this cell and the reason it is famous, that it is a primary sensory neuron whose cell body sits inside the central nervous system instead of in a ganglion outside it, the only example of that architecture in the human brain.

Jaw-Stretch names what it senses, since it carries the primary afferents from the muscle spindles of the jaw-closing muscles, the masseter, temporalis and medial pterygoid, plus mechanoreceptors of the periodontal ligament around the tooth roots.

Neuron marks it as the cell whose central branch synapses directly on the trigeminal motor nucleus, forming the one-synapse arc of the jaw-jerk reflex.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus neuron, usually shortened to Mes V neuron, is a first-order sensory cell, meaning its own peripheral fibre is the one that touches the sense organ, with no cell in between.

Every other first-order sensory cell in your body sits outside the brain in a ganglion.

These cells sit inside the midbrain, a developmental oddity produced when their precursors failed to migrate out.

They report muscle stretch from the jaw-closing muscles and biting pressure from receptors around the roots of the teeth, and they drive the jaw jerk reflex and stop you from crushing your own teeth.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is a smooth sphere or oval with a very large pale nucleus and one strikingly prominent nucleolus.

It is pseudounipolar, meaning a single stalk leaves the cell and immediately forks in two: one branch runs out to the jaw muscle or tooth socket, the other runs down into the brainstem.

The cell body is therefore not on the signal path at all; it hangs off the side of the wire like a bulb on a string.

Cell bodies frequently touch one another directly, soma to soma, forming clusters.

SIZE:

Soma diameters are 30 to 70 micrometres, making them among the largest cell bodies in the brainstem and easily visible in a routine histological section.

The peripheral branch is 8 to 12 micrometres thick and runs 8 to 12 centimetres to the jaw muscles.

The nucleus itself is a thin column: in the rat it stretches about 4.5 millimetres, and in the human it runs the length of the midbrain into the upper pons.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two functional populations share one anatomy.

Muscle spindle afferents supply the stretch receptors inside masseter, temporalis and medial pterygoid, and dominate numerically.

Periodontal mechanoreceptor afferents supply pressure receptors in the ligament that slings each tooth in its socket, and these are the cells that let you feel a grain of sand between your teeth.

A small third group sends collateral branches to both the eyelid-lifting muscle and the masseter, which is thought to explain Marcus Gunn jaw-winking syndrome, in which chewing makes the eyelid rise.

WHERE IT LIVES:

A narrow column at the lateral edge of the periaqueductal grey in the midbrain, running alongside the cerebral aqueduct from the level of the superior colliculus down to the level of the trigeminal motor nucleus in the pons.

It sits at a genuine and unique interface: the boundary between peripheral sensory identity and central nervous system location.

Its lower end lies immediately adjacent to the locus coeruleus, so noradrenaline released there reaches these cells by diffusion.

Its axon terminals reach the trigeminal motor nucleus, the reticular formation, the hypoglossal nucleus and the cerebellum.

NUMBER:

Rat counts give 1,000 to 1,600 cells per side over a 4.5 millimetre column.

Scaling by brainstem size and column length, a defensible human estimate is 2,000 to 4,000 per side, or 4,000 to 8,000 in total, and confidence is low because no modern unbiased human count has been published.

That is about one in fifteen million of the nervous system's neurons and roughly 0.003 percent of the brainstem's 200 million, making this one of the smallest named neuron populations in the human brain.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 60 millivolts.

A persistent sodium current, an inward current that does not switch itself off, works against a slowly activating D-type potassium current to produce subthreshold membrane oscillations at 20 to 100 hertz, meaning the voltage ripples rhythmically without spiking.

Spikes ride on the peaks of these ripples, so the cell naturally fires in bursts locked to the oscillation, which matches the rhythm of chewing.

They also carry a resurgent sodium current that lets them fire at very high rates without inactivating.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Chemical synapses onto the cell body are essentially absent, which is extraordinary: the classic description is that the mesencephalic nucleus contains no chemical synapses on its somata.

Instead the cell bodies are joined to each other by gap junctions, direct protein tunnels that pass electrical current, so the population is electrically coupled into a network.

Output is a conventional excitatory synapse onto trigeminal motor neurons, forming a two-neuron reflex arc, the shortest reflex loop in the head.

There is also a modulatory input from the locus coeruleus delivered not through synapses but by diffusion.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Large and extremely fast, conducting at 60 to 80 metres per second, which is what makes the jaw jerk one of the shortest-latency reflexes measurable in a clinic.

The central branch descends as the mesencephalic tract and gives collaterals to several targets along the way.

The peripheral branch leaves through the motor root of the trigeminal nerve rather than the sensory root, an anatomical trap for medical students.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the transmitter at the central terminals.

These cells are also unusual in expressing high levels of the calcium-binding proteins parvalbumin and calretinin.

They carry alpha-2 adrenergic receptors that respond to noradrenaline arriving by diffusion from the neighbouring locus coeruleus.

MYELINATION:

Both branches are heavily myelinated.

The central branch is wrapped by oligodendrocytes and the peripheral branch by Schwann cells, and the transition happens unusually far into the brain because the cell body itself is central.

The cell body is left bare of myelin, which is what allows the soma-to-soma gap junctions to work.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High during chewing and low otherwise, giving one of the most sharply duty-cycled energy profiles in the brainstem.

The persistent sodium current imposes a constant background sodium load even at rest, so the sodium-potassium pump runs continuously.

PLASTICITY:

Limited synaptic plasticity, because there are almost no chemical synapses onto them.

Instead they show intrinsic plasticity: gap junction strength and the size of the persistent sodium current change during development and after tooth loss.

Losing teeth removes the periodontal input permanently, and the reflex map does not fully recover, which is part of why chewing changes after dental extraction.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes here are specialised in a way seen nowhere else in the brain: they wrap individual cell bodies in near-complete sheaths that isolate them from ordinary synaptic contact while leaving small windows where somata meet each other at gap junctions.

Astrocytes also actively shape the noradrenaline volume signal arriving from the locus coeruleus, taking up the transmitter and setting how far it spreads.

Microglia are sparse and quiet here in health.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the midbrain loses its only direct physical contact with the outside world.

The jaw jerk reflex disappears entirely, so the jaw no longer protects itself and biting force becomes unregulated.

You would lose the exquisite sense of how hard your teeth are pressing, so eating would become clumsy and self-injury common.

The periaqueductal grey region would keep all its emotional and pain-modulating functions and lose its one strand of raw mechanical truth about the jaw.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Almost everything about these cells is beyond integrate and fire.

They generate subthreshold oscillations intrinsically, so the cell has its own rhythm before any input arrives.

They are electrically coupled through gap junctions, so a group of them synchronises and behaves as one oscillator, and the D-type potassium current sets how tightly they lock together.

They receive noradrenaline by volume transmission from the locus coeruleus, meaning the chemical simply diffuses through the tissue rather than crossing a synapse.

They release glutamate from the cell body and from the tract, not only from axon terminals, and this somatic release is thought to signal to neighbouring astrocytes.

Their soma-to-soma contacts also permit ephaptic interaction, in which the electrical field of one cell nudges the next without any junction at all.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: jaw muscle spindle stretch, encoded 0 to 200 spikes per second over 0 to 20 millimetres of muscle length change; periodontal pressure, 0 to 150 spikes per second over 0 to 20 newtons of bite force; electrical current through gap junctions from coupled neighbours; diffused noradrenaline, 10 nanomolar to 1 micromolar.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto trigeminal motor neurons, hypoglossal motor neurons, the parvocellular reticular formation and the cerebellum.

• STATE: membrane voltage; persistent sodium activation; D-type potassium activation; oscillation phase; coupling current from each neighbour.

• PARAMETERS: persistent sodium conductance 0.2 to 0.35 millisiemens per square centimetre; D-type potassium conductance 0.4 to 0.8; gap junction conductance 0.03 to 0.1; oscillation frequency 20 to 100 hertz; conduction velocity 60 to 80 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 8 to 12 milliseconds; D-type potassium activation 10 to 15 milliseconds; oscillation period 10 to 50 milliseconds; jaw jerk reflex loop latency 6 to 8 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis a brisk jaw jerk is an early clinical sign that the descending control of this loop has failed; loss of periodontal input after full dental extraction permanently degrades bite force control; abnormal coupling in this nucleus is implicated in sleep bruxism, the involuntary night-time grinding of teeth.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make two electrically coupled mesencephalic trigeminal neurons oscillate and then lock into the same rhythm.
Create a number variable called voltage one with initial value -64.
Create a number variable called voltage two with initial value -50.
Create a number variable called potassium one with initial value 0.02.
Create a number variable called potassium two with initial value 0.99.
Create a number variable called coupling with initial value 0.5.
Create a number variable called stretch drive with initial value 5.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called phase difference history with initial value empty list.
While step is less than 40000, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the difference of voltage two and voltage one.
    Set coupling current to the product of coupling and that difference.
    Define a function called advance one cell that performs the following operations.
        Set sodium activation to the persistent sodium curve value for this voltage.
        Set sodium current to the product of 20 and the product of sodium activation and the difference of this voltage and 60.
        Set potassium current to the product of 10 and the product of this potassium and the difference of this voltage and -90.
        Set leak current to the product of 8 and the difference of this voltage and -80.
        Calculate the sum of stretch drive and this coupling current.
        Set net current to the difference of that sum and the sum of sodium current and the sum of potassium current and leak current.
        Set voltage change to the product of net current and 0.01.
        Calculate the sum of this voltage and voltage change.
        Return that sum to the calling function.
    End the function definition.
    Call the function named advance one cell.
    Set voltage one to the returned value.
    Call the function named advance one cell.
    Set voltage two to the returned value.
    Calculate the difference of voltage one and voltage two.
    Add that difference to the end of phase difference history.
    Calculate the sum of step and 1.
    Set step to that sum.
End the loop.
Display the last item in phase difference history to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the two coupled cells must be stepped forward together in lockstep, and a shared derivative function makes it obvious that both obey identical rules and differ only in their starting voltage.

# Two mesencephalic trigeminal somata joined by a gap junction. The persistent
# sodium current makes each one oscillate on its own; the junction then drags
# the pair into step. Conductances are in the normalised units of the standard
# persistent-sodium-plus-potassium model, not in millisiemens per square centimetre.
import math

DT = 0.01                                  # milliseconds per step
C, G_L, E_L = 1.0, 8.0, -80.0              # capacitance, leak, leak reversal
G_NA, E_NA = 20.0, 60.0                    # persistent sodium: never switches off
G_K, E_K, TAU_N = 10.0, -90.0, 1.0         # the potassium brake and its lag
G_GAP = 0.5                                # gap junction between the two somata

def m_inf(v):                              # sodium activation, effectively instant
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((-20.0 - v) / 15.0))

def n_inf(v):                              # potassium activation, delayed
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((-25.0 - v) / 5.0))

def derivative(v, n, i_ext, i_gap):
    """Rate of change of voltage for one Mes V soma, in millivolts per millisecond."""
    i_na = G_NA * m_inf(v) * (v - E_NA)
    i_k = G_K * n * (v - E_K)
    return (-G_L * (v - E_L) - i_na - i_k + i_ext + i_gap) / C

def run(ms=400.0, stretch=5.0):
    v1, v2 = -64.0, -50.0                  # start deliberately out of phase
    n1, n2 = n_inf(v1), n_inf(v2)
    crests, previous = 0, v1
    for _ in range(int(ms / DT)):
        gap = G_GAP * (v2 - v1)            # current flows from cell two into cell one
        new_v1 = v1 + DT * derivative(v1, n1, stretch, gap)
        new_v2 = v2 + DT * derivative(v2, n2, stretch, -gap)
        n1 += DT * (n_inf(v1) - n1) / TAU_N
        n2 += DT * (n_inf(v2) - n2) / TAU_N
        if v1 > previous and v1 > new_v1:
            crests += 1                    # count oscillation crests in cell one
        previous, v1, v2 = v1, new_v1, new_v2
    return crests, abs(v1 - v2)

crests, mismatch = run()
print("voltage crests in 400 ms: %d (about %.0f Hz)" % (crests, crests / 0.4))
print("voltage gap between the coupled pair at the end: %.4f mV" % mismatch)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A very large round pale-nucleated cell sitting inside the midbrain that has no business being there, carrying no chemical synapses on its body, joined to its neighbours by direct electrical tunnels, wrapped in a private astrocyte jacket, oscillating at chewing rhythm all by itself, and belonging by every developmental measure to the peripheral nervous system it left behind.

CHAPTER 132. LOCUS COERULEUS NEURONS (Brain-Wide Alerting Neuron) (COG)

A patch of tissue the size of a grain of rice, visibly blue to the naked eye in a fresh brain, sends fibres to almost every corner of the nervous system, and when it fires you snap awake.

Locus coeruleus is Latin for blue spot, a description of pigment seen at autopsy, and it teaches nothing about function.

Brain-Wide names the astonishing reach of this cell, since a nucleus of only some tens of thousands of neurons per side sends fibres to nearly the whole neuraxis, from spinal cord to cortex to cerebellum, so a handful of cells can change the state of the entire brain at once.

Alerting names the work, because these are the brain's main source of noradrenaline and their firing rises with arousal, novelty and stress, falls in slow-wave sleep, and goes essentially silent during rapid eye movement sleep.

Neuron marks it as a cell that does not carry a message about the world but sets how strongly every other message is heard.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Locus coeruleus is Latin for blue spot, and the colour comes from neuromelanin, a dark pigment that these cells accumulate over a lifetime as a by-product of making their transmitter.

Locus coeruleus neurons are the brain's near-exclusive source of noradrenaline, also called norepinephrine, a chemical messenger that sets arousal, alertness, attention and the response to anything surprising.

They are marked cognitive because their firing pattern does not report a sensation or drive a muscle; it decides how much of the brain's processing capacity is switched on and where it points.

They wake you, they focus you, they consolidate memories, and they decide when to abandon a strategy that is not working.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Medium-sized fusiform or multipolar cells packed densely into a compact cluster with almost no glial partitioning between them.

Three to seven dendrites extend well beyond the borders of the nucleus into a surrounding shell called the pericoerulear zone, where they gather inputs the cell bodies never see.

The cytoplasm is loaded with coarse brown neuromelanin granules, which makes the nucleus visible without any stain at all.

Dendrites of neighbouring cells bundle together, which is central to how the nucleus behaves as a unit.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 20 to 45 micrometres across.

The nucleus itself is tiny: about 12 to 17 millimetres long, 2.5 millimetres wide and 2.0 millimetres high in the human.

The axonal tree is the opposite of tiny: a single locus coeruleus neuron can support an axonal arbour with a total length estimated in metres, branching to reach cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, thalamus and spinal cord.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Not a uniform pool.

A dorsal compact core projects mainly to forebrain and cortex, while a ventral group projects to spinal cord, cerebellum and brainstem.

Recent work shows individual cells are far more target-specific than the old picture of one cell broadcasting everywhere, with modules that project to prefrontal cortex behaving differently from modules projecting to amygdala.

A distinct subset co-expresses galanin heavily, and another subset projects almost exclusively to the spinal dorsal horn to suppress pain.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The dorsal pons, in the floor of the fourth ventricle at the lateral edge of the periaqueductal grey, just beneath the ependymal lining, extending from the level of the inferior colliculus down towards the mid pons.

It sits at several interfaces at once.

It is immediately adjacent to the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus, so the two exchange signals by diffusion.

Its dendrites extend into the pericoerulear shell, which is technically outside the nucleus and is where most inhibitory control arrives.

And it lies against the ventricle wall, so its transmitter can reach the cerebrospinal fluid directly.

NUMBER:

Counts of pigmented neurons in adult human males give 22,000 to 51,000 in total across both sides, with the most commonly cited figure being about 45,000 to 50,000 for both hemispheres combined.

Confidence is good because neuromelanin makes these cells unusually easy to count, though pigment loss in disease biases counts downward.

That is the entire locus coeruleus allocation of the brainstem's 200 million neurons, about 0.025 percent of the brainstem, and roughly one in 1.7 million of the nervous system's 86 billion neurons.

It is one of the highest ratios of influence to headcount anywhere in biology: one locus coeruleus neuron for every few hundred thousand cortical neurons it can reach.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Slow autonomous pacemakers, firing 1 to 3 spikes per second at rest without any input, driven by a persistent sodium current and a hyperpolarisation-activated current.

Spikes are wide, lasting 2 to 4 milliseconds, followed by a long calcium-activated potassium afterhyperpolarisation lasting several hundred milliseconds that enforces the slow rate.

They operate in two modes: a tonic mode of steady low firing that scales with arousal, and a phasic mode in which a salient event triggers a burst of two to five spikes in under 100 milliseconds followed by a silent period.

Firing falls almost to zero during rapid eye movement sleep, the only time in life the brain is essentially free of noradrenaline.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The main excitatory input is from the nucleus paragigantocellularis in the medulla, carrying autonomic urgency, plus inputs from the prefrontal cortex, the central amygdala, the hypothalamic orexin cells, and the nucleus of the solitary tract.

The main inhibitory input is from the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi, using GABA, and it arrives largely onto the dendrites in the pericoerulear shell.

Output is extraordinary in scale: locus coeruleus fibres innervate the entire cerebral cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, thalamus, cerebellum, all of the brainstem and the whole spinal cord, while notably sparing the basal ganglia.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Very thin, 0.2 to 1.0 micrometres, and slow, conducting at 0.5 to 2 metres per second.

The arbour is immense and highly branched, with hundreds of thousands of small swellings called varicosities strung along it like beads.

Most varicosities do not form a classical synapse at all; they simply release noradrenaline into the surrounding tissue.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Noradrenaline, made by the enzymes tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine beta-hydroxylase, acting on alpha-1 receptors that excite, alpha-2 receptors that inhibit, and beta receptors that boost signal-to-noise ratio in cortex.

Galanin and neuropeptide Y are co-released during strong firing and produce prolonged inhibition of targets.

Critically, noradrenaline also acts back on the locus coeruleus itself through alpha-2 autoreceptors, a self-applied brake that couples the whole nucleus together.

Some cells co-release dopamine, the immediate chemical precursor of noradrenaline.

MYELINATION:

Almost entirely unmyelinated.

This is a defining feature: the axons are too fine to be worth insulating, so the noradrenaline signal spreads slowly, taking tens to hundreds of milliseconds to reach distant cortex.

The consequence is that noradrenaline sets a slowly changing background state rather than delivering fast point-to-point messages.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Punishing, and this is the key to their vulnerability.

The axonal arbour is so vast that a single cell must maintain an enormous membrane area on a low firing rate, and the constant pacemaker activity means calcium is always entering.

Making and breaking down noradrenaline generates reactive oxygen species and the toxic aldehyde DOPEGAL, and neuromelanin is the visible residue of that chemistry.

These cells sit permanently close to their metabolic limit, which is why they fail early.

PLASTICITY:

They are the instrument of plasticity elsewhere more than the site of it.

Noradrenaline released during a surprising or emotional event lowers the threshold for long-term potentiation in the hippocampus and cortex, which is why you remember startling moments vividly.

The nucleus itself shows adaptation of alpha-2 autoreceptor sensitivity over weeks, which is the accepted mechanism by which antidepressant drugs take a fortnight to work.

Chronic stress causes measurable dendritic remodelling here.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here are unusual in two ways.

First, they carry beta-adrenergic receptors densely, so noradrenaline from these very neurons switches astrocytes into a high-energy state, causing them to break down stored glycogen and hand lactate to nearby neurons; this is the cellular basis of the metabolic surge that accompanies alertness.

Second, they gate volume transmission by controlling reuptake and diffusion distance, effectively deciding how wide the noradrenaline signal spreads.

Microglia here are highly reactive and are increasingly implicated in the earliest stages of Alzheimer disease.

There is almost no myelin, so oligodendrocytes play a minimal role.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the locus coeruleus and the dorsal pons loses its ability to change the state of the entire brain.

The pons would still relay, still time, still breathe.

But nothing would be able to say to the cortex: something important just happened, pay attention, remember this.

Wakefulness would become shallow and fragile, attention would not sharpen under threat, emotional memories would not be stamped in, and the brain would lose its capacity to switch from exploiting a familiar strategy to exploring a new one.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell type is the textbook case for everything beyond integrate and fire.

Transmission is largely volume transmission, with noradrenaline diffusing tens of micrometres to reach extrasynaptic receptors on neurons, astrocytes, microglia and blood vessels.

The cells release noradrenaline from their dendrites as well as their axons, and that dendritic release acting on alpha-2 autoreceptors within the bundled dendrites synchronises the nucleus into a functional unit.

Locus coeruleus neurons are gap-junction coupled, especially in early life.

They control local blood flow directly by acting on the smooth muscle of cortical arterioles.

They instruct astrocyte metabolism, they modulate microglial surveillance and inflammatory tone, and they influence clearance of waste through the brain's fluid pathways during sleep.

Their own gene transcription shifts with sleep and stress, changing how much transmitter machinery they build.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: excitatory glutamate from nucleus paragigantocellularis and prefrontal cortex, 0 to 40 spikes per second; inhibitory GABA from nucleus prepositus hypoglossi; orexin peptide from the lateral hypothalamus setting the wake state; corticotropin-releasing factor during stress; ambient noradrenaline acting on alpha-2 autoreceptors.

• OUTPUTS: noradrenaline released from about 100,000 varicosities per neuron into cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, thalamus, cerebellum, brainstem and spinal cord, with extracellular concentration swinging between roughly 10 nanomolar at rest and 1 micromolar during a phasic burst.

• STATE: membrane voltage; calcium-activated potassium afterhyperpolarisation level; local noradrenaline pool acting on autoreceptors; phasic burst variable; sleep and wake mode flag.

• PARAMETERS: tonic rate 1 to 3 hertz awake, 0 to 0.5 hertz in slow-wave sleep, near 0 in rapid eye movement sleep; phasic burst 2 to 5 spikes; spike width 2 to 4 milliseconds; conduction velocity 0.5 to 2 metres per second; autoreceptor gain 0.3 to 0.8.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 60 to 120 milliseconds; afterhyperpolarisation 300 to 500 milliseconds; phasic burst decay about 150 milliseconds; autoreceptor noradrenaline pool 1 to 2 seconds; antidepressant autoreceptor desensitisation 10 to 21 days.

• FAILURE MODE: hyperphosphorylated tau appears in locus coeruleus neurons before anywhere else in the brain in Alzheimer disease, and the cells are lost by Braak stages three and four as memory symptoms begin; in Parkinson disease models these neurons become abnormally overactive through failure of calcium-activated potassium channels before they die, and their loss drives the depression, sleep disturbance and cognitive slowing that often precede tremor by years.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to reproduce the slow tonic pacemaking of a locus coeruleus neuron and the phasic burst it produces when something surprising happens.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -55.
Create a number variable called noradrenaline pool with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called afterhyperpolarisation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called phasic drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called tonic drive with initial value 0.62.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 20000, repeat the following steps.
    Check if step is equal to a salience event time.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set phasic drive to 3.
    End the conditional block.
    Set phasic decay to the quotient of phasic drive divided by 150.
    Calculate the difference of phasic drive and phasic decay.
    Set phasic drive to that difference.
    Set autoinhibition to the product of noradrenaline pool and 0.5.
    Calculate the sum of tonic drive and phasic drive.
    Set gross drive to that sum.
    Calculate the sum of autoinhibition and afterhyperpolarisation.
    Set net drive to the difference of gross drive and that sum.
    Set target voltage to the sum of -60 and the product of net drive and 45.
    Calculate the difference of target voltage and membrane voltage.
    Set voltage change to the product of that difference and 0.0111.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and voltage change.
    Set membrane voltage to that sum.
    Set pool decay to the quotient of noradrenaline pool divided by 1200.
    Calculate the difference of noradrenaline pool and pool decay.
    Set noradrenaline pool to that difference.
    Set afterhyperpolarisation decay to the quotient of afterhyperpolarisation divided by 400.
    Calculate the difference of afterhyperpolarisation and afterhyperpolarisation decay.
    Set afterhyperpolarisation to that difference.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -40.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add step to the end of spike times.
        Set membrane voltage to -60.
        Calculate the sum of noradrenaline pool and 0.05.
        Set noradrenaline pool to that sum.
        Calculate the sum of afterhyperpolarisation and 0.25.
        Set afterhyperpolarisation to that sum.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of step and 1.
    Set step to that sum.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in spike times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the three interacting slow variables, the afterhyperpolarisation, the self-inhibiting noradrenaline pool and the phasic drive, are easiest to follow when each gets its own clearly named line inside a single loop.

DT = 0.001                                   # one millisecond per step, in seconds

def locus_coeruleus(seconds=20.0, salience_times=(5.0, 12.0),
                    tonic_drive=0.62, autoreceptor_gain=0.5):
    """Slow pacemaking, a phasic burst on salience, then self-applied silence."""
    triggers = set(int(round(t / DT)) for t in salience_times)
    v, na_pool, ahp, phasic, spikes = -55.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, []
    v_th, v_reset, e_rest, gain = -40.0, -60.0, -60.0, 45.0
    tau_m, tau_na, tau_ahp, tau_phasic = 0.090, 1.200, 0.400, 0.150
    for k in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        if k in triggers:
            phasic = 3.0                     # a startling stimulus arrives
        phasic -= phasic * DT / tau_phasic
        drive = tonic_drive + phasic - autoreceptor_gain * na_pool - ahp
        v += DT * (e_rest + gain * drive - v) / tau_m
        na_pool -= na_pool * DT / tau_na     # released noradrenaline clears slowly
        ahp -= ahp * DT / tau_ahp            # the long potassium brake fades
        if v >= v_th:
            spikes.append(k * DT)
            v = v_reset
            na_pool += 0.05                  # every spike deepens self-inhibition
            ahp += 0.25                      # and deepens the afterhyperpolarisation
    return spikes

sp = locus_coeruleus()
before = [t for t in sp if t < 5.0]
burst = [t for t in sp if 5.0 <= t < 5.3]
after = [t for t in sp if 5.3 <= t < 6.3]
print("tonic rate before the stimulus: %.2f Hz" % (len(before) / 5.0))
print("spikes in the 300 ms burst window: %d" % len(burst))
print("spikes in the following second (post-burst silence): %d" % len(after))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A brown-pigmented, visibly blue-black cell in the floor of the fourth ventricle that ticks over at one to three spikes a second all your waking life and falls completely silent when you dream, whose unmyelinated axon spreads further than any other single neuron's in the human body, which sprays its transmitter into the tissue instead of aiming it at a partner, which inhibits itself and thereby its whole nucleus with the very chemical it releases, and which is the first place in the entire brain where the pathology of Alzheimer disease can be found.

CHAPTER 133. RAPHE NUCLEI NEURONS (Mood-Steadying Patience Neuron) (COG)

Down the exact midline of the brainstem runs a thin grey seam, and from it a few hundred thousand neurons send hair-thin fibres to almost every other neuron you own.

Raphe means seam, describing only where the cells sit along the midline of the brainstem.

Mood-Steadying names the faculty for which they are best known, since these nuclei hold most of the brain's serotonin cells and their loss of tone is the target of the commonest antidepressant drugs.

Patience names a second and better-measured job, because recordings from the dorsal raphe show these neurons firing steadily while an animal waits for a delayed reward, and silencing them makes the animal give up waiting sooner.

Neuron marks it as a cell that, like the alerting cells, is quiet in rapid eye movement sleep and steady in waking, which is why it sets a background mood rather than reporting an event.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Raphe is Latin for seam, and these cells sit in the seam where the two halves of the brainstem meet.

Most make serotonin, properly 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), a signalling molecule that acts less like a telephone call and more like a change in the weather.

A raphe neuron carries no detail about a sound or a touch; it sets the operating conditions of everything else, including patience, pain, sleep, breathing drive and body temperature.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is spindle-shaped or many-sided and throws out only three to six dendrites, the branch-like input antennae of a neuron.

Those dendrites are long, straight and barely branched, a starburst rather than a bush, and in the dorsal raphe they fan across the midline so one cell listens to both halves of the brainstem.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly 15 to 35 micrometres across, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre, with dorsal raphe serotonin cells clustering at 20 to 30.

Dendrites spread 300 to 600 micrometres, but the axon is the astonishing part: one human raphe neuron is estimated to carry tens of centimetres of total axon and on the order of a hundred thousand release swellings.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The classical scheme labels nine clusters, B1 to B9, running from medulla to midbrain.

The ascending set, B5 to B9, is dominated by the dorsal raphe (B7) and median raphe (B8) and supplies the forebrain; the descending set, B1 to B3, is raphe pallidus, obscurus and magnus, and supplies medulla and spinal cord.

Cutting across that geography are chemical subtypes: serotonin cells that also package glutamate using vesicular glutamate transporter 3 (VGLUT3), cells co-releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA, the main inhibitory chemical), pure GABA interneurons, and a small dopamine group in the dorsal raphe.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Dorsal raphe nucleus in the midbrain tegmentum beneath the cerebral aqueduct, physically embedded inside the ventral periaqueductal grey, which makes it a genuine interface population living within another region.

Median raphe and caudal linear nucleus on the pontine and upper midbrain midline; raphe magnus in the rostral ventromedial medulla at the level of the facial nucleus; raphe obscurus and raphe pallidus on the medullary midline, with pallidus pressed against the ventral surface at the interface between brain tissue and the cerebrospinal fluid of the subarachnoid space.

Group B9 lies off midline above the medial lemniscus, at the border between the raphe system and the reticular formation.

NUMBER:

The human dorsal raphe contains about 235,000 neurons, of which about 165,000, roughly 70 percent, make serotonin, from stereological counts by Baker and colleagues; the median raphe holds the second largest pool, usually given as 20 to 25 percent of all serotonin neurons.

Summing all nine groups, a defensible figure is 400,000 to 600,000 raphe neurons, of which perhaps 300,000 to 400,000 are serotonergic, with moderate confidence for the dorsal raphe and low confidence for the medullary groups, which have never been counted carefully.

That is about 0.25 percent of the brainstem's roughly 200 million neurons and about six millionths of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the whole nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is near minus 65 to minus 70 millivolts with a high input resistance of 200 to 500 megaohms, so small currents move the cell a long way.

The action potential, the brief electrical pulse a neuron sends, is unusually broad at 1.5 to 3 milliseconds and is followed by a large afterhyperpolarization of 150 to 300 milliseconds carried by calcium-activated potassium channels, which is why the cell ticks at only 0.5 to 5 hertz.

The rhythm is state dependent: fastest in active waking, roughly halved in non-rapid-eye-movement sleep, and almost silent during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from medial prefrontal cortex, the lateral habenula (a powerful disappointment signal), orexin neurons of the lateral hypothalamus, the locus coeruleus, the periaqueductal grey and dense local GABA interneurons.

Outputs reach almost everywhere: cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, striatum, thalamus, hypothalamus and cerebellum from the rostral groups, and spinal dorsal horn laminae I, II and V, motor neuron pools and sympathetic preganglionic columns from the caudal groups.

Crucially, many release sites face no postsynaptic partner at all.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axons are among the thinnest in the nervous system at 0.1 to 0.5 micrometres, conducting at only 0.5 to 1 metre per second.

Fine varicose axons come mainly from the dorsal raphe and thicker beaded ones from the median raphe, and in humans a population of supraependymal axons crawls over the ventricle walls and releases serotonin directly into cerebrospinal fluid.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Serotonin is built from dietary tryptophan by tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (TPH2), loaded by the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2), recaptured by the serotonin transporter (SERT) and destroyed by monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A).

Co-transmitters include glutamate, GABA, substance P, thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), enkephalin and galanin, and fourteen receptor subtypes mean the same molecule excites one target and inhibits another.

MYELINATION:

Overwhelmingly unmyelinated, because myelin, the fatty insulating wrap made by oligodendrocytes, is too expensive to apply to a hundred thousand twigs.

A minority of thick descending medullary raphe axons carries a thin sheath.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Firing is slow, so the spike bill is small, but the axon bill is enormous, since proteins, vesicles and mitochondria must be shipped along tens of centimetres of cable.

The cell is hostage to diet, as a few hours of tryptophan depletion measurably lowers brain serotonin, and MAO-A breakdown generates hydrogen peroxide inside the neuron, a chronic oxidative burden.

PLASTICITY:

The most important plasticity here is slow desensitisation of the cell's own 5-HT1A autoreceptor.

A selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) raises serotonin within hours, which at first switches the raphe neuron off through that autoreceptor, and only after two to three weeks does the autoreceptor weaken and firing recover, which is the accepted explanation for why antidepressants take weeks to work.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes around raphe neurons carry 5-HT2B receptors and release the growth protein S100B in response to serotonin, so the glia here are listeners rather than bystanders.

Medullary raphe astrocytes are themselves acid sensitive and release adenosine triphosphate (ATP) when carbon dioxide rises, and ependymal cells lining the aqueduct provide the surface on which supraependymal serotonin axons travel, a glial relationship found nowhere else.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete these cells and the medulla still breathes, but breathing stops responding to rising carbon dioxide, temperature drifts and arousal from a suffocating environment fails, which is the leading model for sudden infant death syndrome.

Higher up, the forebrain loses its capacity to wait, taking small immediate rewards over larger delayed ones, and the emotional colour of experience flattens.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Most output is volume transmission, meaning serotonin is spilled into the extracellular space and diffuses to receptors on cells never wired to the raphe at all.

The neuron also releases serotonin from its own dendrites and soma, feeding back onto its 5-HT1A autoreceptors and opening potassium channels, a self-braking loop with no synapse involved.

Medullary raphe neurons are direct chemoreceptors, since falling pH closes background potassium channels of the TASK family and speeds the cell up, and raphe serotonin additionally acts as a developmental growth factor and tunes local blood vessels and microglia, the brain's immune cells.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from medial prefrontal cortex and lateral habenula (0 to 40 hertz); orexin arousal scalar (0 to 1); noradrenaline from locus coeruleus as a permissive gain term (0 to 1); local GABA (0 to 50 hertz); extracellular pH 7.6 down to 7.2 for medullary groups; extracellular serotonin at the soma (0 to 500 nanomolar).

• OUTPUTS: extracellular serotonin concentration as a diffuse cloud at each target region rather than a spike train; co-released glutamate as fast synaptic events at a subset of targets; peptide release only above about 8 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage; calcium driving the afterhyperpolarization; vesicular serotonin store; somatodendritic serotonin; autoreceptor sensitivity (0 to 1, slow); behavioural state flag of wake, non-REM or REM.

• PARAMETERS: resting minus 68 millivolts; threshold minus 45 millivolts; spike width 2 milliseconds; input resistance 300 megaohms; waking rate 2 hertz; conduction velocity 0.7 metres per second; about 100,000 release sites per neuron.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 25 to 50 milliseconds; afterhyperpolarization 200 milliseconds; serotonin clearance 0.5 to 3 seconds; autoreceptor desensitisation 14 to 21 days.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of medullary raphe cells removes the carbon dioxide arousal reflex, the pattern found in sudden infant death syndrome; reduced dorsal raphe signalling accompanies major depression and impulsivity; combined serotonergic drugs cause serotonin syndrome with fever, rigidity and clonus; early alpha-synuclein deposition here contributes to the depression that precedes Parkinson's disease by years.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate one serotonin raphe neuron as a slow pacemaker whose rate is set by behavioural state, by carbon dioxide, and by its own released serotonin acting back on itself.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -68.
Create a number variable called afterhyperpolarization with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called somatodendritic serotonin with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called autoreceptor sensitivity with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called state drive with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called carbon dioxide drive with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called release events with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 20000 times.
    Calculate the product of somatodendritic serotonin and autoreceptor sensitivity.
    Set self inhibition to that product.
    Calculate the difference of state drive and self inhibition.
    Calculate the sum of that difference and carbon dioxide drive.
    Set total drive to that sum.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and total drive.
    Calculate the difference of that sum and afterhyperpolarization.
    Set membrane voltage to that difference.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than -45.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to -68.
        Set afterhyperpolarization to 12.
        Add one release event to the end of release events.
        Calculate the sum of somatodendritic serotonin and 0.05.
        Set somatodendritic serotonin to that sum.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of afterhyperpolarization and 0.995.
    Set afterhyperpolarization to that product.
    Calculate the product of somatodendritic serotonin and 0.999.
    Set somatodendritic serotonin to that product.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in release events.
Display that number to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the output of interest is a slowly varying chemical concentration rather than a fast waveform, so readable arithmetic matters more than speed.

import math

DT = 0.001  # seconds per step

def raphe_neuron(seconds=60.0, state="wake", pH=7.4, autoreceptor_gain=1.0):
    v, ahp, sd_5ht, spikes = -68.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0
    drive = {"wake": 1.0, "nrem": 0.7, "rem": 0.0}[state]  # permissive arousal drive
    co2 = max(0.0, 7.4 - pH) * 2.0                         # medullary chemoreception
    for _ in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        total = drive + co2 - sd_5ht * autoreceptor_gain   # 5-HT1A self-braking
        v += ((-68.0 + 50.0 * total) - v) * (DT / 0.035) - ahp * DT / 0.035
        if v > -45.0:
            v, ahp, spikes = -68.0, 18.0, spikes + 1       # large calcium-gated AHP
            sd_5ht += 0.08                                 # dendritic release
        ahp *= math.exp(-DT / 0.200)                       # 200 ms recovery
        sd_5ht *= math.exp(-DT / 1.500)                    # SERT uptake and diffusion
    return spikes / seconds

for st in ("wake", "nrem", "rem"):
    print(f"{st:5s} {raphe_neuron(state=st):5.2f} Hz")
print("hypercapnia   ", round(raphe_neuron(pH=7.25), 2), "Hz")
print("desensitised autoreceptor after weeks of an SSRI:",
      round(raphe_neuron(autoreceptor_gain=0.3), 2), "Hz")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A neuron on the exact midline with long unbranched dendrites, a broad spike, a huge slow afterhyperpolarization and a metronomic one-to-five-hertz beat.

No other cell in the body switches itself off completely for the duration of REM sleep and resumes its clock the moment you wake.

CHAPTER 134. PEDUNCULOPONTINE AND LATERODORSAL TEGMENTAL NUCLEUS NEURONS (Walk-Starting Arousal Neuron) (COG)

Two smudges of large cells at the junction of midbrain and pons act as the ignition switch of consciousness, and when they fire the sleeping thalamus stops idling and starts reporting the world.

The existing label is two coordinates in the tegmentum and names no faculty.

Walk-Starting records the best established motor fact, that this region is the core of the midbrain locomotor area, and optogenetic excitation of its glutamatergic cells reliably starts an animal walking, while damage here contributes to the freezing of gait seen late in Parkinson disease.

Arousal names its other half, because its acetylcholine cells drive the thalamus into the fast, low-voltage rhythm of waking and of rapid eye movement sleep, and electrical stimulation of the region during sleep produces rapid awakening.

Neuron marks it as a cell of a pairing that is honest rather than tidy, because the same small nucleus really does hold both a gait switch and a wakefulness switch.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) and the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (LDT) are twin cholinergic outposts, meaning their famous cells release acetylcholine, the same chemical your nerves use to command muscle.

Inside the brain acetylcholine does something different: it lifts thalamic relay cells out of rhythmic bursting into a faithful transmission mode, so signals from eye, ear and skin actually reach the cortex.

The same cells help start walking, make midbrain dopamine neurons burst when something goes better than expected, and switch on rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cholinergic cells are large, deeply staining and multipolar, with three to seven long dendrites that ignore the boundaries of the nucleus.

They are intermingled with, not separated from, glutamate-releasing and GABA-releasing neurons, and their dendrites weave among the fibres of the superior cerebellar peduncle, the great cable leaving the cerebellum, which is why the nucleus has no crisp border.

SIZE:

Cholinergic somata are 20 to 45 micrometres across, among the largest in the brainstem tegmentum, with dendritic fields of 500 to 800 micrometres.

The human PPN occupies roughly 100 cubic millimetres per side, stretched about 10 millimetres along the brainstem axis.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Three intermingled chemical populations exist: cholinergic (labelled Ch5 in the PPN and Ch6 in the LDT), glutamatergic and GABAergic.

Careful counts in the rat make the cholinergic group the minority, roughly a quarter to a third of neurons, with glutamatergic cells the largest group.

Anatomically the PPN splits into a dense caudal pars compacta and a scattered rostral pars dissipata, and many cholinergic cells here also stain for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate diaphorase (NADPH-diaphorase), the signature of the enzyme that makes nitric oxide gas.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The PPN sits at the midbrain and pons junction in the lateral pontomesencephalic tegmentum, wrapped through the superior cerebellar peduncle, bounded medially by the central tegmental tract and laterally by the medial lemniscus.

The LDT lies dorsomedial to it, in the floor of the fourth ventricle beneath the locus coeruleus, spreading into the central grey and towards the medial longitudinal fasciculus.

This is explicitly an interface population, straddling the borders between reticular formation, cerebellar output pathway, basal ganglia output territory and periventricular grey, and the caudal PPN overlaps the mesencephalic locomotor region, the patch whose stimulation makes an animal walk.

NUMBER:

Recent human stereology gives about 72,000 cholinergic PPN neurons across both sides using the classical Ch5 boundary, or about 36,000 per side using a stricter fibre-tract boundary, with roughly 47,000 in pars dissipata and 26,000 in pars compacta of that bilateral total.

The LDT has not been counted as rigorously in humans, and a reasonable bound is 20,000 to 40,000 cholinergic neurons bilaterally.

Adding the non-cholinergic neighbours, which outnumber them at least two to one, the whole complex plausibly holds 250,000 to 500,000 neurons, roughly 0.15 to 0.25 percent of the brainstem's 200 million; confidence is good for the PPN cholinergic count and low for everything else.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting near minus 60 millivolts, these cells fire spontaneously at 1 to 10 hertz with no input at all.

A hyperpolarization-activated cation current called Ih acts like a spring pushing the cell back up whenever it is pushed down, and a low-threshold calcium current fires a rebound burst when the spring releases, while an A-type potassium current delays the first spike after a pause.

High-threshold calcium channels let these neurons oscillate near 40 hertz when strongly driven, which is thought to be how they impose a fast rhythm on the waking cortex.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from the internal globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata (inhibitory basal ganglia output), the subthalamic nucleus, motor cortex, lateral hypothalamus, amygdala and spinal cord.

Outputs go to the thalamus, especially intralaminar and reticular nuclei, to dopamine neurons of substantia nigra pars compacta and ventral tegmental area, to basal forebrain, pontine reticular formation, locus coeruleus, raphe and spinal cord.

A burst of acetylcholine plus glutamate from the PPN is a principal trigger for the dopamine burst that signals a better-than-expected outcome.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin at 0.5 to 2 micrometres and branch early, so one neuron can contact thalamus and midbrain at once.

Conduction is 1 to 10 metres per second, fast enough for arousal and far too slow for reflexes, with ascending fibres running in the dorsal tegmental bundle to thalamus and the ventral tegmental bundle to basal forebrain.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine, made by choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) and destroyed in the cleft by acetylcholinesterase, acting on nicotinic receptors for fast excitation and muscarinic receptors for slow effects.

Neighbouring cells use glutamate or GABA, many cholinergic cells co-release glutamate, and nitric oxide, a gas that diffuses straight through membranes, is a genuine transmitter for this population.

MYELINATION:

Thinly myelinated, with sheaths on larger ascending axons and bare membrane on fine terminal branches.

The compromise gives enough speed to keep arousal signals coherent across the millimetres to thalamus without the cost of heavy insulation.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and continuous, since the cells never truly stop except in deep non-REM sleep.

Acetylcholine synthesis needs a steady supply of choline and of acetyl coenzyme A from mitochondria, tying transmitter output directly to energy supply, which is one reason cholinergic neurons are early casualties in degenerative disease.

PLASTICITY:

Nicotinic receptors on cholinergic targets upregulate with chronic nicotine, a direct substrate of tobacco addiction.

The nucleus also undergoes unwanted plasticity: roughly half its cholinergic neurons are gone in Parkinson's disease, and the loss tracks falls and freezing of gait rather than tremor.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing about the astrocytes is exotic, but their geometry matters, because nitric oxide made by these neurons passes through glia unimpeded and dilates local capillaries, so glial coverage sets the radius of that gas signal.

Oligodendrocytes give only thin sheaths, and microglia here are notably reactive in Parkinson's disease and progressive supranuclear palsy, tracking the ongoing cholinergic loss.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these neurons and the upper brainstem loses its ability to hand the cortex a clean signal.

The thalamus falls into slow rhythmic bursting, the electroencephalogram slows, attention fragments, REM sleep disorganises, and walking loses the automatic postural readiness that lets you take a first step without thinking about it.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Nitric oxide release makes this a volume-signalling nucleus, since the gas is not stored in vesicles and cannot be aimed.

Intrinsic Ih and low-threshold calcium currents make the neuron a rhythm generator in its own right, and dendritic high-threshold calcium channels generate gamma-band oscillation, shaping the frequency of output rather than merely its rate.

Acetylcholine arriving in cortex and thalamus also acts as a permission signal deciding whether a coincidence between two other signals is written into the circuit.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: GABAergic drive from substantia nigra pars reticulata and internal globus pallidus (0 to 80 hertz); glutamate from subthalamic nucleus and motor cortex (0 to 50 hertz); orexin wake scalar (0 to 1); ascending spinal and vestibular locomotor drive (0 to 1); local GABAergic inhibition.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine plus co-released glutamate onto thalamic relay and reticular neurons, midbrain dopamine neurons and pontine reticular formation; nitric oxide as a diffusing concentration with a radius near 100 micrometres.

• STATE: membrane voltage; Ih activation; low-threshold calcium inactivation; A-current inactivation; intracellular calcium; vesicular acetylcholine; behavioural state flag of wake, non-REM or REM.

• PARAMETERS: resting minus 60 millivolts; threshold minus 45 millivolts; waking rate 4 hertz; burst rate 20 to 80 hertz; conduction velocity 1 to 10 metres per second; about 36,000 cholinergic cells per side in the PPN.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds; Ih activation 100 to 500 milliseconds; calcium de-inactivation about 100 milliseconds; nicotinic response 5 to 20 milliseconds; muscarinic response 100 to 1000 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: about 50 percent loss of PPN cholinergic neurons in Parkinson's disease produces freezing of gait, falls and attention deficits that levodopa does not fix; severe loss occurs in progressive supranuclear palsy; disordered PPN and LDT output underlies REM sleep behaviour disorder, in which a sleeper acts out dreams, one of the strongest early warnings of later Parkinson's disease.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate one pedunculopontine cholinergic neuron that fires tonically when awake, falls silent in deep sleep, and produces a rebound burst after release from basal ganglia inhibition.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called calcium availability with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called h current with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called pallidal inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called wake drive with initial value 1.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 5000 times.
    Calculate the difference of wake drive and pallidal inhibition.
    Set net drive to that difference.
    Check if membrane voltage is less than -70.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of h current and 0.02.
        Set h current to that sum.
        Calculate the sum of calcium availability and 0.01.
        Set calcium availability to that sum.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of h current and 0.98.
        Set h current to that product.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of net drive and h current.
    Calculate the sum of that sum and membrane voltage.
    Set membrane voltage to that sum.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than -45.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current step number to the end of spike times.
        Calculate the difference of membrane voltage and 20.
        Set membrane voltage to that difference.
        Check if calcium availability is greater than 0.5.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Calculate the difference of calcium availability and 0.15.
            Set calcium availability to that difference.
            Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and 14.
            Set membrane voltage to that sum.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in spike times.
Display that number to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the interesting behaviour is a change of firing mode over hundreds of milliseconds, and a plain loop with named state variables shows the rebound burst clearly.

DT = 0.0005  # 0.5 ms steps

def ppn_neuron(seconds=2.0, wake=1.0, inhibition=0.0, release_at=None):
    v, ih, ca = -60.0, 0.0, 0.0
    spikes = []
    for i in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        inh = 0.0 if (release_at is not None and t > release_at) else inhibition
        target = -60.0 + 16.0 * (wake - inh)
        low = 1.0 if v < -70.0 else 0.0
        ih += (low - ih) * (DT / 0.250)   # Ih builds while held hyperpolarised
        ca += (low - ca) * (DT / 0.100)   # T-type calcium recovers from inactivation
        v += ((target - v) + 18.0 * ih) * (DT / 0.060)
        if v > -45.0:
            spikes.append(round(t, 4))
            v = -62.0
            if ca > 0.5:                  # rebound burst rides the calcium spike
                ca -= 0.20
                v += 14.0
    return spikes

print("tonic waking:", round(len(ppn_neuron(wake=1.0)) / 2.0, 1), "Hz")
print("deep sleep:  ", round(len(ppn_neuron(wake=0.1)) / 2.0, 1), "Hz")
burst = ppn_neuron(wake=1.0, inhibition=3.2, release_at=1.0)
print("spikes in 150 ms after pallidal release:", len([s for s in burst if 1.0 < s < 1.15]))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A very large, darkly staining neuron at the midbrain and pons junction, threaded through the superior cerebellar peduncle, positive for both choline acetyltransferase and nitric oxide synthase, firing steadily when you are awake and dreaming but quiet in deep sleep.

No other brainstem cell both wakes the thalamus with acetylcholine and tells midbrain dopamine neurons that the world just went better than expected.

CHAPTER 135. VENTROLATERAL MEDULLARY ADRENERGIC NEURONS (Pressure-Holding Emergency Neuron) (NON-COG)

A few thousand cells tucked into the side of the lowest part of the brainstem set the pressure in every artery in your body, and if they stop for eight seconds you faint.

The old name gives a location and a chemical class, neither of which says why the cell matters.

Pressure-Holding names the everyday duty, because these cells fire tonically in rhythm with the cardiac cycle, drive the sympathetic preganglionic neurons of the spinal cord, and are the main reason resting arterial pressure exists at all, since silencing them drops blood pressure toward collapse.

Emergency names their finest hour, since their firing climbs during compensated bleeding to defend perfusion, and the sudden fall of their activity marks the moment a haemorrhage decompensates into cardiovascular collapse.

Neuron marks it as a cell silenced from moment to moment by the arterial baroreceptors, the negative feedback loop that keeps the holding steady rather than runaway.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are the C1 neurons, named for the first adrenaline-making cell group found in the medulla.

They are the only neurons in the brain that finish the catecholamine assembly line and make adrenaline itself, also called epinephrine, using an enzyme called phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT) that converts noradrenaline into adrenaline.

Their day job is blunt and vital: they send a continuous excitatory command down the spinal cord to the sympathetic neurons that squeeze your arteries, and when you bleed, suffocate, run out of blood sugar or get an infection, they mount the emergency response.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small to medium multipolar cells with three to five modestly branched dendrites, arranged as a thin sheet rather than a compact ball, which is why they were missed for so long.

The dendrites of the spinally projecting cells reach towards the ventral surface of the medulla, putting them within range of substances in cerebrospinal fluid and of surface oxygen levels, and they interleave with, but are chemically distinct from, the A1 noradrenaline neurons behind them.

SIZE:

Somata are 15 to 30 micrometres across the long axis, spindle-shaped or triangular, with dendritic fields of 200 to 400 micrometres.

The whole C1 column in a human is a ribbon perhaps 6 to 10 millimetres long and under 1 millimetre thick, running just beneath the nucleus ambiguus.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Three adrenergic groups exist in the medulla and their proportions have been measured: C1 holds about 72 percent of adrenaline-making medullary neurons, C2 in the solitary tract and dorsal vagal region about 13 percent, and C3 in the mediodorsal medulla about 15 percent.

Within C1 the functional split is by target, since bulbospinal C1 neurons descend to the spinal cord and control blood vessels while others ascend to hypothalamus, locus coeruleus and solitary tract nucleus to control hormones and alertness.

A third split is by fast transmitter, as most bulbospinal C1 cells also load glutamate using vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (VGLUT2).

WHERE IT LIVES:

The rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM), a patch of reticular formation below the nucleus ambiguus, medial to the spinal trigeminal tract, lateral to the inferior olive and dorsal to the pyramid, running from the caudal pole of the facial nucleus towards the obex.

The column continues caudally and interdigitates with the A1 noradrenergic group, a genuine chemical interface inside one anatomical strip, while C2 sits in the nucleus of the solitary tract and dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and C3 near the dorsal midline.

The ventral dendrites reach the glia-lined ventral medullary surface, the interface between brain tissue and cerebrospinal fluid.

NUMBER:

No rigorous human stereological count of C1 neurons exists, and that must be said plainly rather than papered over with false precision.

In the rat there are roughly 700 to 1,100 C1 neurons per side, about 60 percent of which project to the spinal cord.

Scaling by medullary volume gives a defensible human bound of 5,000 to 25,000 per side, so 10,000 to 50,000 in total, well under one hundredth of one percent of the brainstem's 200 million neurons; confidence is high for the rat figures and low for the human ones.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting near minus 55 to minus 60 millivolts, these cells are slow tonic pacemakers firing at 0.5 to 5 hertz driven by a persistent sodium current rather than by synaptic input.

Their signature is barosensitivity: a rise in arterial pressure stretches receptors in the carotid arteries and aortic arch, exciting the solitary tract nucleus, which excites the caudal ventrolateral medulla, which delivers GABA to C1 and switches it off within about 100 milliseconds.

Firing is also locked to the breathing rhythm, so sympathetic traffic surges once per breath.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs: inhibitory GABA from the caudal ventrolateral medulla carrying the baroreflex; glutamate from the solitary tract nucleus carrying oxygen and inflammatory signals; the retrotrapezoid nucleus carrying carbon dioxide; the paraventricular hypothalamus; the periaqueductal grey; and dense local inhibition.

Outputs: the intermediolateral cell column of the thoracic and upper lumbar spinal cord and sacral autonomic preganglionic neurons, with ascending branches to paraventricular hypothalamus, locus coeruleus, raphe, periaqueductal grey and solitary tract nucleus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin and slow, conducting at roughly 0.5 to 1.5 metres per second, so a command leaving the medulla takes tens of milliseconds to reach the mid-thoracic cord.

Descending axons travel in the lateral funiculus and form dense baskets around preganglionic cells, though many adrenaline-containing swellings again make no classical synapse.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Adrenaline, made by adding a methyl group to noradrenaline with PNMT, which is the stain used to identify these cells.

Glutamate is the fast transmitter that actually drives the spinal target moment to moment while adrenaline acting on alpha-2 receptors is a slower modulator, and this two-speed arrangement is the most commonly misunderstood fact about C1.

Co-stored peptides include neuropeptide Y (NPY), which causes long-lasting vasoconstriction, substance P and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP), and mu-opioid receptors on these cells explain why opioid drugs lower blood pressure.

MYELINATION:

Essentially unmyelinated, in the class physiologists call C fibres, which is exactly why conduction is around 1 metre per second.

Slowness is tolerable because blood pressure control works over hundreds of milliseconds, not microseconds.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest, in keeping with slow steady firing, but unusually oxygen sensitive.

These neurons and their astrocytes respond to a fall in oxygen within seconds, which is a design feature rather than a weakness, though it also means prolonged hypoxia damages them early.

PLASTICITY:

Chronic high blood pressure is accompanied by a lasting rise in RVLM excitability involving oxidative stress, angiotensin II signalling and microglial activation, so the set point itself drifts upward and stays there.

Repeated low blood sugar blunts the C1 response to the next episode, the mechanism behind hypoglycaemia unawareness in diabetes.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes here are not ordinary: astrocytes at the ventral medullary surface are themselves oxygen sensors, and when oxygen falls they release adenosine triphosphate (ATP) that directly excites C1 neurons, so part of what looks like neuronal oxygen sensing is glial.

Microglia in the RVLM become activated in experimental hypertension and heart failure and release cytokines that raise C1 firing, making local immune cells part of the blood pressure circuit rather than spectators.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take these cells out and the ventrolateral medulla stops being a pressure regulator and becomes ordinary reticular formation.

Resting arterial pressure collapses by 40 to 50 millimetres of mercury, the baroreflex has nothing left to act on, standing up causes fainting, and the coordinated one-second recruitment of heart, vessels, adrenal gland and pituitary during bleeding never happens.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

C1 neurons are the clearest brainstem example of a cell that is sensor, integrator and effector at once.

They release adrenaline and neuropeptide Y by volume transmission, are metabolically coupled to oxygen-sensing astrocytes, and drive the adrenal medulla to dump adrenaline into the blood, so one cell type controls both the neural and the hormonal arms of the stress response.

They also signal to the immune system, since activating them changes anti-inflammatory hormone release and alters the course of experimental sepsis and kidney injury, and their peptide co-release is frequency dependent, so the same neuron speaks a different chemical language at 1 hertz and at 15 hertz.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: GABAergic baroreflex signal proportional to mean arterial pressure over 60 to 180 millimetres of mercury; glutamate from solitary tract nucleus carrying carotid body oxygen (arterial oxygen 30 to 100 millimetres of mercury); carbon dioxide and pH drive from the retrotrapezoid nucleus; blood glucose 2 to 10 millimoles per litre; circulating inflammatory signal; descending drive from hypothalamus and periaqueductal grey; astrocytic ATP.

• OUTPUTS: spike train to spinal sympathetic preganglionic neurons, 0 to 20 hertz, carrying glutamate plus adrenaline plus neuropeptide Y; ascending spike train to hypothalamus and locus coeruleus; simulation-level output is sympathetic nerve activity from 0 to 1.

• STATE: membrane voltage; persistent sodium activation; vesicular adrenaline store; vesicular neuropeptide Y store; slow excitability set point representing chronic remodelling.

• PARAMETERS: resting minus 57 millivolts; threshold minus 45 millivolts; baseline 2 hertz; maximum about 20 hertz; conduction velocity 1 metre per second; baroreflex gain about 0.2 hertz lost per millimetre of mercury; 5,000 to 25,000 cells per side.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 30 milliseconds; baroreflex loop delay 100 to 200 milliseconds; respiratory modulation 3 to 5 seconds; spinal adrenaline clearance 1 to 5 seconds; hypertensive remodelling weeks to months.

• FAILURE MODE: degeneration of C1 neurons in multiple system atrophy causes severe orthostatic hypotension, in which standing drops blood pressure enough to cause collapse; C1 loss also occurs in Parkinson's disease; chronic RVLM overactivity is a leading mechanism of neurogenic high blood pressure and of sympathetic overdrive in heart failure; sudden failure during severe bleeding turns a compensated haemorrhage into cardiovascular collapse.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate one C1 adrenergic neuron that sets sympathetic outflow from arterial pressure, oxygen and blood glucose, and releases the peptide neuropeptide Y only when firing is high.
Create a number variable called arterial pressure with initial value 100.
Create a number variable called oxygen level with initial value 95.
Create a number variable called blood glucose with initial value 5.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 2.
Create a number variable called peptide released with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called sympathetic output with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 600 times.
    Calculate the difference of 100 and arterial pressure.
    Calculate the product of that difference and 0.2.
    Set baroreflex drive to that product.
    Calculate the difference of 95 and oxygen level.
    Calculate the product of that difference and 0.15.
    Set hypoxia drive to that product.
    Calculate the difference of 5 and blood glucose.
    Calculate the product of that difference and 0.4.
    Set glucose drive to that product.
    Calculate the sum of baroreflex drive and hypoxia drive.
    Calculate the sum of that sum and glucose drive.
    Calculate the sum of that sum and 2.
    Set firing rate to that sum.
    Check if firing rate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if firing rate is greater than 20.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 20.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if firing rate is greater than 8.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of firing rate and 8.
        Calculate the product of that difference and 0.02.
        Set peptide released to that product.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set peptide released to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Add firing rate to the end of sympathetic output.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in sympathetic output.
Display that number to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this cell is best understood as a closed feedback loop with the circulation, and Python lets the neuron and the simulated arteries sit side by side in a few readable lines.

DT = 0.1  # seconds per step

def c1_neuron(pressure, oxygen=95.0, glucose=5.0, baseline=2.0):
    """Return firing rate in Hz plus adrenaline and neuropeptide Y release."""
    baro = 0.20 * (100.0 - pressure)              # 0.2 Hz lost per mmHg rise
    hypoxia = 0.15 * max(0.0, 95.0 - oxygen)
    hypoglyc = 0.40 * max(0.0, 5.0 - glucose)
    rate = max(0.0, min(20.0, baseline + baro + hypoxia + hypoglyc))
    return rate, 0.05 * rate, 0.02 * max(0.0, rate - 8.0)  # peptide needs high rates

def run(seconds=60.0, bleed_at=20.0, loss_rate=1.2):
    pressure, deficit = 100.0, 0.0
    for i in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        if t > bleed_at:
            deficit += loss_rate * DT             # steady haemorrhage
        rate, adr, npy = c1_neuron(pressure)
        target = 100.0 - 1.4 * deficit + 2.5 * rate + 40.0 * npy - 5.0
        pressure += (target - pressure) * (DT / 2.0)   # vascular lag of about 2 s
        if abs(t - round(t)) < 1e-9 and int(t) % 10 == 0:
            print(f"t={t:5.1f}s  MAP={pressure:6.1f} mmHg  C1={rate:5.2f} Hz")

run()

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small spindle-shaped neuron in the ventrolateral medulla that stains for PNMT, is silenced within a tenth of a second by a rise in blood pressure, surges within a second of blood loss, and speaks glutamate for speed and adrenaline for persistence from the same terminal.

It is the only neuron in the human brain whose final chemical product is adrenaline and whose failure makes standing upright impossible.

CHAPTER 136. PERIAQUEDUCTAL GREY NEURONS (Freeze-Or-Flee Selecting Neuron) (NON-COG)

In 1969 a rat lay quietly through abdominal surgery with no anaesthetic, because a wire in this grey collar around the midbrain's central channel was switched on.

Periaqueductal grey states only that the tissue is grey and lies around the cerebral aqueduct, an address with no function in it.

Freeze-Or-Flee names the choice this tissue makes, and the choice is anatomically real, since exciting the dorsolateral column drives escape and threat vocalisation while exciting the lateral and ventrolateral columns drives immobility, so a few millimetres of position decide whether the animal runs or holds still.

Selecting names the work, since the region does not execute the movement itself but picks which defensive programme the lower motor machinery will run.

Neuron marks it as a cell that also launches the descending pathway producing opioid analgesia, which is why an animal in mortal danger stops feeling its wounds.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The periaqueductal grey (PAG) is a sleeve of neurons wrapped around the cerebral aqueduct, the narrow channel of cerebrospinal fluid running through the midbrain.

It is the brain's survival command post: it does not analyse a threat, it selects and executes a whole-body response to one.

Freeze, flee, fight, fall silent, stop feeling pain, change your breathing, change your blood pressure or make a sound, each is a package assembled here and fired as a unit, and this is also the most powerful pain-suppressing site in the nervous system and where morphine does much of its work.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Most PAG neurons are small to medium spindle-shaped or triangular cells with three to five sparsely branched dendrites running parallel to the aqueduct rather than across it.

That orientation matters, because it keeps each longitudinal column functionally separate from its neighbour despite there being no anatomical wall between them.

SIZE:

Somata are typically 10 to 30 micrometres across, small by brainstem standards, with dendritic fields of 200 to 500 micrometres elongated along the brainstem axis.

The whole human PAG is a tube roughly 15 millimetres long with a wall 2 to 4 millimetres thick and a total volume commonly reported near 400 cubic millimetres for both sides together.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The functional taxonomy is columnar rather than cellular, with four longitudinal columns: dorsomedial, dorsolateral, lateral and ventrolateral.

Dorsolateral neurons produce flight, raised blood pressure and a non-opioid analgesia; lateral neurons produce fight with similar autonomic activation; ventrolateral neurons produce freezing, quiescence, falling blood pressure and heart rate and a powerful opioid-dependent analgesia.

By chemistry the population splits roughly between glutamatergic output neurons and GABAergic local interneurons, with peptide subsets containing enkephalin, substance P, cholecystokinin and neurotensin, and a dopamine group in the ventrolateral column.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The midbrain tegmentum, forming a collar around the cerebral aqueduct from the posterior commissure rostrally to the locus coeruleus and fourth ventricle caudally, where it becomes continuous with the periventricular grey of the pons.

Its neighbours are all interfaces that matter: the dorsal raphe nucleus is physically embedded inside the ventral PAG, the superior and inferior colliculi lie above, the cuneiform nucleus and mesencephalic locomotor region laterally, the oculomotor and trochlear nuclei ventromedially, and the ependymal lining of the aqueduct forms its inner surface.

Rostrally it grades into the hypothalamus without a sharp border, which is why it behaves like a downstream extension of hypothalamic defence circuits.

NUMBER:

There is no rigorous stereological count of human PAG neurons, and inventing one would be dishonest.

An arithmetic bound can be given transparently: a bilateral volume near 400 cubic millimetres multiplied by a midbrain grey neuronal density in the plausible range of 5,000 to 25,000 neurons per cubic millimetre gives 2 million to 10 million neurons.

Taking the middle, about 3 to 5 million, the PAG is on the order of 1.5 to 2.5 percent of the brainstem's 200 million neurons; confidence is low and the figure is an order of magnitude, not a measurement.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is around minus 60 to minus 70 millivolts, and most PAG output neurons are quiet at rest, not because they lack drive but because local interneurons hold them down with continuous GABA release.

Many carry a prominent A-type potassium current that delays the first spike, so a weak threat produces nothing and a sustained one produces a sudden switch, which suits a system that must commit to one behaviour rather than blend several.

Firing during a defensive response is a sustained 10 to 40 hertz that lasts as long as the behaviour, and the key computational fact is that the resting state is suppression, so the fastest way to activate the PAG is to remove inhibition rather than add excitation.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from medial prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex, the central and medial amygdala, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, the hypothalamus, the superior colliculus, and directly from spinal cord and trigeminal nucleus through the spinomesencephalic tract carrying pain.

Ventrolateral outputs go to the rostral ventromedial medulla, especially raphe magnus, which projects to the spinal dorsal horn; other outputs reach nucleus retroambiguus for vocalisation, the pontine micturition centre for the bladder, the ventrolateral medulla for blood pressure, the parabrachial nucleus for breathing and the cuneiform nucleus for locomotion.

The most important local connection is GABAergic interneuron onto output neuron, because that is the switch morphine flips.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Descending output axons are thin to medium at 0.5 to 2 micrometres, conducting at 1 to 10 metres per second, fast enough for a behaviour that unfolds over hundreds of milliseconds.

They descend in the dorsolateral funiculus and the ventrolateral tegmentum, while local interneuron axons are short, unmyelinated and confined to one column.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for output neurons and GABA for interneurons form the backbone, layered with enkephalin and other endogenous opioid peptides, substance P, neurotensin, cholecystokinin, corticotropin-releasing factor and ventrolateral dopamine.

Mu-opioid receptors are dense and sit chiefly on GABAergic terminals, so morphine works by silencing the inhibitor and thereby releasing the output neuron, a mechanism called disinhibition.

Endocannabinoids made on demand by output neurons travel backwards across the synapse and suppress transmitter release from selected inputs.

MYELINATION:

Mixed and generally light, with thin sheaths on descending projection axons and none on the dense local circuitry.

The PAG is grey matter in the strict sense, so its low myelin density is one way it is recognised on a stained section.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low at rest because the cells are largely silent, and briefly very high during a defence reaction.

Functional imaging shows a sharp localised rise in PAG blood flow during acute pain and during panic, consistent with a tissue that idles and then sprints.

PLASTICITY:

Chronic opioid exposure remodels this circuit, so mu-opioid receptors become less effective, GABA release rebounds, and the descending pathway can flip from suppressing pain to facilitating it, the accepted mechanism of opioid-induced hyperalgesia and a driver of dose escalation.

Persistent pain and repeated threat also shift the balance between the ventrolateral and dorsolateral columns, biasing a person towards freezing rather than escape, which is relevant to post-traumatic stress.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Microglia here are unusually consequential, because chronic morphine activates them and blocking that activation restores morphine potency in animals, so local immune cells are part of the analgesic circuit rather than housekeeping.

Astrocytes in the PAG express mu-opioid receptors and modulate glutamate clearance during withdrawal, and the ependymal cells lining the aqueduct give this region direct access to substances carried in cerebrospinal fluid.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove PAG neurons and the midbrain keeps its eye movement control, its sensory maps and its dopamine cells, but loses its capacity to commit.

There would be no freezing, no coordinated flight, no vocal cry, no stress-induced analgesia and no bladder control; the animal still sees the predator and still runs the sensory analysis, it simply does nothing about it.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The dominant computation is disinhibition, so a model with excitation only will get the drug pharmacology completely wrong.

Retrograde endocannabinoid signalling lets the output neuron talk backwards to its own inputs, selectively quieting the amygdala input, which is how cannabinoids and opioids produce analgesia by different routes, and dendritic peptide release adds slow modulation over tens of seconds.

The columnar layout supports a winner-take-all competition in which activity in one column suppresses its neighbours, so the outputs are mutually exclusive behaviours rather than a blend, and PAG neurons also directly control local blood flow.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamatergic threat signal from amygdala and hypothalamus (0 to 50 hertz); top-down control from medial prefrontal and cingulate cortex (0 to 30 hertz); ascending nociceptive drive from spinal lamina I (0 to 100 hertz); local GABAergic tone (0 to 40 hertz, tonically active at rest); mu-opioid receptor occupancy (0 to 1); threat distance as a scalar selecting the column.

• OUTPUTS: sustained spike train to rostral ventromedial medulla ON and OFF cells, expressed as descending analgesia gain from 0 to 1; freezing command to medullary reticular formation; flight command to cuneiform nucleus; autonomic set point change to the ventrolateral medulla, positive for the dorsolateral column and negative for the ventrolateral column.

• STATE: output neuron voltage; interneuron voltage; A-current inactivation; endocannabinoid concentration; opioid receptor desensitisation (slow); currently selected column.

• PARAMETERS: resting minus 65 millivolts; threshold minus 45 millivolts; tonic interneuron rate 12 hertz; defence output 10 to 40 hertz; conduction velocity 1 to 10 metres per second; roughly 3 to 5 million neurons bilaterally.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 40 milliseconds; A-current inactivation 30 to 80 milliseconds; GABA-A decay 5 to 20 milliseconds; endocannabinoid signalling 2 to 20 seconds; descending analgesia onset 1 to 5 seconds; opioid tolerance days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: weakened descending inhibition to the rostral ventromedial medulla is a central mechanism of chronic pain, fibromyalgia and medication-overuse headache; over-activation of the dorsolateral column reproduces a panic attack, terror and urge to flee included; PAG damage from stroke or tumour causes loss of vertical gaze, sleep disturbance and, ventrally, akinetic mutism; opioid tolerance is maladaptive plasticity of this exact synapse.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a ventrolateral periaqueductal grey output neuron held silent by local inhibition and released by opioid action, and to report the resulting strength of descending pain suppression.
Create a number variable called interneuron rate with initial value 12.
Create a number variable called opioid occupancy with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called nociceptive drive with initial value 20.
Create a number variable called output voltage with initial value -65.
Create a list variable called output spikes with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 4000 times.
    Calculate the difference of 1 and opioid occupancy.
    Calculate the product of interneuron rate and that difference.
    Set effective inhibition to that product.
    Calculate the product of nociceptive drive and 0.06.
    Set excitation to that product.
    Calculate the product of effective inhibition and 0.09.
    Set inhibition to that product.
    Calculate the difference of excitation and inhibition.
    Calculate the product of that difference and 3.
    Calculate the sum of -65 and that product.
    Set target voltage to that sum.
    Calculate the difference of target voltage and output voltage.
    Calculate the product of that difference and 0.05.
    Calculate the sum of output voltage and that product.
    Set output voltage to that sum.
    Check if output voltage is greater than -45.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current step number to the end of output spikes.
        Set output voltage to -66.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in output spikes.
Display that number to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the point is a two-cell interaction, an inhibitor and an output cell, and Python makes the disinhibition arithmetic visible with no framework in the way.

DT = 0.001  # 1 ms steps

def vlpag_output(seconds=4.0, opioid=0.0, nociception=20.0, tonic_gaba=12.0):
    """opioid is mu-receptor occupancy from 0 to 1; returns rate and analgesia."""
    v, spikes = -65.0, 0
    gaba = tonic_gaba * (1.0 - opioid)     # opioids act on GABA terminals
    for _ in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        target = -65.0 + 2.0 * (1.2 * nociception - 1.5 * gaba)
        v += (target - v) * (DT / 0.020)   # 20 ms membrane time constant
        if v > -45.0:
            spikes += 1
            v = -66.0
    rate = spikes / seconds
    return rate, min(1.0, rate / 60.0)     # analgesia saturates near 60 Hz

for occ in (0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0):
    r, a = vlpag_output(opioid=occ)
    print(f"occupancy {occ:4.2f} -> vlPAG {r:5.1f} Hz, analgesia {a:4.2f}")

r, a = vlpag_output(opioid=0.75, tonic_gaba=26.0)   # tolerance: GABA rebounds
print(f"tolerant, same dose -> {r:5.1f} Hz, analgesia {a:4.2f}")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small neuron in a grey sleeve around the midbrain aqueduct, silent at rest because it is held down rather than because it has nothing to say, organised into four longitudinal columns that each command a different survival package.

Stimulate it in the right column and a conscious human reports either overwhelming terror or the complete disappearance of pain, which no other single cell group can do.

CHAPTER 137. SPHERICAL BUSHY CELLS (COG)

You can tell which ear a sound reached first even when the gap is ten millionths of a second, and this neuron is the reason the clock is that good.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A spherical bushy cell is the first relay inside the brain for sound, one synapse downstream of the auditory nerve.

Its job is not to add anything but to preserve the exact timing of the signal, because the timing is the information.

Auditory nerve fibres fire at a preferred point on each cycle of a low-frequency sound wave, a behaviour called phase locking, and this cell takes that timing, cleans it, and hands it to the medial superior olive, the nucleus that compares the two ears and tells you where a sound came from.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is round, hence spherical, and carries only one or two short stubby dendrites ending in a tangle of fine branches resembling a small bush, hence bushy.

The remarkable part is what is stuck to it: one to four gigantic nerve terminals called endbulbs of Held, each a branching claw from a single auditory nerve fibre, together covering a large fraction of the cell body.

Because the contact is on the soma rather than out on the dendrites, the signal does not travel and lose sharpness before it acts, and the small dendritic synapses that do exist have been shown to improve timing rather than degrade it.

SIZE:

Somata are typically 20 to 35 micrometres across in humans, large for a sensory relay cell.

A single endbulb can spread across 20 to 30 micrometres of that surface and contains dozens to a couple of hundred separate release sites, while the dendritic tuft extends only 30 to 80 micrometres, so the whole cell is compact by design.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

In cats and rodents the population divides into large spherical bushy cells, tuned to low frequencies and projecting to both medial superior olives, and small ones projecting mainly to the ipsilateral lateral superior olive.

In humans that clean separation is not evident, and spherical bushy cells, globular bushy cells and stellate cells lie somewhat intermixed among the entering branches of the cochlear nerve, an important species difference for anyone modelling the human system.

A practical third axis is endbulb count, since a cell with one endbulb behaves as a faithful relay and a cell with four behaves partly as a coincidence detector.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The rostral part of the anteroventral cochlear nucleus (AVCN), on the lateral surface of the brainstem at the pontomedullary junction, immediately deep to where the cochlear nerve enters the brain and against the inferior cerebellar peduncle.

The cells are laid out tonotopically, in an orderly map from low to high sound frequency, following the branching of the entering nerve.

This is explicitly an interface structure, straddling the boundary between peripheral nerve and central nervous system, and the changeover from peripheral myelin made by Schwann cells to central myelin made by oligodendrocytes happens inside it, at the Obersteiner-Redlich zone.

NUMBER:

The human cochlear nucleus on each side contains on the order of 100,000 neurons in total.

Spherical bushy cells are a major but not dominant fraction of the anteroventral part, and a defensible estimate is 25,000 to 40,000 per side, so 50,000 to 80,000 for both ears; confidence is low, because human counts by cell type are scarce and human bushy cells are not cleanly segregated.

A useful cross-check is that each human ear has only about 30,000 to 40,000 auditory nerve fibres, each branching to contact several bushy cells, so the numbers are of the same order; this places the type at roughly 0.03 to 0.04 percent of the brainstem's 200 million neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

This is one of the fastest neurons in the human body, and the speed comes from deliberately making the cell leaky.

A large low-voltage-activated potassium conductance carried by Kv1 channels is already partly open at rest, so the membrane time constant, the time the cell takes to blur an input, is only about 0.3 to 1 millisecond rather than the 20 to 50 milliseconds of a cortical neuron; input resistance is a correspondingly low 20 to 70 megaohms, and a hyperpolarization-activated current called Ih, carried by HCN1 channels, pins the resting voltage near minus 60 millivolts.

The consequence is phasic firing: a slow ramp of current produces no spike at all, while a fast endbulb input produces exactly one spike with jitter of only tens of microseconds, and the cell fires at 100 to 300 hertz during a loud tone.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation comes from one to four auditory nerve fibres through endbulbs of Held, using glutamate on exceptionally fast AMPA receptors built from GluA3 and GluA4 subunits in their flop form, which open and close in well under a millisecond.

Inhibition arrives as glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid from D-stellate cells of the ventral cochlear nucleus, from tuberculoventral cells of the dorsal cochlear nucleus, and as descending feedback from the ventral nucleus of the trapezoid body.

Output goes bilaterally to the medial superior olive, which computes interaural time difference, and to the lateral superior olive and lateral nucleus of the trapezoid body.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thick for a small cell at 2 to 4 micrometres and heavily myelinated, conducting at 10 to 30 metres per second.

The axons to the medial superior olive act as tuned delay lines, with internode lengths, the spacing between gaps in the myelin, adjusted so arrival times from the two ears line up, a rare case of a wire whose insulation is engineered for delay rather than speed alone.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, released in unusually large quanta with a low probability of release per site, which is how a giant terminal fires hundreds of times per second without running out.

Modulation arrives as glycine and GABA for inhibition and as acetylcholine from the ventral nucleus of the trapezoid body acting through nicotinic and muscarinic receptors to adjust gain.

MYELINATION:

Heavy and highly specialised on both the incoming and outgoing sides.

Inside the nucleus the auditory nerve fibre changes from Schwann cell myelin to oligodendrocyte myelin, and the last stretch before the endbulb loses myelin altogether in a controlled way.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Extremely high, among the greatest anywhere in the brain.

The auditory brainstem shows some of the densest staining for cytochrome oxidase, the marker enzyme of mitochondrial energy production, in the whole nervous system, because these cells fire at hundreds of hertz for a lifetime, and endbulbs are packed with mitochondria.

PLASTICITY:

Endbulbs are strikingly sensitive to hearing experience: deafness makes them shrink, flatten and lose their shape within weeks, and early cochlear implant stimulation partially restores them, which is the cellular basis of the clinical rule that deaf children implanted early do far better than those implanted late.

In adults, sudden loss of input produces a rebound of spontaneous activity in the cochlear nucleus, one of the leading explanations for tinnitus.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here do something genuinely unusual: astrocytes wrap the endbulb tightly and express very high densities of the glutamate transporters GLAST and GLT-1, because a synapse firing hundreds of times a second would otherwise flood itself with its own transmitter and lose all timing precision.

Oligodendrocytes handle the peripheral-to-central myelin transition and set internode lengths that tune conduction delay, so they participate in the computation rather than merely insulating it, and microglia prune endbulb terminals during development and after deafness.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove spherical bushy cells and the cochlear nucleus still reports that a sound happened, how loud it was and what frequencies it held, because stellate and octopus cells survive.

What vanishes is microsecond timing, and with it the ability to know where a sound is, to pick one voice out of a noisy room, and to sense that the auditory world has a spatial layout at all; the region becomes a loudness meter rather than a spatial instrument.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The dominant non-classical feature is that this cell computes by being deliberately bad at integrating, since Kv1 channels make it forget the past almost instantly, so it reports coincidence rather than sum.

Glial glutamate uptake is part of the circuit because clearance speed sets the width of the synaptic event, and myelin geometry is used as a computational variable, with oligodendrocytes instructed to set internode length so axonal delays match.

The endbulb also shows very little depression in a living animal despite its size, implying release probability is kept low on purpose, a form of self-regulation a naive model will get wrong.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: one to four auditory nerve spike trains, each 0 to 300 hertz, with phase locking described by a vector strength of 0 to 0.9 below 1 kilohertz; glycinergic and GABAergic inhibition from D-stellate and tuberculoventral cells, 0 to 100 hertz; cholinergic gain signal (0 to 1).

• OUTPUTS: a single spike train, 0 to 300 hertz, with timing jitter of 20 to 100 microseconds, delivered to ipsilateral and contralateral medial superior olive and to lateral superior olive, with a tuned axonal delay.

• STATE: membrane voltage; synaptic conductance per endbulb; Kv1 activation; Ih activation; readily releasable vesicle pool per endbulb; refractory timer.

• PARAMETERS: capacitance about 12 picofarads; leak conductance about 3 nanosiemens; maximum Kv1 conductance 30 to 50 nanosiemens; Ih conductance 10 to 20 nanosiemens; endbulb peak conductance 20 to 60 nanosiemens; threshold minus 45 millivolts; resting minus 62 millivolts; conduction velocity 10 to 30 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 0.3 to 1 millisecond; AMPA decay 0.2 to 0.4 milliseconds; Kv1 activation about 0.5 milliseconds; refractory period 0.7 to 1 millisecond; glutamate clearance under 1 millisecond; endbulb remodelling after deafness 2 to 8 weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of timing precision with age produces difficulty understanding speech in noise despite a normal audiogram; auditory neuropathy, in which the nerve fires but not in time, destroys the input this cell depends on; deafferentation causes endbulb collapse and rebound hyperactivity linked to tinnitus; anything that slows the membrane, including demyelination, converts a microsecond timer into a millisecond one and abolishes sound localisation.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a spherical bushy cell that fires one precisely timed spike for a fast endbulb input but refuses to fire for a slowly rising input, because its low-threshold potassium channels have already opened.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -62.
Create a number variable called synaptic conductance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called potassium activation with initial value 0.35.
Create a number variable called refractory timer with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called output spike times with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 4000 times.
    Check if an endbulb input arrives at this step.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of synaptic conductance and 50.
        Set synaptic conductance to that sum.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of synaptic conductance and 0.98.
    Set synaptic conductance to that product.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than -57.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of potassium activation and 0.02.
        Set potassium activation to that sum.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of potassium activation and 0.99.
        Set potassium activation to that product.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of potassium activation and 12.
    Set potassium leak to that product.
    Calculate the difference of synaptic conductance and potassium leak.
    Calculate the product of that difference and 0.05.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and that product.
    Set membrane voltage to that sum.
    Check if both membrane voltage is greater than -45 and refractory timer is equal to 0 are true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current step number to the end of output spike times.
        Set membrane voltage to -68.
        Set refractory timer to 140.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if refractory timer is greater than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of refractory timer and 1.
        Set refractory timer to that difference.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in output spike times.
Display that number to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because a conductance-based model in real physical units, nanosiemens and picofarads, reads almost like the sentence describing it, and the point is to show a beginner that the low-threshold potassium channel is what creates the timing.

import math

DT = 0.005  # milliseconds

def spherical_bushy(inputs_ms=(), ramp_pa=0.0, gklt_max=40.0, dur=20.0):
    """Units: mV, nS, pF, ms, pA. w is Kv1 low-threshold potassium activation."""
    V, gsyn, w = -62.0, 0.0, 0.35
    C, gleak, EL, gh, Eh, EK = 12.0, 3.0, -65.0, 15.0, -43.0, -80.0
    spikes, refr, k = [], -10.0, 0
    for i in range(int(dur / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        while k < len(inputs_ms) and inputs_ms[k] <= t:
            gsyn += 50.0                 # one endbulb of Held, about 50 nS
            k += 1
        gsyn *= math.exp(-DT / 0.3)      # AMPA decay of 0.3 ms
        w += (1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(V + 57.0) / 6.0)) - w) * (DT / 0.5)
        I = (gleak * (EL - V) + gh * (Eh - V) + gsyn * (0.0 - V)
             + gklt_max * w * (EK - V) + ramp_pa * (t / dur))
        if t - refr > 0.7:               # 0.7 ms refractory period
            V += I * DT / C
            if V > -45.0:
                spikes.append(round(t, 3))
                V, refr = -68.0, t
    return spikes

print("one endbulb at 2 ms ->", spherical_bushy([2.0]))
print("300 Hz endbulb train ->", len(spherical_bushy([2.0 + 3.333 * i for i in range(5)])), "spikes")
print("slow ramp, Kv1 on  ->", len(spherical_bushy(ramp_pa=800.0)), "spikes")
print("slow ramp, Kv1 off ->", len(spherical_bushy(ramp_pa=800.0, gklt_max=0.0)), "spikes")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A round cell with a tiny bush of dendrites, wearing one to four of the largest nerve terminals in the brain like a helmet, that answers a fast input with exactly one spike and a slow input with nothing at all.

Find a neuron whose membrane forgets in under a millisecond and whose spike times are accurate to tens of microseconds, and you have found a spherical bushy cell.

CHAPTER 138. GLOBULAR BUSHY CELLS (COG)

This neuron collects up to seventy trembling, imprecise inputs, produces from them a spike train more accurate than any one of them, and sends it across the brainstem to build the largest synapse in the mammalian brain.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A globular bushy cell is the second great timing cell of the cochlear nucleus, and it exists to make inhibition as fast and accurate as excitation.

Its axon crosses the midline and ends on a neuron in the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body as the calyx of Held, a hand-shaped terminal so large it is visible under an ordinary microscope and so reliable it essentially never fails.

That target cell converts the signal from excitation to inhibition, so the arrangement is a sign-inverting, delay-matched relay that lets one ear silence the other ear's channel with sub-millisecond accuracy, which is how you work out which side a loud sound came from.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is slightly elongated or pear-shaped, which is what globular means here, and like its spherical cousin it has one or two short dendrites ending in a small bushy tuft.

The critical difference is on the surface, because instead of one to four giant endbulbs it is peppered with many medium-sized terminals called modified endbulbs, spread over the soma and proximal dendrites.

SIZE:

Somata are typically 15 to 30 micrometres, slightly smaller and more angular than spherical bushy cells, and the axon is the thickest in the cochlear nucleus at up to 3 to 5 micrometres.

The calyx of Held it forms wraps a target cell body 15 to 25 micrometres across and contains on the order of 500 to 700 separate release sites in one terminal.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The most meaningful subdivision is by convergence, which has been measured directly and ranges from 9 to 69 auditory nerve inputs, with more than half of cells receiving between 15 and 23.

Cells at the low end behave more like relays and those at the high end more like averagers, so the population spans a continuum from temporal fidelity to rate coding.

A second axis is target, since most globular bushy cells form a calyx in the contralateral medial nucleus of the trapezoid body while collaterals also supply the lateral and ventral nuclei of the trapezoid body and the superior paraolivary nucleus.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The caudal anteroventral cochlear nucleus and the adjacent nerve root region, sometimes called the interstitial or peripheral nucleus, on the lateral surface of the pontomedullary junction.

Its axon runs medially through the ventral acoustic stria, better known as the trapezoid body, crosses the midline of the pons, and ends in the contralateral medial nucleus of the trapezoid body, which sits lateral to the medial lemniscus against the ventral pons.

This is another true interface cell, living where the cochlear nerve root meets the brainstem and projecting across the midline; note that a distinct human medial nucleus of the trapezoid body was denied for nearly fifty years and has only recently been documented in human post-mortem tissue, so a simulation should include it while flagging that the human evidence is thinner than the animal evidence.

NUMBER:

Globular bushy cells are less numerous than spherical bushy cells, and a defensible estimate is 8,000 to 15,000 per side within a cochlear nucleus of roughly 100,000 neurons per side.

That is about 16,000 to 30,000 in a whole human brain, roughly 0.01 percent of the brainstem's 200 million neurons.

Confidence is low, because the figure is anchored on the size of the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body and on the approximately one-to-one relationship between a globular bushy cell and a calyx of Held, not on a direct human count.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Like its spherical cousin it is deliberately leaky, with a large Kv1 low-threshold potassium conductance giving a membrane time constant under a millisecond, but it adds a very large Kv3 high-threshold conductance that repolarises the spike in under half a millisecond.

That pairing allows sustained firing at 300 to 800 hertz without the spikes broadening, and because individual auditory nerve inputs here are sub-threshold, several must coincide within a few hundred microseconds to fire the cell.

That coincidence requirement is what removes jitter, so phase locking measured as vector strength is higher at the output than at any single input, meaning the cell manufactures timing precision rather than merely conserving it; the classic recorded pattern is primary-like with a notch.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs: 9 to 69 auditory nerve fibres through modified endbulbs of Held, all glutamatergic; glycinergic inhibition from D-stellate and tuberculoventral cells; descending cholinergic and GABAergic feedback from the superior olivary complex.

Outputs: one calyx of Held onto a principal cell of the contralateral medial nucleus of the trapezoid body, plus collaterals to the ipsilateral lateral and ventral nuclei of the trapezoid body and the superior paraolivary nucleus.

The chain to remember is that this excitatory cell exists to drive an inhibitory cell, so its net influence on sound localisation is negative.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The thickest and fastest axon in the cochlear nucleus, heavily myelinated and conducting at 15 to 40 metres per second, so the extra journey across the midline and the extra synapse cost almost nothing in time.

Near the calyx the internodes shorten and the axon narrows into a specialised heminode that reliably converts an arriving action potential into a massive calcium influx, and the whole delay is tuned so inhibition reaches the superior olive essentially simultaneously with the excitation it must oppose.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, released from the calyx onto AMPA receptors rich in the fast GluA4 subunit, with a postsynaptic response decaying in a fraction of a millisecond.

The calyx carries presynaptic metabotropic glutamate and GABA-B receptors that turn down release during loud sustained sound, and the target cell then releases glycine, so the pathway converts glutamate into glycine with one synapse and about 0.4 milliseconds of delay.

MYELINATION:

Among the most heavily myelinated axons in the brainstem for their diameter, and the geometry is tuned rather than merely maximised.

Losing this myelin desynchronises the binaural comparison and is a plausible contributor to the poor sound localisation reported in multiple sclerosis and some auditory processing disorders.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Enormous, both at the cell body and spectacularly at the calyx, which contains dense clusters of mitochondria held beside the release machinery by structures called mitochondria-associated adherens complexes.

Oxygen deprivation silences this pathway within seconds, which is why the auditory brainstem response is used clinically to monitor brainstem function during surgery.

PLASTICITY:

The calyx matures dramatically after hearing onset, changing from a spoon-shaped cup into a fenestrated hand, and that maturation depends on sound experience.

In the adult, short-term plasticity dominates, since the synapse depresses within milliseconds at high firing rates and recovers over tens to hundreds of milliseconds, and this depression is itself part of the code, signalling changes in sound level; conductive hearing loss in early childhood permanently degrades this timing, one reason repeated glue ear in infancy has lasting effects on listening in noise.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here are specialised for extreme glutamate loads, forming a tight sleeve around the calyx with very high densities of the transporter GLT-1, and the fenestrations in the mature calyx exist partly to let those glial processes reach in.

NG2 glia, a distinct class of progenitor cells, also contact the calyx directly, and oligodendrocytes tune internode length along the crossing axon, so glia are again setting the delay of a computation.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take away the globular bushy cells and the cochlear nucleus loses its only fast pathway to the other side of the brain.

The medial nucleus of the trapezoid body would fall silent, the superior olive would receive excitation from both ears with no matching inhibition, loudness comparisons between the ears would collapse, high-frequency sound localisation would fail, and the auditory brainstem response used in every newborn hearing screen would lose its later waves.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The headline non-classical property is noise reduction by convergence, since the cell exploits the statistical independence of jitter across many inputs so its output is more precise than its inputs, which no simple relay can do.

Short-term depression at the calyx is itself a computation, converting sustained sound level into a slowly adapting signal, while presynaptic receptors implement automatic gain control at the terminal and axonal delay is a tuned free parameter instructed by oligodendrocytes.

The calyx also regulates its own mitochondria and calcium buffering in an activity-dependent way, a form of self-maintenance without which it would fail within minutes at physiological firing rates.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: 9 to 69 auditory nerve spike trains, each 0 to 300 hertz and each sub-threshold alone, with phase locking vector strength 0 to 0.9 below 1 kilohertz; glycinergic inhibition from D-stellate and tuberculoventral cells, 0 to 100 hertz; descending modulation from the superior olivary complex (0 to 1).

• OUTPUTS: one spike train, 0 to 800 hertz, with output vector strength exceeding input vector strength, through a single calyx of Held onto one contralateral medial nucleus of the trapezoid body principal cell, plus collateral output to lateral and ventral trapezoid body nuclei.

• STATE: membrane voltage; summed synaptic conductance; Kv1 activation; Kv3 activation; refractory timer; readily releasable vesicle pool at the calyx; residual presynaptic calcium.

• PARAMETERS: capacitance 10 to 15 picofarads; membrane time constant 0.2 to 0.5 milliseconds; single input conductance 1 to 4 nanosiemens, deliberately sub-threshold; convergence 9 to 69 with a median near 19; threshold minus 45 millivolts; conduction velocity 15 to 40 metres per second; 500 to 700 calyx release sites.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 0.2 to 0.5 milliseconds; AMPA decay 0.2 to 0.3 milliseconds; spike width under 0.4 milliseconds; refractory period 0.6 to 0.8 milliseconds; calyx depression 2 to 50 milliseconds with recovery over 100 to 500 milliseconds; glutamate-to-glycine conversion delay about 0.4 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: demyelination or axonal slowing breaks the delay match and abolishes localisation of high-frequency sound; abnormalities of the superior olivary complex including the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body have been reported in autism and proposed to contribute to difficulty hearing speech in noise; loss of these cells removes waves three and four of the auditory brainstem response, detectable in a routine clinical test; sustained overdrive can transiently exhaust the calyx.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a globular bushy cell that receives many weak, jittered, phase-locked inputs and fires only when enough of them coincide, producing an output with less timing jitter than any single input.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -63.
Create a number variable called synaptic conductance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called refractory timer with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called next arrival times with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called output spike times with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 20 times.
    Add a randomly chosen time within one stimulus cycle to the end of next arrival times.
End the loop.
Repeat the following steps exactly 80000 times.
    For each fibre in next arrival times, perform the following operations.
        Check if the current clock time is greater than or equal to the arrival time of that fibre.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Calculate the sum of synaptic conductance and 0.9.
            Set synaptic conductance to that sum.
            Set the arrival time of that fibre to the current clock time plus one to three stimulus cycles plus a small random jitter.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
    Calculate the product of synaptic conductance and 0.9876.
    Set synaptic conductance to that product.
    Calculate the product of synaptic conductance and 4.
    Calculate the difference of -63 and membrane voltage.
    Calculate the sum of that difference and that product.
    Calculate the product of that sum and 0.00714.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and that product.
    Set membrane voltage to that sum.
    Check if both membrane voltage is greater than -45 and refractory timer is equal to 0 are true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current clock time to the end of output spike times.
        Set membrane voltage to -70.
        Set refractory timer to 280.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if refractory timer is greater than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of refractory timer and 1.
        Set refractory timer to that difference.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in output spike times.
Display that number to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because this cell must be simulated with microsecond time steps over many converging inputs, and a plain C loop makes that cost cheap and obvious; the program prints vector strength, the standard measure of phase locking, for locked and unlocked input.

#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#define DT   2.5e-6   /* 2.5 microsecond steps */
#define NIN  36       /* modified endbulbs converging on one cell */
#define PI   3.14159265358979323846

static double r01(void) { return (double)rand() / ((double)RAND_MAX + 1.0); }

static void run(int locked, double f) {
    double v = -63.0, g = 0.0, next[NIN], si = 0.0, co = 0.0, last = -1.0;
    long s, steps = (long)(0.2 / DT);
    int i, spikes = 0;
    srand(7);
    for (i = 0; i < NIN; i++) next[i] = r01() / f;      /* stagger the start */
    for (s = 0; s < steps; s++) {
        double t = s * DT;
        for (i = 0; i < NIN; i++) {
            if (t >= next[i]) {
                double c = floor(t * f) + 1 + rand() % 3;   /* skip 1 to 3 cycles */
                g += 0.9;                               /* one sub-threshold EPSC */
                next[i] = locked ? c / f + (r01() - 0.5) * 1.0e-4  /* 100 us jitter */
                                 : c / f + r01() / f;   /* same rate, phase destroyed */
            }
        }
        g *= exp(-DT / 2.0e-4);                         /* 200 us EPSC decay */
        v += ((-63.0 - v) + 6.0 * g) * (DT / 3.5e-4);   /* 350 us, Kv1-shortened */
        if (v > -45.0 && t - last > 8.0e-4) {           /* Kv3 gives a fast reset */
            spikes++; v = -70.0; last = t;
            si += sin(2.0 * PI * f * t); co += cos(2.0 * PI * f * t);
        }
    }
    printf("%-14s %6.1f Hz   vector strength %.3f\n", locked ? "phase-locked:" : "unlocked:",
           spikes / 0.2, spikes ? sqrt(si * si + co * co) / spikes : 0.0);
}

int main(void) { run(1, 500.0); run(0, 500.0); return 0; }

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A slightly oval cell at the back of the anteroventral cochlear nucleus, wearing dozens of medium-sized terminals rather than a few giant ones, with the fattest axon in the nucleus and an output whose timing is sharper than any of its inputs.

Follow that axon across the midline and it ends in the calyx of Held, the largest synapse in the mammalian brain, and no other neuron in the human body does that.

CHAPTER 139. STELLATE OR MULTIPOLAR CELLS, T-STELLATE TYPE (Narrow-Band Spectrum-Reporting Neuron) (COG)

Strike a piano key and this cell answers not with a copy of the note but with a steady private drumbeat, chopping the sound into evenly spaced spikes at a rhythm it chooses for itself.

The letter T is laboratory shorthand for where the axon leaves, not for what the cell does, so the name is rebuilt on the one property that matters, the narrow slice of frequency this cell listens to.

Narrow-Band names the tuning, because the cell is sharply selective for a small span of pitch and ignores energy outside it.

Spectrum-Reporting names the work, because the population together carries the spectral shape of a sound up to the opposite inferior colliculus, converting how much energy sits at each pitch into a firing rate.

Neuron marks it as an excitatory projection cell rather than a local one.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Stellate means star shaped, and this cell earns the name by sending dendrites, the branching input fibres of a neuron, outward in several directions.

Its job is to measure how much sound energy sits at one pitch and to report that amount as a firing rate.

It does this by ignoring the rhythm of the sound entirely and chopping out spikes at a pace of its own, so that loudness is carried by rate rather than by timing.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is oval, with three to five thick smooth dendrites flattened into a single plane.

Those dendrites lie parallel with the incoming hearing nerve fibres, which is what confines the cell to a narrow slice of pitch.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 15 to 25 micrometres across, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Planar multipolar cells, the commonest form, with dendrites confined to one frequency lamina.

• Type I multipolar cells, an older name for the same population.

• Sustained chopper cells, the name used when the cell is classified by its firing pattern rather than its shape.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The ventral cochlear nucleus, the front part of the first hearing relay in the brainstem, across both its anteroventral and posteroventral divisions.

Axon collaterals cross into the deep layer of the dorsal cochlear nucleus, the interface at which the ventral and dorsal halves of the nucleus exchange information.

NUMBER:

About 15,000 per side, so roughly 30,000 in total, which is a little under a sixth of the roughly 200,000 neurons in the two human cochlear nuclei.

Confidence is moderate, because human figures are extrapolated from cat and mouse proportions.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Input resistance is about 100 to 200 megaohms and the membrane time constant several milliseconds, so voltage changes linger long enough to add up.

Given steady drive the cell fires regularly at 100 to 400 spikes per second, with a coefficient of variation of the gaps between spikes below about 0.35.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It collects many small hearing nerve boutons of nearly the same best frequency and adds excitation from other cells of its own kind in the same pitch slice.

It receives glycine from the broad-band damping cells, from L-stellate cells and from vertical cells.

Its axon reaches the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus on the opposite side, with branches to periolivary nuclei and the deep dorsal cochlear nucleus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The main axon leaves through the ventral acoustic stria, is one to two micrometres thick, and conducts at roughly 5 to 15 metres per second.

Thin local collaterals stay inside the same pitch slice.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glutamate, the brain's main excitatory messenger.

Unusually for this nucleus its inputs drive slow NMDA receptors as well as fast AMPA receptors, which keeps it depolarised between spikes and is part of why the chopping is so regular.

MYELINATION:

The main axon is well myelinated, wrapped in the fatty insulation made by oligodendrocytes that speeds conduction, while local feedback collaterals are thinly myelinated or bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Firing steadily at hundreds of spikes per second is expensive, and the cell is rich in mitochondria and in the enzyme cytochrome oxidase, though less extreme than its octopus and bushy cell neighbours.

PLASTICITY:

Nitric oxide, a gas that diffuses freely through tissue, is made during activity and raises the gain of this cell's response to hearing nerve input.

After cochlear damage the cell loses glycinergic inhibition and fires faster in silence, a change tied to loudness intolerance and tinnitus.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here carry unusually dense glutamate transporters, because the hearing nerve fires continuously even in silence and spilled glutamate would otherwise poison the cell.

After cochlear damage, microglia and astrocytes of this nucleus strip out the dead nerve endings within days, a demolition speed unmatched in most of the brain.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the nucleus still forwards exquisite timing but stops forwarding the shape of the sound spectrum.

Vowels would lose their formants, the energy peaks that separate ah from ee, and speech would arrive as rhythm without identity.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

NMDA receptors let the dendrites amplify coincident inputs beyond the sum of their parts.

Nitric oxide spreads gain changes through a small volume of tissue rather than one synapse.

Mutual excitation among cells of this type forms a recurrent network that turns brief phasic drive into steady tonic output, a computation belonging to the circuit rather than to any one cell.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: 10 to 60 hearing nerve fibres from a narrow frequency band at 0 to 300 spikes per second each, recurrent excitation from neighbours of the same type, and glycinergic inhibition at 0 to 200 spikes per second.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to 400 spikes per second to the contralateral inferior colliculus, periolivary nuclei, deep dorsal cochlear nucleus and local neighbours.

• STATE: membrane voltage, refractory countdown, AMPA conductance, NMDA conductance, glycine conductance, nitric oxide gain factor.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 100 to 200 megaohms, threshold 15 millivolts above rest, refractory period 1.0 to 1.5 milliseconds, excitation to inhibition ratio about 3 to 1.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 4 to 10 milliseconds, AMPA decay 0.3 to 1 millisecond, NMDA decay 20 to 50 milliseconds, glycine decay 2 to 5 milliseconds, nitric oxide gain minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of glycinergic inhibition after noise trauma raises the resting rate and flattens the code for spectral contrast, contributing to hyperacusis, poor speech understanding in noise, and tinnitus.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn an irregular stream of hearing nerve spikes into a regular chopping discharge whose rate reports sound level in one narrow frequency band.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative sixty five.
Create a number variable called refractory countdown with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called nitric oxide gain with initial value one.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
For each time step in the simulation clock, perform the following operations.
    Set excitatory drive to the product of nitric oxide gain and the count of hearing nerve spikes in this time step.
    Set net current to the difference of excitatory drive and the count of glycine spikes in this time step.
    If refractory countdown is greater than zero, then perform the following actions.
        Set refractory countdown to the difference of refractory countdown and the step duration.
        Set membrane voltage to negative seventy.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Set voltage change to the quotient of the sum of net current and the negative displacement from rest divided by the membrane time constant.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the product of voltage change and the step duration.
    If membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative fifty, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current time to the end of spike times.
        Set membrane voltage to negative seventy.
        Set refractory countdown to one point two.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in spike times.
Display the total number of items in spike times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because it reads almost like the English above and needs no libraries.
import random

DT, TAU = 0.02, 6.0                        # step and membrane time constant, milliseconds
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -65.0, -50.0, -70.0
R_IN, T_REF = 120.0, 1.2                   # megaohms, refractory milliseconds

def chopper(level_hz, dur_ms=200.0, seed=1):
    rnd = random.Random(seed)
    v, ref, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, []
    for i in range(int(dur_ms / DT)):
        drive = 0.13 + 0.0006 * level_hz + 0.02 * rnd.gauss(0.0, 1.0)   # nanoamps
        if ref > 0.0:
            ref, v = ref - DT, V_RESET
            continue
        v += (-(v - V_REST) + R_IN * drive) * DT / TAU
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes.append(i * DT)
            v, ref = V_RESET, T_REF
    return spikes

for level in (50, 150, 300):
    gaps = [b - a for a, b in zip(chopper(level), chopper(level)[1:])]
    mean = sum(gaps) / len(gaps)
    sd = (sum((g - mean) ** 2 for g in gaps) / len(gaps)) ** 0.5
    print(level, "-> chop rate", round(1000.0 / mean, 1), "Hz, CV", round(sd / mean, 3))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell in the cochlear nucleus whose spike rhythm ignores the rhythm of the sound entirely.

Play a 400 hertz tone and a bushy cell locks to 400 hertz, while this cell keeps chopping at its own pace, so its rate reports loudness and its regularity survives even in noise.

CHAPTER 140. STELLATE OR MULTIPOLAR CELLS, D-STELLATE TYPE (Broad-Band Sound-Damping Neuron) (COG)

Every other cell leaving the first hearing relay carries a message onward; this one leaves in order to tell the next nucleus, and its own, to be quiet.

The letter D is laboratory shorthand for the dorsal route its axon takes, which says nothing about the work.

Broad-Band names the listening, because unlike its narrow-band neighbour this cell deliberately sums energy across several octaves at once.

Sound-Damping names the output, because it is the only inhibitory projection cell leaving the cochlear nucleus, releasing glycine onto the narrow-band cells in both its own and the opposite cochlear nucleus.

Neuron marks it as a projection cell, and the shared word Band keeps the family resemblance with the cell it opposes.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is the wide listener of the ventral cochlear nucleus.

Where its narrow-band neighbour measures energy at one pitch, this cell measures total energy across many pitches and uses the answer to turn its neighbours down.

The effect is contrast: a sound with a sharp spectral peak is passed on with that peak exaggerated, because the broad background is subtracted.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell is larger than its narrow-band counterpart and its dendrites deliberately cut across the frequency laminae rather than lying within one.

That single anatomical decision is what lets one cell hear several octaves at once.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 20 to 35 micrometres across, with dendritic fields spanning 200 to 500 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Radiate multipolar cells, named for dendrites radiating across laminae.

• Type II multipolar cells, an older name for the same population.

• Onset chopper cells, the name used when the cell is classified by its firing pattern.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The ventral cochlear nucleus, concentrated in the posteroventral division.

Its axon crosses to the opposite cochlear nucleus and also enters the deep layer of the dorsal cochlear nucleus, so a single cell influences both sides of the first hearing relay.

NUMBER:

About 5,000 per side, so roughly 10,000 in total, making this a small minority of the stellate population and about one twentieth of the neurons in the two human cochlear nuclei.

Confidence is moderate, extrapolated from animal proportions.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Given steady drive the cell fires once or twice at sound onset and then falls quiet, which is the signature that gives it the onset chopper name.

Its wide dendritic reach and large surface area give it a lower input resistance than the narrow-band cell, so it needs many inputs arriving together to fire at all.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It collects hearing nerve boutons drawn from a wide span of best frequencies, which is the anatomical basis of its broad tuning.

Its output lands on narrow-band cells in its own nucleus, on narrow-band cells across the midline, and in the deep dorsal cochlear nucleus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The main axon leaves through the intermediate acoustic stria, is one to two micrometres thick, and conducts at roughly 5 to 15 metres per second.

Local collaterals spread widely within the nucleus rather than staying in one pitch slice.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glycine, a small inhibitory amino acid, and some cells also carry gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), the other main inhibitory messenger.

This is what makes it unique among the nucleus's output cells, all of which are otherwise excitatory.

MYELINATION:

The main axon is well myelinated, while the wide local collaterals are thinly myelinated or bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Lower than its narrow-band neighbour, because it fires only briefly at onset rather than continuously, so its mitochondrial density is correspondingly more modest.

PLASTICITY:

After cochlear damage this cell's inhibitory output falls, which is one of the direct causes of the raised resting firing seen in the narrow-band cells.

That loss of damping is a leading candidate mechanism for tinnitus and for loudness intolerance.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

It shares the nucleus's unusually dense astrocytic glutamate transporters, needed because the hearing nerve fires continuously even in silence.

Its glycinergic terminals are also served by glial glycine transporters that clear the transmitter fast enough for the damping to be brief and well timed.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the first hearing relay loses its contrast control.

Every sound would be passed on with its broadband background intact, so a voice in a noisy room would arrive smeared into the noise rather than standing out from it.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Because one cell samples several octaves and projects across the midline, it performs a genuine across-frequency and across-ear computation before any of that information reaches the midbrain.

It is also one of the few cells whose main contribution is subtraction rather than transmission, which makes it a rare example of a projection neuron built to reduce the signal it carries.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: 30 to 200 hearing nerve fibres drawn from a wide frequency span at 0 to 300 spikes per second each.

• OUTPUTS: a brief onset burst of 1 to 3 spikes to narrow-band cells in both cochlear nuclei and to the deep dorsal cochlear nucleus.

• STATE: membrane voltage, refractory countdown, AMPA conductance, adaptation variable.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 40 to 80 megaohms, threshold 15 millivolts above rest, refractory period 1.0 to 1.5 milliseconds, adaptation strength high.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 2 to 5 milliseconds, AMPA decay 0.3 to 1 millisecond, adaptation 20 to 60 milliseconds, glycine decay at its targets 2 to 5 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of this cell after noise trauma removes wideband damping, raising resting rates in the narrow-band population and flattening spectral contrast, which contributes to tinnitus and to difficulty understanding speech in noise.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire a brief onset burst when total sound energy across a wide frequency span rises sharply, and then to fall silent through adaptation.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative sixty five.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called refractory countdown with initial value zero.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
For each time step in the simulation clock, perform the following operations.
    Set wideband drive to the sum of hearing nerve spike counts across all frequency bands in this time step.
    Set net current to the difference of wideband drive and adaptation.
    If refractory countdown is greater than zero, then perform the following actions.
        Set refractory countdown to the difference of refractory countdown and the step duration.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Set voltage change to the quotient of the sum of net current and the negative displacement from rest divided by the membrane time constant.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the product of voltage change and the step duration.
    If membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative fifty, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current time to the end of spike times.
        Set membrane voltage to negative seventy.
        Set refractory countdown to one point two.
        Set adaptation to the sum of adaptation and one point five.
    End the conditional block.
    Set adaptation to the difference of adaptation and the quotient of adaptation divided by the adaptation time constant.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in spike times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because adaptation is one subtraction per step, which reads clearly here.
import random

DT, TAU, TAU_A = 0.02, 3.0, 40.0           # milliseconds
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -65.0, -50.0, -70.0
R_IN, T_REF = 60.0, 1.2                    # megaohms, milliseconds

def onset_cell(level_hz, dur_ms=100.0, seed=2):
    rnd = random.Random(seed)
    v, a, ref, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, 0.0, []
    for i in range(int(dur_ms / DT)):
        wide = 0.30 + 0.0010 * level_hz + 0.03 * rnd.gauss(0.0, 1.0)    # nanoamps, many bands
        if ref > 0.0:
            ref -= DT
        else:
            v += (-(v - V_REST) + R_IN * (wide - a)) * DT / TAU
            if v >= V_TH:
                spikes.append(i * DT)
                v, ref, a = V_RESET, T_REF, a + 1.5
        a -= a * DT / TAU_A
    return spikes

for level in (50, 150, 300):
    s = onset_cell(level)
    print(level, "-> spikes", len(s), "first at", round(s[0], 2) if s else None, "ms")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell that leaves the cochlear nucleus carrying inhibition rather than excitation.

Play a long tone and it answers with one or two spikes at the very beginning and then nothing at all, however long the tone continues.

CHAPTER 141. OCTOPUS CELLS (COG)

A few thousand cells in your brainstem are so leaky that a signal fades inside them in two ten thousandths of a second, and that near total forgetfulness makes them the fastest coincidence detectors in the human body.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An octopus cell is named for its shape, because all of its thick dendrites stream from one side of the cell body like the arms of an octopus caught in a current.

Its job is to detect synchrony, meaning the arrival of many hearing nerve spikes within a fraction of a millisecond of each other, which is what broadband events such as a consonant, a click or a footstep produce.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is large and round, with six to eight stout unbranched dendrites all leaving one pole and running across, not along, the bundle of incoming hearing nerve fibres.

Because those fibres enter in order of pitch, a dendrite crossing them samples the whole hearing range in sequence, from low to high.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 25 to 35 micrometres across, among the largest in the cochlear nucleus, and the dendritic tuft extends 150 to 300 micrometres, enough to sweep several octaves of the frequency map.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There are no accepted subtypes, and the octopus cell area contains essentially only this one principal cell, which is why the region is named after it.

Cells differ only in whether their tuft leans toward high or low frequencies, and that bias is what makes an individual cell prefer upward or downward frequency sweeps.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Octopus cells occupy the octopus cell area, a compact cap in the caudal and dorsal corner of the posteroventral cochlear nucleus where the hearing nerve fibre bundle turns.

That site is itself an interface, lying against the entering nerve root and against the border with both the dorsal cochlear nucleus and the granule cell shell that wraps the whole nucleus.

NUMBER:

In the mouse roughly 200 octopus cells sample about 12,000 hearing nerve fibres, and scaling to the human nerve of about 30,000 fibres gives an estimate of 1,000 to 2,000 per side, so 2,000 to 4,000 in total.

That is one to two percent of the cochlear nuclei and about four millionths of one percent of the nervous system, with low confidence because no direct human count exists.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Input resistance is under 10 megaohms, often 4 to 6, because of an enormous low voltage activated potassium conductance of roughly 500 nanosiemens, about sixty percent of it carried by channels containing the Kv1.1 subunit, plus about 150 nanosiemens of a hyperpolarisation activated conductance built from HCN1 subunits.

The result is a membrane time constant near 0.2 milliseconds, synaptic potentials of a fraction of a millivolt, small action potentials, and an integration window of about one millisecond.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Each cell receives more than sixty hearing nerve fibres as small boutons spread along the dendrites, and no single one can make it fire.

Inhibition is sparse, which is unusual, so the cell is close to a pure detector of excitatory coincidence.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is among the thickest in the auditory brainstem, leaves through the intermediate acoustic stria, crosses the midline, and ends in cup shaped calyx like terminals on cells of the ventral nucleus of the lateral lemniscus.

It also supplies the main excitatory drive to the superior paraolivary nucleus, and it conducts at tens of metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Octopus cells release glutamate onto very fast AMPA receptors whose currents last under a millisecond, with little NMDA receptor contribution in the mature cell, because a slow receptor would smear the timing this cell exists to preserve.

MYELINATION:

The axon is heavily myelinated with widely spaced nodes, matched to a demand for minimum delay, and even the proximal dendrites carry unusual glial investment thought to lower capacitance near the cell body.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Holding a huge potassium leak open at rest means the sodium potassium pump must run continuously even in silence, so these mitochondria rich cells burn energy simply to stay ready and are correspondingly vulnerable to oxygen shortage.

PLASTICITY:

Octopus cells show very little classical synaptic plasticity, and that stability is the point, because a detector of microsecond synchrony cannot afford drifting weights.

Their properties are set during development by sound driven activity, and after deafness the low voltage potassium conductance falls and temporal precision is lost.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The octopus cell area holds an unusually dense extracellular matrix forming perineuronal nets, which are lattices of sugar and protein that clamp channel distribution in place and support fast firing.

Astrocytes here press tightly against the cell body with high potassium buffering capacity, because a cell with this much potassium flux would otherwise flood its own surroundings.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove octopus cells and the brainstem loses its stopwatch for acoustic events.

Speech would keep its pitch and loudness but lose the crisp punctuation of consonant onsets, and the brain would lose the precise timing signal used to suppress echoes and to hear gaps in noise.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The cell does not integrate voltage, it differentiates it, firing when the rate of depolarisation exceeds a threshold rather than when voltage does.

Its dendrites perform sequence detection, so an upward sweep that reaches the tuft tip first can fire the cell while the downward sweep fails, and its hyperpolarisation activated current is a standing inward leak, a form of active self maintenance paid for in every second of life.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: more than 60 hearing nerve fibres spanning several octaves, each 0 to 300 spikes per second and each worth 0.3 to 1 millivolt at the soma, with dendritic position adding an arrival delay of 0 to 0.4 milliseconds.

• OUTPUTS: precisely timed spikes at 0 to 800 per second to the contralateral ventral nucleus of the lateral lemniscus and the superior paraolivary nucleus.

• STATE: membrane voltage, previous membrane voltage, low voltage potassium activation, hyperpolarisation activated current activation, refractory countdown.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 4 to 10 megaohms, potassium conductance about 500 nanosiemens, HCN conductance about 150 nanosiemens, rate of rise threshold 100 to 300 millivolts per millisecond.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane about 0.2 milliseconds, AMPA decay 0.2 to 0.5 milliseconds, integration window about 1 millisecond, refractory period about 0.8 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: when ageing or noise damage makes hearing nerve timing jitter exceed the coincidence window, the cell stops responding to speech transients, producing the pattern of a normal hearing test with poor speech in noise seen in hidden hearing loss and auditory neuropathy.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire a spike only when enough hearing nerve inputs arrive close enough together to make the membrane voltage rise faster than a fixed rate.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called previous voltage with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called refractory countdown with initial value zero.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
For each time step in the simulation clock, perform the following operations.
    Create a number variable called synaptic current with initial value zero.
    For each fibre in the input fibre list, perform the following operations.
        If the fibre is active in this time step, then perform the following actions.
            Set synaptic current to the sum of synaptic current and the single bouton current.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
    Set voltage change to the quotient of the difference of the product of input resistance and synaptic current and membrane voltage divided by the membrane time constant.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the product of voltage change and the step duration.
    Set rate of rise to the quotient of the difference of membrane voltage and previous voltage divided by the step duration.
    Set previous voltage to membrane voltage.
    If refractory countdown is greater than zero, then perform the following actions.
        Set refractory countdown to the difference of refractory countdown and the step duration.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    If rate of rise is greater than or equal to the rate of rise threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current time to the end of spike times.
        Set refractory countdown to zero point eight.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python, because the point is a five microsecond loop that still reads plainly.
import random

DT, TAU, R_IN = 0.005, 0.20, 6.0     # milliseconds, milliseconds, megaohms
EPSC, DVDT_TH, REF = 0.35, 200.0, 0.8   # nanoamps, millivolts per millisecond, milliseconds

def octopus(n_fibres=60, jitter_ms=0.1, dur=6.0, seed=3):
    """Spike times when n_fibres fire near t = 2 ms with the given timing scatter."""
    rnd = random.Random(seed)
    arrivals = [2.0 + rnd.gauss(0.0, jitter_ms) for _ in range(n_fibres)]
    v, prev, ref, spikes = 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, []
    for i in range(int(dur / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        i_syn = EPSC * sum(1 for a in arrivals if a <= t < a + 0.2)   # 0.2 ms pulses
        v += (-v + R_IN * i_syn) * DT / TAU
        dvdt, prev = (v - prev) / DT, v
        if ref > 0.0:
            ref -= DT
            continue
        if dvdt >= DVDT_TH:                 # fires on rate of rise, not on voltage
            spikes.append(round(t, 3))
            ref = REF
    return spikes

for jitter in (0.05, 0.1, 0.3, 1.0):
    print("input scatter", jitter, "ms -> spikes at", octopus(jitter_ms=jitter))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron in the human body combines an input resistance under ten megaohms with dendrites that all point the same way.

Inject a slow current ramp, however large, and the cell will not fire; inject a fast one and it fires at once, a behaviour no ordinary neuron shows.

CHAPTER 142. FUSIFORM CELLS, ALSO CALLED PYRAMIDAL CELLS, OF THE DORSAL COCHLEAR NUCLEUS (Sound-Elevation Reading Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that tells you a sound is above you rather than in front of you, and it does it by noticing which frequency is missing rather than which is present.

Fusiform is Latin for spindle-shaped and pyramidal borrows a name already owned by a very different cortical cell, so neither label teaches what this one does.

Sound-Elevation names the question it answers, which is how high or low a sound source sits, a judgement the two ears cannot make by comparison because both ears hear the same thing.

Reading names the work, because the outer ear carves deep notches into the incoming spectrum at frequencies that shift with elevation, and these cells are the notch-sensitive principal output of the dorsal cochlear nucleus.

Neuron marks it as a projection cell sending the answer to the inferior colliculus.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Fusiform means spindle shaped, tapering at both ends, which describes the cell body exactly, and pyramidal is the alternative name earned by its two opposed dendritic trees.

It is the main output neuron of the dorsal cochlear nucleus, and it compares raw sound arriving at its lower dendrites with information about head, neck, jaw and ear position arriving at its upper dendrites, which is how the brain reads the way the outer ear filters sound and so judges elevation.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The apical tree points up into the molecular layer, is densely branched, and is studded with spines that receive thousands of tiny parallel fibre inputs.

The basal tree points down into the deep layer, is sparser and free of spines, and receives a small number of powerful hearing nerve contacts on its distal branches.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 15 to 25 micrometres long and 8 to 15 wide, with each dendritic tree reaching 150 to 300 micrometres, giving a total span of up to half a millimetre.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

One anatomical class exists, but the cells sort physiologically into the classic type IV response, inhibited by a tone at its own best frequency yet excited by broadband noise, and a spectral edge type that peaks when the rising edge of a spectral notch sits near best frequency.

In humans the dorsal cochlear nucleus has fewer layers and fewer cell types than in cats and rodents, so the human population may be less sharply defined.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Fusiform cells occupy layer two, the fusiform cell layer, of the dorsal cochlear nucleus on both sides of the brainstem at the junction of medulla and pons, with apical dendrites in layer one and basal dendrites in layer three.

This is an explicit interface cell, sitting exactly where the hearing pathway meets the cerebellum like granule cell circuit fed by the trigeminal ganglion, the dorsal column nuclei and the medial vestibular nucleus.

NUMBER:

About 10,000 fusiform cells per side, roughly 20,000 in total, is consistent with human dorsal cochlear nucleus volume and cell density, making them about ten percent of the two cochlear nuclei and two millionths of one percent of the nervous system.

Confidence is low to moderate, and the true figure may be lower because the human dorsal nucleus is proportionally smaller than the cat's.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Input resistance is 50 to 150 megaohms and the membrane time constant 10 to 20 milliseconds, so these are comparatively slow, deliberative cells that fire regularly at 10 to 100 spikes per second.

A transient potassium current gives many of them a pauser or buildup pattern, a gap of tens of milliseconds before firing resumes after a hyperpolarisation.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Basal dendrites take a handful of large hearing nerve synapses that supply most of the drive, while apical spines take thousands of weak parallel fibre synapses carrying touch, jaw position, eye position and self generated sound.

Inhibition lands on the cell body and proximal dendrites from vertical cells, which respond to tones but not to noise, and from cartwheel cells, and the output crosses in the dorsal acoustic stria to the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon leaves the base of the cell, gives local collaterals in the deep layer, then crosses the midline, and it is about one micrometre thick, conducting at 5 to 10 metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Fusiform cells release glutamate in the inferior colliculus and receive glutamate from the hearing nerve and parallel fibres, glycine from vertical cells, and mixed glycine and GABA from cartwheel cells.

Serotonin from the raphe nuclei and acetylcholine strongly modulate them, which is why attention and arousal change their gain.

MYELINATION:

The output axon is myelinated once it leaves the deep layer, while the apical dendrites and the parallel fibres contacting them stay unmyelinated, keeping the molecular layer slow, dense and plastic.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate by brainstem standards at tens rather than hundreds of spikes per second, though the apical spines carry a heavy protein turnover cost because they are constantly rebuilt.

PLASTICITY:

Parallel fibre synapses on the apical spines show both long term potentiation and long term depression, with the direction set by the order of the two signals in a rule called stimulus timing dependent plasticity.

If a touch signal leads the sound by a few milliseconds the synapse strengthens and if it lags it weakens, which is how you learn to ignore the sound of your own chewing, and it is exactly this rule that goes wrong in tinnitus.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes of the molecular layer behave like cerebellar Bergmann glia, wrapping individual spines and clearing glutamate fast enough to keep neighbouring parallel fibre synapses chemically independent.

Microglia in the fusiform cell layer prune apical spines after hearing loss, and that pruning tracks the emergence of tinnitus in animals.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take fusiform cells away and the dorsal cochlear nucleus almost stops speaking to the rest of the brain.

The listener would keep left and right localisation but lose up and down, could no longer tell a sound in front from one behind, and would stop being able to cancel the sounds made by their own body.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Action potentials travel backward from the cell body into the apical dendrites, and their coincidence with parallel fibre input sets the sign of plasticity, while calcium entering the spines triggers local protein synthesis and gene transcription that make the change permanent.

The cells also release endocannabinoids backward onto parallel fibre terminals to damp excessive input, and they remodel their basal dendrites structurally with age.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: 4 to 10 narrowly tuned hearing nerve fibres on basal dendrites at 0 to 300 spikes per second, thousands of parallel fibres on apical spines at 0 to 50 spikes per second each, glycinergic vertical cell inhibition tuned to nearby frequencies, and mixed glycine and GABA from cartwheel cells.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to 120 spikes per second to the contralateral central nucleus of the inferior colliculus and to local deep layer targets.

• STATE: membrane voltage, transient potassium inactivation, calcium level in each apical spine, per synapse weight, refractory countdown.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 50 to 150 megaohms, resting rate 1 to 10 spikes per second, excitatory bandwidth about one third of an octave, inhibitory bandwidth about one octave, plasticity window plus or minus 10 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, transient potassium inactivation 20 to 50 milliseconds, spine calcium 50 to 200 milliseconds, plasticity consolidation minutes to hours.

• FAILURE MODE: after cochlear damage the balance tips toward the touch input and spontaneous rate, bursting and synchrony all rise, which is the leading physiological account of tinnitus, and timed pairing of sound with electrical stimulation of the neck can push the same synapses back down, the basis of bimodal tinnitus therapy.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the firing rate of a fusiform cell as narrow excitation minus broad inhibition, so that the cell reports a missing band of frequencies.
Create a number variable called spontaneous rate with initial value ten.
Create a list variable called output rates with initial value empty list.
For each notch position in the list of tested notch centres, perform the following operations.
    Create a number variable called excitation with initial value zero.
    Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value zero.
    For each frequency channel in the cochlear channel list, perform the following operations.
        Set channel energy to the sound energy in this channel for this notch position.
        Set excitation to the sum of excitation and the product of channel energy and the narrow tuning weight for this channel.
        Set inhibition to the sum of inhibition and the product of channel energy and the broad tuning weight for this channel.
    End the loop.
    Set net drive to the difference of excitation and inhibition.
    Set firing rate to the sum of spontaneous rate and the product of net drive and forty.
    If firing rate is less than zero, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to zero.
    End the conditional block.
    Add firing rate to the end of output rates.
End the loop.
Display output rates to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the computation is a weighted sum along a frequency axis, which reads cleanly as a loop.
import math

BF = 8000.0                                            # best frequency, hertz
CHANNELS = [200.0 * (1.06 ** k) for k in range(64)]    # cochlear filter centres

def weight(freq, centre, octaves):
    """Gaussian tuning measured in octaves, so it is symmetric on a log axis."""
    d = math.log(freq / centre, 2.0)
    return math.exp(-(d * d) / (2.0 * octaves * octaves))

def notched_noise(notch_centre, width_oct=0.5):
    """Flat noise with one band removed."""
    return [0.0 if abs(math.log(f / notch_centre, 2.0)) < width_oct / 2.0 else 1.0
            for f in CHANNELS]

def fusiform_rate(spectrum, g_inh=0.25, spont=10.0):
    """Narrow excitation minus broad inhibition, the type IV recipe."""
    exc = sum(e * weight(f, BF, 0.30) for f, e in zip(CHANNELS, spectrum))
    inh = sum(e * weight(f, BF, 1.00) for f, e in zip(CHANNELS, spectrum))
    return max(0.0, spont + 20.0 * (exc - g_inh * inh))

print("broadband noise ", round(fusiform_rate([1.0] * len(CHANNELS)), 1), "spikes per second")
for centre in (4000.0, 6000.0, 8000.0, 11000.0):
    print("notch at", int(centre), "Hz", round(fusiform_rate(notched_noise(centre)), 1))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only auditory cell with two dendritic trees pointing in opposite directions and listening to two different senses.

Touch the ear or jaw while recording and the cell responds, and a hearing neuron that answers to touch is a signature no other principal cell of the cochlear nucleus shares.

CHAPTER 143. GIANT CELLS (Deep-Layer Hearing-Output Neuron) (COG)

Hidden in the deepest layer of the hearing nucleus are its largest neurons, cells so broad that a single one listens to almost the whole piano keyboard at once.

Giant records only body size, which teaches nothing about purpose, and the detailed function of these cells is genuinely not settled, so the name records what is solid rather than inventing a role.

Deep-Layer names its place in the dorsal cochlear nucleus, where it is the sparser of the two excitatory cell types that send axons out of the nucleus, alongside the far more numerous elevation-reading cells.

Hearing-Output names the one firm fact, that its axon leaves in the dorsal acoustic stria and terminates in the inferior colliculus, with some axons instead carrying inhibition to the opposite cochlear nucleus.

Neuron marks it as a projection cell rather than a local one.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A giant cell is a very large multipolar neuron, meaning one with many dendrites leaving the cell body in many directions, and it is a second output neuron of the dorsal cochlear nucleus alongside the fusiform cell.

Where a fusiform cell reports on one narrow band of pitch, a giant cell reports on the pattern of energy across the whole spectrum, making it a detector of broadband events and sound quality rather than of pitch.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The defining feature is a cell body whose average diameter exceeds 22 micrometres, the criterion anatomists use to identify them.

Dendrites are long, thick, sparsely branched and mostly spine free, running hundreds of micrometres across the frequency map, and some tips climb into the molecular layer to sample the touch carrying parallel fibres.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 22 to 40 micrometres across, several times the volume of a typical brainstem interneuron, and the dendritic field spans 400 to 800 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Five classes were distinguished in the cat by cell shape: elongate bipolar, elongate multipolar, globular, radiate and oriented multipolar giant cells.

They differ chiefly in how their dendrites are aligned relative to the frequency axis, and whether these are truly separate types or a continuum is unresolved, since no molecular marker yet separates them.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Giant cells live in the deep layer, layer three, of the dorsal cochlear nucleus, with some cell bodies in layer two and, in species with a distinct layer four, in that layer too.

The deep layer is itself an interface, because it is where the dorsal nucleus abuts the ventral cochlear nucleus and receives T-stellate and D-stellate collaterals, so a single giant cell spans deep layer, fusiform cell layer and molecular layer at once.

NUMBER:

About 1,000 giant cells per side, roughly 2,000 in total, is about one percent of the cochlear nuclei and around two millionths of one percent of the nervous system.

Confidence is low, since no human count exists and the estimate is scaled from cat and mouse work in which giant cells are a small minority of dorsal cochlear nucleus neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Intracellular recordings in mouse slices show regular firing with broad action potentials and a prominent slow afterhyperpolarisation, the dip in voltage that follows a spike.

Input resistance is low for so large a cell at roughly 40 to 100 megaohms, the membrane time constant is 10 to 25 milliseconds, and firing runs at 5 to 60 spikes per second, often building up over tens of milliseconds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation comes from hearing nerve fibres directly, from T-stellate collaterals arriving out of the ventral cochlear nucleus, and at the distal tips from parallel fibres.

Inhibition comes from vertical cells, from cartwheel cells at the apical tips, and from the wideband D-stellate inhibitor, which is strong enough that broadband noise can silence the cell.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thick, one to three micrometres, and leaves through the dorsal acoustic stria to the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus on the opposite side, ending in rostrocaudal bands aligned with the frequency layers there.

A further branch reaches the medial geniculate body of the thalamus directly, so a giant cell can deliver hearing information to the forebrain with one relay fewer than any other route.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Giant cells release glutamate, and their terminals in the inferior colliculus form asymmetric contacts, the shape typical of excitation, on disc shaped and stellate cells there.

They receive glutamate, glycine and GABA, and are modulated by serotonin from the raphe nuclei and noradrenaline from the locus coeruleus.

MYELINATION:

The output axon is well myelinated, matching its job of getting a broadband alerting signal quickly to midbrain and thalamus, while the dendrites are unmyelinated as dendrites almost always are.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

A large cell body and long dendrites mean a large membrane area to keep polarised, so resting cost is high even at moderate firing rates, and giant cells are among the first neurons here to shrink after cochlear damage.

PLASTICITY:

Their distal apical inputs from parallel fibres undergo the same long term potentiation and depression seen on fusiform cells.

After hearing loss they show raised spontaneous firing and weakened glycinergic inhibition, and their very broad convergence means the change is amplified quickly.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Because a giant cell body offers so much surface, astrocytes wrap it in a sheath thicker than that around neighbouring fusiform cells, buffering the potassium released during bursts.

Perineuronal nets are present but sparser than around fast spiking cells, consistent with a cell built for integration rather than for speed.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete giant cells and the dorsal cochlear nucleus keeps its fine frequency analysis but loses its broadband alarm.

The wide spectrum onset of a snapping branch would still reach the midbrain by other routes, but the fast, direct, thalamus bound signal saying something just happened across the whole spectrum would be gone.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Long dendrites crossing many frequency slices make this a genuine dendritic computation, with distant inputs filtered and delayed before they reach the cell body.

The slow afterhyperpolarisation gives the cell a memory of its own recent activity lasting a hundred milliseconds or more, so its gain depends on its history, and its broad convergence makes it a natural target for volume transmitted serotonin that can shift it from silence to responsiveness.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: hearing nerve fibres spanning one to three octaves at 0 to 300 spikes per second, T-stellate collaterals from the ventral cochlear nucleus, wideband glycinergic inhibition from D-stellate cells, parallel fibre excitation at the distal tips, and serotonergic modulation as a slow scalar gain.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to 120 spikes per second to the contralateral inferior colliculus in frequency aligned bands, and directly to the medial geniculate body.

• STATE: membrane voltage, a dendritic voltage for each of at least three compartments, calcium activated potassium conductance, refractory countdown.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 40 to 100 megaohms, spectral integration width one to three octaves, inhibition to excitation ratio near one to one for broadband sound, dendritic delay 0 to 2 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 25 milliseconds, afterhyperpolarisation 80 to 200 milliseconds, buildup ramp 20 to 60 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: after cochlear damage giant cells shrink and lose inhibition, and their broad convergence turns them into amplifiers of central gain, contributing to hyperacusis, in which ordinary sounds become painfully loud.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to integrate sound energy across three dendritic compartments spanning many frequency slices, then fire with a slow gain reducing memory of recent activity.
Create a number variable called somatic voltage with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called slow potassium with initial value zero.
Create a list variable called compartment voltages with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly three times.
    Add zero to the end of compartment voltages.
End the loop.
For each time step in the simulation clock, perform the following operations.
    Create a number variable called total dendritic current with initial value zero.
    For each compartment in compartment voltages, perform the following operations.
        Set local net to the difference of the sound energy reaching this compartment and the wideband inhibitory drive.
        Set the compartment voltage to the sum of the compartment voltage and the product of local net and the compartment coupling factor.
        Set total dendritic current to the sum of total dendritic current and the compartment voltage.
    End the loop.
    Set effective current to the difference of total dendritic current and slow potassium.
    Set somatic voltage to the sum of somatic voltage and the quotient of the difference of effective current and somatic voltage divided by the membrane time constant.
    If somatic voltage is greater than or equal to the firing threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Display the current time to the console.
        Set somatic voltage to zero.
        Set slow potassium to the sum of slow potassium and the afterhyperpolarisation increment.
    End the conditional block.
    Set slow potassium to the product of slow potassium and the slow potassium decay factor.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: three dendritic compartments plus a slow potassium memory, readable in one screen.
DT, TAU_M, TAU_AHP = 0.1, 15.0, 120.0     # all in milliseconds
THRESH, AHP_STEP = 7.0, 1.0               # arbitrary millivolt units
COUPLING = [1.0, 0.6, 0.35]               # distal dendrites are electrically further away

def giant_cell(energy_per_compartment, inhibition, dur_ms=300.0):
    v, k, comp, spikes = 0.0, 0.0, [0.0, 0.0, 0.0], []
    for i in range(int(dur_ms / DT)):
        drive = 0.0
        for j in range(3):
            net = energy_per_compartment[j] - inhibition
            comp[j] += (net - comp[j]) * DT / 8.0       # dendritic low pass filter
            drive += COUPLING[j] * comp[j]
        v += ((drive - k) - v) * DT / TAU_M
        if v >= THRESH:
            spikes.append(round(i * DT, 1))
            v, k = 0.0, k + AHP_STEP
        k -= k * DT / TAU_AHP
    return spikes

print("narrow band :", len(giant_cell([9.0, 0.0, 0.0], 0.5)), "spikes")
print("broadband   :", len(giant_cell([9.0, 9.0, 9.0], 0.5)), "spikes")
print("broadband with wideband inhibition:", len(giant_cell([9.0, 9.0, 9.0], 7.0)), "spikes")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else in the cochlear nucleus is this big, and under the microscope a giant cell dwarfs its neighbours.

Functionally it is the only cochlear nucleus cell that can send a signal straight to the auditory thalamus without stopping at the midbrain first.

CHAPTER 144. CARTWHEEL CELLS (COG)

This cell is a piece of cerebellum that got lost on its way and settled in the hearing pathway, firing the same strange stuttering bursts as a cerebellar Purkinje cell but using a different inhibitory chemical to do it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A cartwheel cell is an inhibitory interneuron, meaning a local cell whose job is to quieten others rather than to send messages out of the region, and it is the most numerous inhibitory neuron of the dorsal cochlear nucleus.

It damps fusiform cells whenever the touch and position signals carried by parallel fibres become active, which is how the hearing system subtracts predictable, self generated sound such as your own chewing or a collar scraping your ear.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is round to oval and gives rise to one or two thick primary dendrites that branch into a bushy, heavily spiny tree confined to the molecular layer.

Those spines contain mGluR1 alpha, a slow glutamate receptor that is a hallmark of cerebellar Purkinje cells, though unlike a Purkinje cell the tree is not flattened into one plane and there is no single powerful climbing fibre.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 10 to 20 micrometres across, smaller than fusiform cells, and the dendritic tree spans 100 to 200 micrometres without leaving the molecular layer.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No formal subtypes are recognised, but the cells fall into two functional groups by target, one inhibiting fusiform cells and one preferentially inhibiting other cartwheel cells.

They also differ in internal chloride concentration, which decides whether glycine arriving from a neighbour inhibits them or, remarkably, excites them.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cartwheel cells sit at the border between the molecular layer and the fusiform cell layer of the dorsal cochlear nucleus on both sides of the brainstem, with dendrites entirely above that border and axons entirely below it.

That border is precisely the interface between the cerebellum like circuit above and the hearing circuit below, and in primates including humans these cells are identified by staining for calbindin and for the inositol trisphosphate receptor.

NUMBER:

About 7,000 cartwheel cells per side, roughly 14,000 in total, is about seven percent of the two cochlear nuclei and about 1.6 millionths of one percent of the nervous system.

Confidence is low, and there is genuine uncertainty about the size of the human population, because the human dorsal cochlear nucleus has fewer layers and fewer cell types than the cat's.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The signature is the complex spike, a burst of two to five fast sodium action potentials riding on a slower calcium driven hump lasting 10 to 30 milliseconds, and cartwheel cells are the only cells in the cochlear nuclei that fire them.

They also fire ordinary simple spikes, run at 5 to 30 events per second even in silence, and have an input resistance of 100 to 300 megaohms with a membrane time constant of 10 to 20 milliseconds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation arrives almost entirely from parallel fibres onto the spines, thousands of weak synapses carrying multisensory information, with inhibition from other cartwheel cells and from molecular layer stellate cells.

Output lands on the cell bodies and proximal dendrites of fusiform cells, on giant cells, and on other cartwheel cells, all of it local and none of it leaving the nucleus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is short, thin and unmyelinated, ramifying within a few hundred micrometres of the cell body and conducting at well under one metre per second, which is acceptable because the targets are next door.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The principal transmitter is glycine, and many cartwheel cells also contain GABA and its synthesising enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase, so one vesicle can carry both.

Because target cells differ in internal chloride, the same release can inhibit a fusiform cell while depolarising a neighbouring cartwheel cell, a context dependence that is rare in the brain.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable in the usual sense, because these axons are short unmyelinated local branches and there is nothing for an oligodendrocyte to wrap; the absence is meaningful rather than unknown, since a purely local inhibitor gains nothing from myelin and pays for it in space.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Continuous spontaneous firing and repeated calcium loading during complex spikes make the cost per cell high relative to its small size, and pumping that calcium back out, rather than the sodium spikes, dominates the bill.

PLASTICITY:

Parallel fibre synapses onto cartwheel spines undergo bidirectional long term potentiation and depression with the sign set by spike timing.

Sustained firing makes the cell manufacture endocannabinoids, fatty signalling molecules that travel backward across the synapse and suppress parallel fibre release for tens of seconds.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes of the molecular layer behave like cerebellar Bergmann glia, enclosing individual spines so that each parallel fibre synapse stays chemically private.

They also supply the fatty acid precursors from which the endocannabinoid signal is built, so here the support cells are part of the plasticity machinery rather than mere housekeeping.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove cartwheel cells and the dorsal cochlear nucleus loses its editor.

Fusiform cells would fire to every touch of the ear and every movement of the jaw, so the world would fill with phantom sounds made by your own body, and the nucleus would lose the ability to learn which sounds to ignore.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Complex spikes are a dendritic calcium event rather than a somatic one, so the cell's characteristic output is generated in the dendrites and merely read out at the cell body.

Retrograde endocannabinoid release makes the cell an active regulator of its own input, mGluR1 alpha drives slow calcium release from internal stores that outlasts the stimulus by seconds, and because its transmitter is inhibitory on one target and excitatory on another it cannot be modelled as a simple negative weight.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: thousands of parallel fibre synapses at 0 to 50 spikes per second each, carrying trigeminal, dorsal column and vestibular information, plus local inhibition from other cartwheel cells and molecular layer stellate cells.

• OUTPUTS: glycine and GABA release as simple spikes at 5 to 30 per second and complex spikes at 1 to 10 per second, onto fusiform cells, giant cells and other cartwheel cells.

• STATE: membrane voltage, dendritic calcium plateau, internal calcium store level, endocannabinoid level, per synapse weight.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 100 to 300 megaohms, burst size 2 to 5 spikes, chloride reversal potential between negative 80 and negative 55 millivolts depending on target, endocannabinoid suppression up to about 60 percent of parallel fibre release.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, calcium plateau 10 to 30 milliseconds, internal store calcium 0.5 to 2 seconds, endocannabinoid suppression 10 to 60 seconds, plasticity minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: when cartwheel inhibition weakens after hearing loss, fusiform cells become hyperactive, synchronised and bursty, which is the leading circuit account of tinnitus, while excessive cartwheel inhibition would instead blunt genuine responses to quiet sound.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to generate the cartwheel cell's complex spike, a short burst of fast spikes riding on a slow calcium hump, and to suppress its own input after heavy activity.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative sixty.
Create a number variable called calcium plateau with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called endocannabinoid level with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called spikes in this burst with initial value zero.
For each time step in the simulation clock, perform the following operations.
    Set parallel fibre drive to the product of the incoming parallel fibre count and the difference of one and endocannabinoid level.
    Set total drive to the sum of parallel fibre drive and calcium plateau.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of the difference of total drive and the displacement from rest divided by the membrane time constant.
    If membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative forty, then perform the following actions.
        Display the current time to the console.
        Set membrane voltage to negative fifty.
        Set spikes in this burst to the sum of spikes in this burst and one.
        If spikes in this burst is equal to one, then perform the following actions.
            Set calcium plateau to eight.
        End the conditional block.
        If spikes in this burst is greater than or equal to four, then perform the following actions.
            Set calcium plateau to zero.
            Set spikes in this burst to zero.
            Set endocannabinoid level to the sum of endocannabinoid level and zero point zero five.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Set calcium plateau to the product of calcium plateau and zero point nine seven.
    Set endocannabinoid level to the product of endocannabinoid level and zero point nine nine nine.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: a two variable burst generator shows a complex spike without a full channel model.
DT, TAU_M = 0.05, 12.0                       # milliseconds
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -60.0, -40.0, -50.0
CA_AMP, CA_DECAY, MAX_BURST = 8.0, 0.97, 4   # plateau size, per step decay, spikes per burst

def cartwheel(pf_drive, dur_ms=400.0):
    v, ca, ecb, n_burst = V_REST, 0.0, 0.0, 0
    spikes, bursts = 0, []
    for i in range(int(dur_ms / DT)):
        drive = pf_drive * (1.0 - ecb) + ca      # own calcium plateau feeds the burst
        v += (-(v - V_REST) + drive) * DT / TAU_M
        if v >= V_TH:
            v, spikes, n_burst = V_RESET, spikes + 1, n_burst + 1
            if n_burst == 1:
                ca = CA_AMP
                bursts.append(round(i * DT, 2))
            elif n_burst >= MAX_BURST:
                ca, n_burst = 0.0, 0
                ecb = min(0.6, ecb + 0.05)       # retrograde self suppression
        ca *= CA_DECAY
        ecb *= 0.999
    return spikes, len(bursts), round(ecb, 3)

for drive in (22.0, 30.0):
    print("drive", drive, "-> spikes %d, bursts %d, suppression %s" % cartwheel(drive))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell in the entire hearing pathway that fires complex spikes.

A train of two to five spikes glued together on a slow hump identifies a cartwheel cell instantly, and finding a Purkinje cell's behaviour inside a hearing nucleus remains one of the great surprises of auditory neuroscience.

CHAPTER 145. SUPERIOR OLIVARY COMPLEX NEURONS (Two-Ear Comparison Neuron) (COG)

These cells measure the difference in arrival time of a sound at your two ears down to about ten millionths of a second, the most precise measurement any part of your body performs.

Superior olivary complex is an address borrowed from a fancied resemblance to an olive, and it names a place rather than a purpose.

Two-Ear names what is special about this station, that it is the first point in the whole ascending pathway where signals from the left and right ears meet on a single cell.

Comparison names the arithmetic, because one part of the complex measures the arrival-time gap between the ears down to tens of millionths of a second while another weighs the loudness difference by pitting direct excitation from the near ear against glycine-mediated inhibition driven by the far ear.

Neuron marks it as the cell whose two comparisons together place a sound on the horizontal circle around the head.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The superior olivary complex is a cluster of small nuclei in the lower pons, and it is the first place in the brain where information from the two ears meets.

Its neurons answer one question, where a sound lies on the left to right axis, using arrival time for low pitched sounds and loudness difference for high pitched ones, while a third group sends commands back down to the ear to adjust its own sensitivity.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Medial superior olive neurons are strikingly bipolar, one dendrite reaching toward the left ear's inputs and one toward the right ear's, so the cell is a physical adding machine for two ears.

Medial nucleus of the trapezoid body neurons are round and each is grasped by a single gigantic terminal, the calyx of Held, the largest synapse in the mammalian brain, covering roughly half the cell surface.

SIZE:

Medial superior olive cell bodies are 20 to 30 micrometres with dendrites 100 to 200 micrometres long on each side, lateral superior olive cells are 15 to 25 micrometres, and olivocochlear neurons, which send axons back to the ear, are 20 to 35 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Medial superior olive principal neurons, which compute interaural time difference.

• Lateral superior olive principal neurons, which compute interaural level difference.

• Medial nucleus of the trapezoid body principal neurons, which convert excitation from the opposite ear into precisely timed inhibition.

• Lateral and ventral nuclei of the trapezoid body neurons, which supply inhibition driven by the same side.

• Superior paraolivary nucleus neurons, which signal sound offsets and gaps.

• Olivocochlear neurons, about 360 medial fibres and about 1,005 lateral fibres in humans, which contact outer hair cells and hearing nerve endings respectively.

WHERE IT LIVES:

All of these nuclei sit in the ventral part of the caudal pons just above the junction with the medulla, straddling the trapezoid body, which is the great sheet of fibres crossing from the cochlear nuclei.

The medial superior olive lies medially, the lateral superior olive laterally, and the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body between them near the midline, so the complex is the interface between the two sides of the hearing system and, through the olivocochlear cells, between brain and inner ear.

NUMBER:

Human counts are unusually good here: about 10,000 to 11,000 neurons in the medial superior olive, about 5,600 in the lateral superior olive, and about 3,000 to 5,000 principal neurons in the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body, per side.

Including the periolivary nuclei a reasonable total is 25,000 to 30,000 per side, so 50,000 to 60,000 in all, under one thousandth of the roughly 200 million brainstem neurons, with good confidence for the two superior olives and lower confidence for the accessory nuclei.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Medial superior olive principal neurons are extreme speed specialists, with an input resistance of about 6 to 9 megaohms and a membrane time constant of a few hundred microseconds, because a dense low voltage activated potassium conductance built on Kv1 subunits, three times denser at the cell body than in the dendrites, cuts short every synaptic potential.

Medial nucleus of the trapezoid body cells fire reliably at 600 to 800 spikes per second and follow their calyx input one spike for one.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

A medial superior olive neuron receives surprisingly few inputs, a handful of excitatory endings from spherical bushy cells on each side, balanced in strength and dynamics, plus glycinergic inhibition from the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body driven by the opposite ear and the lateral nucleus of the trapezoid body driven by the same ear.

A lateral superior olive neuron simply subtracts, taking excitation from the same side and glycinergic inhibition from the opposite side by way of the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body, and both send their answers up to the inferior colliculus and the nuclei of the lateral lemniscus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Ascending axons are thick and heavily myelinated at one to three micrometres, conducting at tens of metres per second, while medial olivocochlear axons run the other way, leaving the brainstem through the vestibular nerve to reach the cochlea.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Excitation is glutamate on very fast AMPA receptors with almost no NMDA component in the adult, and inhibition is glycine from the medial and lateral nuclei of the trapezoid body, with GABA in a slower modulatory role.

Medial olivocochlear neurons release acetylcholine onto outer hair cells, which paradoxically inhibits them through a calcium activated potassium channel, while lateral olivocochlear neurons release a cocktail including dopamine and opioid peptides.

MYELINATION:

Myelination here is among the most precisely regulated in the brain, because the computation depends on axons from the two ears arriving with matched delays, so sheath thickness and node spacing are tuned during development to equalise conduction time.

Myelin is therefore a computational variable in this system rather than mere insulation.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high, since the calyx of Held can release hundreds of vesicles per second without pause and the potassium leak of medial superior olive cells never closes, and these nuclei are among the most densely cytochrome oxidase stained in the whole brainstem.

PLASTICITY:

Inhibitory inputs to the medial superior olive are refined by experience in the first weeks after hearing begins, and if that refinement fails the cell's preferred direction stays permanently biased.

Olivocochlear feedback shows use dependent strengthening that protects the ear against damage from sustained loud noise.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Perineuronal nets are exceptionally dense here, especially around medial nucleus of the trapezoid body cells, built from aggrecan and brevican, and they are required for accurate spike timing rather than merely present.

Astrocytes wrap the calyx of Held so completely that they help clear glutamate between individual spikes, with specialised glial processes filling the gap between calyx and cell surface.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take the superior olivary complex away and the pons still carries sound upward, but the brain loses all knowledge of where a sound sits on the left to right axis.

The listener would also lose the ability to pick one voice out of a crowd, because separating voices depends on knowing they come from different directions, and would lose the ear's own protective volume control.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Medial superior olive dendrites normalise synaptic potentials so that a distant synapse counts as much as a near one, and the cells suppress their own sodium channels at the cell body so that spikes are generated only in the axon, keeping the soma a clean analogue summing point.

Coincidence detection here resolves tens of microseconds, finer than the width of a single action potential, which is possible only because inhibition is timed to arrive fractions of a millisecond before the matching excitation and so shifts the effective delay.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: phase locked spikes from spherical bushy cells of both cochlear nuclei at 0 to 300 per second with sub millisecond timing, and glycinergic inhibition from the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body arriving 0.2 to 0.4 milliseconds ahead of the matching excitation.

• OUTPUTS: a rate coded direction signal at 0 to 200 spikes per second to the inferior colliculus and lateral lemniscus, plus acetylcholine to outer hair cells from the olivocochlear branch.

• STATE: membrane voltage, Kv1 activation, an excitatory conductance for each ear, inhibitory conductance, refractory countdown.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 6 to 9 megaohms, coincidence window 100 to 400 microseconds, best interaural time difference within plus or minus 700 microseconds for a human head, internal delay 0 to 300 microseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 200 to 400 microseconds, AMPA decay 0.2 to 0.4 milliseconds, glycine decay 1 to 3 milliseconds, olivocochlear feedback 30 to 300 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: malformation and neuron loss here are documented in autism spectrum disorder and in sudden infant death, and degraded timing produces normal hearing thresholds with severe difficulty locating sounds and following speech in a noisy room, while the auditory brainstem response wave generated in this region, wave four, is delayed or absent when the complex is damaged.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to find which interaural time difference best matches a sound source, by counting coincidences between spikes from the two ears across a bank of delay tuned cells.
Create a list variable called tuning curve with initial value empty list.
For each candidate delay in the list of internal delays, perform the following operations.
    Create a number variable called coincidence count with initial value zero.
    For each left ear spike time in the left ear spike list, perform the following operations.
        For each right ear spike time in the right ear spike list, perform the following operations.
            Set gap to the difference of left ear spike time and the sum of right ear spike time and candidate delay.
            If gap is less than zero, then perform the following actions.
                Set gap to the product of gap and negative one.
            End the conditional block.
            If gap is less than the coincidence window, then perform the following actions.
                Set coincidence count to the sum of coincidence count and one.
            End the conditional block.
        End the loop.
    End the loop.
    Set firing rate to the difference of coincidence count and the product of the contralateral inhibition strength and coincidence count.
    If firing rate is less than zero, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to zero.
    End the conditional block.
    Add firing rate to the end of tuning curve.
End the loop.
Display tuning curve to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the medial superior olive is literally a cross correlator, expressed here in a few lines.
import random

WINDOW, PERIOD, JITTER = 0.15, 2.0, 0.10   # coincidence window, tone period, jitter, milliseconds

def ear_spikes(true_itd_ms, n_cycles=200, seed=0):
    """Phase locked trains from a 500 hertz tone; the right ear lags by true_itd_ms."""
    rnd = random.Random(seed)
    left = [c * PERIOD + rnd.gauss(0.0, JITTER) for c in range(n_cycles)]
    right = [c * PERIOD + true_itd_ms + rnd.gauss(0.0, JITTER) for c in range(n_cycles)]
    return left, right

def itd_tuning(left, right, delays, inhibition=0.0):
    """Count coincidences at each internal delay; inhibition scales the output down."""
    curve = []
    for d in delays:
        shifted = [r + d for r in right]
        hits = sum(1 for lt in left for st in shifted if abs(lt - st) < WINDOW)
        curve.append(max(0.0, hits * (1.0 - inhibition)))
    return curve

left, right = ear_spikes(true_itd_ms=0.30)        # source about 30 degrees to the right
delays = [-0.6 + 0.1 * k for k in range(13)]      # internal delay line, milliseconds
curve = itd_tuning(left, right, delays, inhibition=0.1)
for d, c in zip(delays, curve):
    print(round(d, 2), "ms internal delay ->", int(c), "coincidences")
print("best internal delay", round(delays[curve.index(max(curve))], 2), "ms")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The calyx of Held is visible under a light microscope as a hand shaped terminal clasping a single cell, and there is nothing else like it in the mammalian brain.

More broadly, no other neurons anywhere in the body resolve time differences of ten microseconds, a precision roughly fifty times finer than the duration of their own action potentials.

CHAPTER 146. MEDIAL OLIVOCOCHLEAR EFFERENT NEURONS (Cochlear-Gain Turning-Down Neuron) (NON-COG)

This is one of the only nerve cells in your body whose whole job is to reach out of the brain, travel down a nerve, and turn down your own ear.

Olivocochlear efferent is a wiring diagram written as a word, telling you the start and the end of the axon but nothing about the effect.

Cochlear-Gain names what the cell acts upon, the inner ear's own amplifier, which is built from the outer hair cells and can add up to about fifty decibels of amplification to a quiet sound.

Turning-Down names the action, because this cell's cholinergic endings land directly on those outer hair cells and reduce that amplification by up to about twenty decibels.

Neuron marks it as an efferent cell running outward from brain to ear, the opposite direction to almost every other sensory nerve.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Almost every nerve in the body carries news inward, from the world to the brain.

This one runs the other way.

It sits in the brainstem, in a cluster of cells called the superior olivary complex, and sends an axon out of the skull cavity into the inner ear.

When it fires it makes an outer hair cell leak potassium and go quiet, which turns the cochlear amplifier down.

The purpose is twofold, to protect the ear from loud noise and to help pick a voice out of a noisy room.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

These are large, chunky, multipolar cells, meaning several thick dendrites radiate out from the cell body in different directions.

Their dendrites spread widely through the area around the olive, sampling from many passing fibres at once.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly 20 to 35 micrometres across, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre, making them among the larger cells of the superior olivary complex.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Crossed medial olivocochlear neurons, the majority in most species, whose axons cross the midline to reach the opposite ear.

• Uncrossed medial olivocochlear neurons, which serve the ear on their own side.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The medial, ventral and anterior periolivary regions of the superior olivary complex in the brainstem.

The axon leaves the brainstem in the vestibular nerve, then crosses into the cochlear nerve at the anastomosis of Oort, the interface at which an efferent fibre transfers from the balance nerve to the hearing nerve.

NUMBER:

Roughly 1,000 to 2,000 per side in humans, so on the order of 2,000 to 4,000 in total.

Confidence is moderate, since human counts are extrapolated from primate and cat material.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The cell fires at low rates at rest, typically under 10 spikes per second, and climbs to about 60 to 100 spikes per second when driven by sound.

Its response to sound is slow to build and slow to decay, on a scale of tens of milliseconds, which suits a gain control rather than a signal carrier.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives its main drive from the posteroventral cochlear nucleus of the opposite side, which is what makes the reflex arc a three-neuron loop from ear to brainstem and back to ear.

It also receives descending input from the inferior colliculus and auditory cortex, so higher centres can set the gain deliberately.

Its terminals end directly on the cell bodies of outer hair cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thick and among the fastest efferents in the head, conducting at roughly 10 to 20 metres per second.

Each axon branches to supply many outer hair cells, spread across a span of the cochlear spiral.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases acetylcholine, acting on an unusual nicotinic receptor built from alpha9 and alpha10 subunits found almost nowhere else in the body.

Calcium entering through that receptor opens calcium-activated potassium channels, so the net effect of an excitatory transmitter is to hyperpolarise and silence the hair cell.

Many terminals also carry gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) as a co-transmitter.

MYELINATION:

The axon is heavily myelinated along its course through the brainstem and the vestibular nerve, losing its sheath only as it enters the organ of Corti.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest at rest and moderate under sustained noise exposure, when the cell may fire for minutes at a time to hold the amplifier down.

PLASTICITY:

The strength of this reflex varies between people and is reduced in many with difficulty hearing speech in noise despite a normal audiogram.

Sectioning the olivocochlear bundle in animals removes the protection and makes the ear markedly more vulnerable to permanent noise damage.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Its terminals in the organ of Corti are surrounded by Deiters cells, the supporting cells that cup each outer hair cell, and these help clear potassium released during the response.

Schwann cells rather than oligodendrocytes myelinate the peripheral portion of the axon once it leaves the brainstem.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the inner ear loses its volume control.

Quiet sounds would still be amplified beautifully, but the ear would have no way to protect itself against sustained loudness and no way to suppress a noisy background in order to hear a voice through it.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is a neuron that changes the mechanical properties of a sense organ.

Its firing alters the stiffness and motility of the outer hair cell, so the consequence is not a change in a downstream firing rate but a change in the physics of how sound is transduced in the first place.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: excitatory drive from the contralateral posteroventral cochlear nucleus at 0 to 200 spikes per second, plus descending input from inferior colliculus and auditory cortex.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to 100 spikes per second of acetylcholine onto outer hair cells, reducing cochlear amplifier gain by 0 to 20 decibels.

• STATE: membrane voltage, refractory countdown, slow build-up variable representing the reflex's rise time.

• PARAMETERS: resting rate under 10 spikes per second, maximum rate 60 to 100, conduction velocity 10 to 20 metres per second, maximum gain reduction about 20 decibels.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 5 to 10 milliseconds, reflex onset 15 to 40 milliseconds, reflex decay 50 to 200 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: a weak or absent reflex leaves the ear unprotected against noise trauma and is associated with poor speech understanding in noise despite normal pure-tone thresholds.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert sound level in one ear into a slowly rising suppression of the cochlear amplifier in the other.
Create a number variable called reflex drive with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called gain reduction in decibels with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called maximum reduction with initial value twenty.
For each time step in the simulation clock, perform the following operations.
    Set reflex drive to the count of spikes arriving from the opposite cochlear nucleus in this time step.
    If reflex drive is greater than the reflex threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Set gain reduction in decibels to the sum of gain reduction in decibels and the product of the rise rate and the step duration.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set gain reduction in decibels to the difference of gain reduction in decibels and the product of the decay rate and the step duration.
    End the conditional block.
    If gain reduction in decibels is greater than maximum reduction, then perform the following actions.
        Set gain reduction in decibels to maximum reduction.
    End the conditional block.
    If gain reduction in decibels is less than zero, then perform the following actions.
        Set gain reduction in decibels to zero.
    End the conditional block.
    Display gain reduction in decibels to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the reflex is a single first-order filter, which is clearest as plain arithmetic.
DT = 1.0                      # milliseconds per step
TAU_ON, TAU_OFF = 25.0, 120.0 # reflex rise and decay time constants, milliseconds
MAX_DB = 20.0                 # maximum gain reduction

def moc_reflex(level_db, dur_ms=600.0, onset_ms=100.0, offset_ms=400.0):
    g, trace = 0.0, []
    for i in range(int(dur_ms / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        loud = onset_ms <= t < offset_ms and level_db > 40.0
        target = MAX_DB * min(1.0, (level_db - 40.0) / 40.0) if loud else 0.0
        tau = TAU_ON if target > g else TAU_OFF
        g += (target - g) * DT / tau
        trace.append((t, round(g, 2)))
    return trace

for lvl in (50, 70, 90):
    tr = moc_reflex(lvl)
    peak = max(g for _, g in tr)
    print(lvl, "dB ->", "peak suppression", round(peak, 1), "dB")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is a brain cell that makes a sense organ less sensitive on purpose.

Play a loud sound in one ear and, some tens of milliseconds later, the measured amplification in the other ear falls, which is the only routine circumstance in which the nervous system deliberately degrades its own input.

CHAPTER 147. LATERAL OLIVOCOCHLEAR EFFERENT NEURONS (Inner-Ear Nerve Steadying Neuron) (NON-COG)

Its partner cell shouts at the ear's amplifier; this one whispers to the hearing nerve itself, and it may spend a lifetime doing nothing more dramatic than keeping the two ears in agreement.

Olivocochlear efferent names the start and end of the axon and nothing about the effect, and it hides the fact that these two cells do entirely different jobs.

Inner-Ear Nerve names the target, because unlike its medial partner this cell never touches a hair cell, ending instead on the dendrites of the hearing nerve fibres just beneath the inner hair cells.

Steadying names the work, a gentle trimming of excitability that balances the two ears against each other and guards the nerve endings against overexcitation.

Neuron marks it as an efferent cell, and Steadying against Turning-Down keeps the gentle action and the strong one distinct.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This cell also runs outward, from brainstem to ear, but it stops one step short of the machinery its partner controls.

It ends on the fine branches, called dendrites, of the hearing nerve fibres that listen to the inner hair cells.

There it sets how excitable those fibres are, nudging their sensitivity up or down rather than switching an amplifier off.

Its two established jobs are keeping the sensitivity of the two ears balanced, which matters for locating sound, and protecting the nerve endings from the glutamate overexcitation that loud sound can cause.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

These are much smaller cells than their medial partners and are often spindle-shaped, with two dendrites leaving opposite poles of the cell body.

Their dendritic reach is modest, sampling a narrower pool of inputs.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly 10 to 20 micrometres across, distinctly smaller than the medial cells of the same complex.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Shell lateral olivocochlear neurons, lying around the margin of the lateral superior olive.

• Intrinsic lateral olivocochlear neurons, lying within the lateral superior olive itself.

• A dopaminergic subgroup, distinguished by carrying tyrosine hydroxylase and thought to mediate the protective arm of the system.

WHERE IT LIVES:

In and around the lateral superior olive of the brainstem.

Its axons run largely uncrossed to the ear on the same side, travelling with the vestibular nerve and crossing into the cochlear nerve at the anastomosis of Oort.

NUMBER:

Roughly 500 to 1,500 per side in humans, so on the order of 1,000 to 3,000 in total, and in most species this population outnumbers the medial one while carrying far thinner fibres.

Confidence is low to moderate, since these fine unmyelinated fibres are hard to count.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Recordings are sparse because the cells are small and the fibres thin, but the population is understood to act tonically and slowly rather than in fast bursts.

Its influence on hearing nerve firing builds over seconds to minutes rather than milliseconds, which is far slower than its medial partner.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives input from the cochlear nucleus and from descending auditory pathways.

Its terminals end on the dendrites of type I spiral ganglion neurons beneath the inner hair cells, which means it modulates the afferent fibre rather than the receptor cell.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is very fine and unmyelinated along its peripheral course, conducting slowly at well under 5 metres per second.

This slowness is consistent with a role in setting a background level rather than in reacting to an individual sound.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases acetylcholine and dopamine, and various members of the population also carry gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), calcitonin gene-related peptide, and opioid peptides including enkephalins and dynorphins.

That chemical variety is unusual and is thought to underlie the differing directions of its effect, since some terminals raise and others lower afferent excitability.

MYELINATION:

The peripheral portion is unmyelinated, which is the clearest structural difference from the heavily myelinated medial cell.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low, consistent with slow tonic activity and fine unmyelinated fibres.

PLASTICITY:

Removing this input in animals produces a lasting imbalance in the sensitivity of the two ears, and the dopaminergic arm becomes more active after noise exposure, consistent with a protective role that is recruited by damage.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Its terminals sit within the inner spiral bundle, surrounded by inner phalangeal and border cells, the supporting cells of the inner hair cell region.

Schwann cells accompany the axon peripherally but do not myelinate it.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the two ears drift out of calibration with one another.

Sound localisation, which depends on comparing loudness between the ears, becomes unreliable, and the hearing nerve loses a protective brake against glutamate overexcitation during loud sound.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell releases at least five chemically distinct messengers from a single small population, so its output is better described as a slowly adjusted chemical environment around the afferent dendrite than as a train of spikes.

It is also one of the clearest examples in the nervous system of a cell whose principal job is calibration rather than signalling.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: drive from the cochlear nucleus and descending auditory pathways at low rates, plus signals reporting damage after noise exposure.

• OUTPUTS: slow tonic release of acetylcholine and dopamine onto type I spiral ganglion dendrites, shifting afferent excitability up or down by a modest fraction.

• STATE: transmitter release level, dopaminergic tone, interaural balance error term.

• PARAMETERS: conduction velocity under 5 metres per second, effect magnitude small relative to the medial reflex, multiple co-transmitters with opposing signs.

• TIME CONSTANTS: seconds to minutes for excitability change, hours to days for interaural rebalancing after injury.

• FAILURE MODE: loss produces interaural sensitivity imbalance with degraded sound localisation, and removes a protective brake against glutamate excitotoxicity at the afferent dendrite.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to slowly adjust the excitability of the hearing nerve on one side until the loudness reported by the two ears is balanced.
Create a number variable called left ear response with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called right ear response with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called excitability adjustment with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called adjustment rate with initial value zero point zero one.
For each time step in the simulation clock, perform the following operations.
    Set left ear response to the average firing rate reported by the left hearing nerve.
    Set right ear response to the average firing rate reported by the right hearing nerve.
    Set balance error to the difference of left ear response and right ear response.
    Set excitability adjustment to the difference of excitability adjustment and the product of adjustment rate and balance error.
    If excitability adjustment is greater than the maximum adjustment, then perform the following actions.
        Set excitability adjustment to the maximum adjustment.
    End the conditional block.
    If excitability adjustment is less than the negative maximum adjustment, then perform the following actions.
        Set excitability adjustment to the negative maximum adjustment.
    End the conditional block.
    Display excitability adjustment to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because interaural balancing is a slow integral controller, shown clearly in a few lines.
DT = 100.0            # milliseconds per step, deliberately coarse: this system is slow
RATE = 0.01           # adjustment gain per step
MAX_ADJ = 0.30        # maximum fractional change in afferent excitability

def loc_balance(left_gain, right_gain, steps=200):
    adj, trace = 0.0, []
    for i in range(steps):
        left = 100.0 * left_gain
        right = 100.0 * right_gain * (1.0 + adj)
        err = left - right
        adj += RATE * err / 100.0
        adj = max(-MAX_ADJ, min(MAX_ADJ, adj))
        trace.append((i * DT / 1000.0, round(adj, 3), round(err, 2)))
    return trace

tr = loc_balance(1.00, 0.80)          # right ear 20 percent less sensitive
print("start error", tr[0][2], "-> end error", tr[-1][2], "with adjustment", tr[-1][1])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the efferent that never reaches the receptor.

Trace any other outgoing fibre into the organ of Corti and it ends on a hair cell; trace this one and it stops on the nerve ending instead, which is why its effects are measured in slow shifts of sensitivity rather than in an immediate change of what you hear.

CHAPTER 148. INFERIOR OLIVE NEURONS (Movement-Error Teaching Neuron) (COG)

Every one of these cells hums quietly to itself about six times a second, and hundreds of them hum in step, wired together like a string of fairy lights.

Inferior olive is an address named for a shape in a jar, and it hides the most consequential fact in cerebellar science.

Movement-Error names the signal, because these cells fire when a movement misses its mark or when something unexpected happens during it.

Teaching names the effect, because each of these cells sends a single climbing fibre that wraps a Purkinje cell so powerfully that one spike is never missed, and that spike rewrites the strength of the parallel fibre synapses that were active just before, which is how the cerebellum learns.

Neuron marks it as a cell joined to its fellows by electrical gap junctions and humming with them at roughly one to ten cycles a second, so the teaching signal arrives across a band of Purkinje cells at the same instant.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The inferior olive is a crumpled sheet of neurons in the medulla, the lowest part of the brainstem, and it has exactly one customer: the cerebellum.

Each olivary neuron sends one axon, called a climbing fibre, up into the cerebellar cortex, where it wraps itself around the dendrites of a Purkinje cell like ivy around a tree.

That one fibre is so powerful that a single spike from the olive forces the Purkinje cell to produce a burst called a complex spike, every single time.

Because it never fails, the climbing fibre is not carrying ordinary information; it is carrying a teaching signal.

The standard interpretation is that the olive reports that something has gone wrong, or that something unexpected has just happened, and the cerebellum uses that report to retune the movement or the prediction that led to it.

The olive also keeps time, because its cells oscillate rhythmically, so it can stamp events with a phase as well as a fact.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is roughly spherical and the dendrites are extraordinary.

Most olivary neurons are the curly type: their dendrites branch repeatedly, bristle with spines, and then curl back towards the cell body, sometimes making complete spirals.

A minority are the straight type, with long, sparse, spiny dendrites radiating outward.

The curling matters, because the returning dendritic tips of neighbouring cells meet inside small sealed balls of tissue called glomeruli, where spines from about six different dendrites are packed together and joined by gap junctions, which are direct electrical tunnels between cells.

SIZE:

The cell body is fifteen to thirty micrometres across, which is medium sized for a brainstem neuron.

The dendritic tree is compact by comparison, usually spanning under two hundred micrometres.

The axon is thin but very long, running from the medulla up into the cerebellar cortex and branching there, so a single cell may extend several centimetres of wiring.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The complex is divided into the principal olive, which is the large convoluted band and is by far the biggest part in humans, the medial accessory olive, and the dorsal accessory olive.

Smaller specialised groups include the dorsal cap of Kooy and the ventrolateral outgrowth, which handle eye movement signals, and the beta nucleus, which handles vestibular signals.

Functionally the whole sheet is carved into narrow strips that project to matching narrow strips of cerebellar cortex called microzones, and those strips line up with the zebrin stripes seen when the cerebellum is stained for aldolase C.

Cells also differ in how strongly they are electrically coupled, from tightly ganged clusters to near solitary cells.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The inferior olivary complex sits in the ventrolateral medulla oblongata, forming the visible olive-shaped bulge on the front surface of the medulla just lateral to the pyramid.

It lies immediately medial to the spinal trigeminal nucleus and dorsal to the pyramidal tract, and the hypoglossal nerve rootlets emerge between olive and pyramid.

Its axons cross the midline and enter the cerebellum through the inferior cerebellar peduncle.

Functionally it sits at a three-way interface known as the Guillain-Mollaret triangle, receiving from the red nucleus of the midbrain by way of the central tegmental tract, projecting to the contralateral cerebellum, and being closed off by the cerebellar dentate nucleus projecting back to the red nucleus.

It is also the target of the spino-olivary tracts from the spinal cord, so it is an interface between limb sensation, midbrain motor control and cerebellum.

NUMBER:

Counts on complete human brainstem series give about one million neurons in the whole inferior olivary complex, a figure that has stood since the 1960s and is repeated in modern reviews, so confidence is moderate to good.

Modern unbiased stereology of the principal nucleus alone reports figures of the order of four to five hundred thousand, with one study finding four point three times ten to the fifth in Alzheimer cases.

One million is therefore the number to use, representing about zero point five percent of the roughly two hundred million brainstem neurons and about zero point zero zero one two percent of all human neurons.

Because there are roughly fifteen million Purkinje cells, each olivary neuron on average teaches something like seven to fifteen of them.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The defining feature is the subthreshold oscillation, a continuous sinusoidal wobble of the membrane voltage of a few millivolts at one to ten hertz, most often around four to eight hertz.

The wobble is built from a somatic low-threshold calcium channel of the Cav3.1 type, a dendritic high-threshold calcium channel of the Cav2.1 type, and a somatic HCN channel that carries the slow inward current known as Ih and helps set the period.

Actual spiking is rare, typically around one spike per second, and it happens only when an excitatory input arrives during the depolarised phase of the wobble.

That gives the olive a natural coincidence detector in time: the same input either fires the cell or does nothing, depending on when it arrives.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input arrives from the spinal cord, the trigeminal nuclei, the superior colliculus, the pretectum, the red nucleus and the mesodiencephalic junction, and from cerebral cortex indirectly.

Inhibitory input arrives from the cerebellar nuclei themselves, the so-called nucleo-olivary pathway, and these GABAergic terminals sit inside the glomeruli right next to the gap junctions.

That placement is the trick of the whole nucleus: when the cerebellum inhibits the olive, it also short-circuits the electrical coupling, so it can decide moment by moment how large a cluster of olivary cells will fire together.

The output is the climbing fibre onto Purkinje cells, plus a collateral that excites the cerebellar nuclei and the Golgi cells of the granular layer.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, about one micrometre, crosses the midline within the medulla, and ascends in the inferior cerebellar peduncle.

Once in the cerebellar cortex it branches to contact roughly five to ten Purkinje cells, and each climbing fibre makes on the order of three hundred separate synaptic contacts on the proximal dendrites of its Purkinje cell.

Conduction is deliberately slow and the branch lengths are tuned so that spikes reach widely separated Purkinje cells at nearly the same moment.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The climbing fibre transmitter is glutamate, the main excitatory transmitter of the brain, acting on AMPA receptors and producing an enormous compound response.

Some climbing fibres also contain corticotropin releasing factor, a peptide that modulates cerebellar plasticity.

The inhibitory input onto olivary cells is GABA, and olivary cells are also sensitive to serotonin and to noradrenaline from the raphe nuclei and locus coeruleus, which change coupling strength and oscillation amplitude.

MYELINATION:

Climbing fibres are myelinated, though thinly, and the myelin ends before the fibre begins its climb around the Purkinje dendrite.

Within the olive itself the neuropil is remarkably poor in myelin, because the glomeruli need bare membrane in contact.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Firing is slow, so spike cost is low, but the maintenance cost is high because every cell keeps a rhythmic calcium current running continuously, and calcium must be pumped back out at every cycle.

Olivary neurons are unusually rich in mitochondria and, in humans, accumulate the yellow-brown age pigment lipofuscin heavily, a visible sign of decades of oxidative work.

PLASTICITY:

The olive itself changes little in its synaptic weights, but it drives the best-understood plasticity in the brain: a climbing fibre spike arriving alongside parallel fibre input to the same Purkinje cell causes long-term depression of those parallel fibre synapses.

The olive also shows striking structural plasticity of coupling, because gap junction strength is adjusted minute by minute by cerebellar inhibition and by neuromodulators.

After injury the nucleus can enlarge rather than shrink, a rare and telling response described below.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The special glial job here is the glomerulus.

Astrocytic processes form a tight capsule around each glomerulus, sealing off the little chamber that contains the gap junctions and the surrounding synapses.

That capsule keeps potassium and glutamate concentrated inside the chamber and keeps outside signals from leaking in, which is what allows a handful of spines to behave as one electrical unit.

Elsewhere astrocytes work to keep neurons apart; here they work to keep neurons together.

Oligodendrocytes myelinate the climbing fibres with unusually thin sheaths, and microglia in the olive are quick to respond to the loss of the descending inhibitory input.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the olive and the medulla still breathes, still swallows, still relays touch.

What the region loses is its metronome and its schoolteacher.

The cerebellum would keep firing its Purkinje cells at a hundred spikes a second, but it would never again be told that a movement had gone wrong, so learned skills would freeze at their current level and could not be corrected.

Patients and animals without olivary input make movements that are roughly aimed but never refined, and they cannot learn new timing.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Electrical coupling through connexin 36 gap junctions is the headline feature, letting a cluster of cells share subthreshold voltage and oscillate as one.

Dendritic spikes carried by P and Q type calcium channels propagate into the tree and back, and the returning current shapes the next oscillation cycle.

Inhibition acts not by subtracting current but by shunting, that is, by opening a hole in the membrane that drains the coupling current, so a GABA input can electrically disconnect a cell from its neighbours within milliseconds.

The nucleus therefore performs dynamic clustering: the same anatomy can behave as one large synchronous ensemble or as many independent cells, decided in real time by the cerebellum.

Olivary neurons also show a remarkable pathological plasticity called hypertrophic olivary degeneration, in which loss of the inhibitory input from the red nucleus makes the neurons swell and enlarge instead of dying, producing a rhythmic palatal tremor at two to three beats per second.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Excitatory glutamatergic error and sensory input from spinal cord, trigeminal nuclei, superior colliculus and mesodiencephalic junction, zero to fifty events per second.

◦ Inhibitory GABAergic input from cerebellar nuclei onto the glomerulus, which both hyperpolarises and reduces gap junction coupling.

◦ Electrical current from coupled neighbours through connexin 36 gap junctions.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ One climbing fibre spike or short burst to five to ten Purkinje cells, plus collaterals to cerebellar nuclei and Golgi cells.

◦ Mean output rate about one hertz, rising briefly to about ten hertz.

• STATE.

◦ Oscillation phase in radians.

◦ Membrane potential and dendritic calcium level.

◦ Effective coupling conductance to each neighbour.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Oscillation frequency one to ten hertz, typically six hertz.

◦ Oscillation amplitude three to ten millivolts.

◦ Coupling conductance per pair on the order of a few hundred picosiemens, adjustable to near zero.

◦ Climbing fibre divergence five to ten Purkinje cells, about three hundred contacts each.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Oscillation period about one hundred and sixty milliseconds.

◦ Membrane time constant about ten to twenty milliseconds.

◦ Calcium clearance hundreds of milliseconds.

◦ Coupling modulation by inhibition within tens of milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Interrupting the central tegmental tract removes inhibition and produces hypertrophic olivary degeneration with palatal tremor and oculopalatal tremor.

◦ Excessive synchrony, as produced experimentally by the drug harmaline, produces a violent whole-body tremor.

◦ Loss of olivary neurons abolishes cerebellar motor learning and eye-blink conditioning.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether an olivary cell fires a climbing fibre spike, given its ongoing oscillation, the pull of its electrically coupled neighbours, and an arriving error signal.
Create a number variable called phase with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step_size with initial value 0.0377.
Create a number variable called neighbour_pull with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike_count with initial value 0.
For each millisecond in the trial, perform the following operations.
    Set neighbour_pull to the mean sine of the phase differences reported by the coupled neighbours.
    Calculate the sum of step_size and neighbour_pull.
    Set advance to the result.
    Calculate the sum of phase and advance.
    Set phase to the result.
    Set excitability to the cosine of phase.
    Set drive to the strength of the error signal arriving this millisecond.
    Calculate the product of drive and excitability.
    Set effective_drive to the result.
    Calculate the difference of effective_drive and the inhibition from the cerebellar nuclei.
    Set net_drive to the result.
    Check if net_drive is greater than 0.6.
    Set will_spike to the result.
    If will_spike is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of spike_count and 1.
        Set spike_count to the result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike_count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python was chosen because coupled phase oscillators need only trigonometry and a loop, and the code then reads almost exactly like the biology.

import math

DT = 0.001                 # one millisecond steps
F_HZ = 6.0                 # subthreshold oscillation frequency
K_GAP = 4.0                # gap junction coupling strength, per second
TWO_PI = 2.0 * math.pi
phases = [0.0, 1.6, 3.1, 4.7]      # four cells starting out of step

def advance(phases, k_gap):
    updated = []
    n = len(phases)
    for i, own in enumerate(phases):
        pull = sum(math.sin(other - own) for j, other in enumerate(phases) if j != i)
        pull = k_gap * pull / (n - 1)          # electrical pull from neighbours
        updated.append((own + DT * (TWO_PI * F_HZ + pull)) % TWO_PI)
    return updated

def fires(phase, drive, nucleo_olivary_inhibition):
    gate = math.cos(phase)                     # +1 at the peak of the oscillation
    return (drive * (0.5 + 0.5 * gate) - nucleo_olivary_inhibition) > 0.6

spikes = 0
for t in range(2000):                          # two seconds
    phases = advance(phases, K_GAP)
    drive = 1.0 if t % 250 == 0 else 0.0       # an error signal every 250 ms
    if fires(phases[0], drive, 0.2):
        spikes += 1

sx = sum(math.cos(p) for p in phases) / len(phases)
sy = sum(math.sin(p) for p in phases) / len(phases)
print("climbing fibre spikes in 2 s:", spikes)
print("synchrony index, 1.0 means locked:", round(math.hypot(sx, sy), 3))
# prints 3 spikes from 8 error signals, and a synchrony index of 0.998

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron in the human body makes a synapse that never fails.

No other nucleus wraps its dendritic spines and its gap junctions inside astrocyte-sealed glomeruli.

If you see a spherical cell with dendrites that curl back on themselves, oscillating gently at six hertz, sitting in a crumpled ribbon on the front of the medulla, it is an inferior olive neuron.

CHAPTER 149. PONTINE NUCLEI NEURONS (Plan-Forwarding Cerebellum-Feeding Neuron) (COG)

The bulge on the front of your brainstem that surgeons call the belly of the pons is a switchboard, and it is almost entirely made of twenty million cells whose only job is to tell the cerebellum what the cerebral cortex has just decided to do.

Pontine nuclei names a bulge in the brainstem, not a job, and the job here is the largest single act of copying in the brain.

Plan-Forwarding names the input, because these cells receive a massive projection from layer five of almost the entire cerebral cortex on the same side, so what arrives is a copy of the command the cortex has just issued.

Cerebellum-Feeding names the output, because their axons cross the midline and end as mossy fibres, supplying more than half of all mossy fibre input to the cerebellum, each axon giving rise to roughly one hundred to two hundred terminals and each terminal contacting thirty to forty granule cells.

Neuron marks it as the cell that ensures the cerebellum is told what the cortex intends at the same moment the body is told to do it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The cerebral cortex plans; the cerebellum checks and refines.

They are not directly connected, so almost everything the cortex sends to the cerebellum passes through one intermediate stop, the pontine nuclei.

A pontine neuron collects axons from layer 5 of the cerebral cortex, sums them, and sends the answer across the midline into the opposite half of the cerebellum as a mossy fibre.

The traffic is enormous and one-way: roughly twenty million corticopontine axons descend into the pons, about twenty times the number of fibres in the pyramidal tract that carries voluntary movement commands to the spinal cord.

In other words, the brain spends twenty times more wire telling the cerebellum about the plan than it spends issuing the plan itself.

The functional consequence is that the cerebellum receives an efference copy, a duplicate of every outgoing instruction, in time to predict what should happen next.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The typical pontine neuron is a medium multipolar cell with a round or oval cell body and four to seven sparsely branched dendrites.

The dendrites are long and straight rather than bushy, and they do something unusual: their fields respect the invisible borders between the territories of different cortical areas, so a cell inside a motor cortex territory keeps its dendrites inside it.

This is the anatomical basis of the modular map of the pons, in which each cortical area paints its own patch.

The pontine nuclei are not one nucleus but grey islands scattered between the descending bundles of the corticospinal tract, so the region looks in section like gravel embedded in cables.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are fifteen to twenty-five micrometres across.

Dendrites extend up to about five hundred micrometres, which is long relative to the cell body and is what lets one cell sample a whole cortical territory.

The axon runs across the midline and out through the middle cerebellar peduncle, a distance of one to three centimetres, ending in mossy fibre rosettes about five to ten micrometres wide.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Almost all pontine neurons are projection neurons and they are essentially all excitatory, so the classical subtypes are defined by connection rather than by shape.

Dorsal and medial pontine neurons tend to be larger with more dendrites than ventral ones.

A small population of local inhibitory interneurons exists but is sparse compared with most brain regions, which is one reason the pons behaves as a relay rather than a processor.

A separate cell group in the same region, the nucleus reticularis tegmenti pontis, is developmentally a sibling of the pontine nuclei and projects to cerebellum as well, but it also receives cerebellar feedback and so forms a loop rather than a one-way relay.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Every one of these cells lives in the basilar pons, also called the basis pontis, the swollen front half of the pons.

They fill the space between the descending corticospinal, corticobulbar and corticopontine fibre bundles, on both sides of the midline, from the level of the midbrain junction down to the pontomedullary junction.

Anatomists divide the region into median, paramedian, peduncular, ventral, lateral and dorsolateral nuclei, and each is dominated by a different cortical source.

The main interface is with white matter on all sides: dorsally the pontine tegmentum, ventrally the surface of the brainstem and the basilar artery, and laterally the middle cerebellar peduncle into which the axons pour.

Developmentally these neurons were born far away, at the rhombic lip on the upper edge of the fourth ventricle, and migrated forward and around the brainstem in the anterior extramural stream to reach the belly of the pons.

NUMBER:

The pontine nuclei contain about twenty million neurons in the human, and the corticopontocerebellar pathway carries about twenty million axons, figures quoted consistently across the anatomical literature, so confidence is moderate.

That is about ten percent of the roughly two hundred million brainstem neurons and about zero point zero two three percent of all human neurons.

They are by a wide margin the largest single neuron population in the brainstem, which is why the human pons is so much bigger than the pons of animals with smaller cerebral cortices.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Pontine neurons are electrically plain, which is appropriate for a relay.

They rest quietly, with low spontaneous rates of a few spikes per second, and fire regular trains up to fifty to one hundred spikes per second when the cortex is active.

They show little bursting, little adaptation and no pacemaking, and their spikes are short with brief afterhyperpolarisations.

The interesting computation is not in the membrane but in the wiring: convergence of several cortical areas onto one cell, then divergence of that cell onto many granule cells.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The dominant input is from layer 5 pyramidal cells of almost the whole cerebral cortex, including primary motor, premotor, somatosensory, posterior parietal, visual and prefrontal areas.

Additional input arrives from the superior colliculus, the spinal cord by the spinopontine tract, the mamillary body and the cerebellar nuclei.

The output is a mossy fibre that ends in one or more rosettes, each rosette forming the core of a cerebellar glomerulus and contacting the claw-shaped dendrites of roughly fifteen to twenty granule cells at once.

Collaterals also excite the cerebellar nuclei directly before the main axon reaches the cortex.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Pontocerebellar axons are one to three micrometres in diameter, cross the midline within the pons, and gather into the middle cerebellar peduncle, the largest white matter bundle in the brainstem.

Individual axons branch several times within cerebellar cortex, so one pontine neuron may reach several separate lobules.

The crossing is why a stroke in one half of the pons produces clumsiness on the opposite side of the cerebellum.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The projection neurons are glutamatergic, using glutamate loaded by the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT1, with a smaller VGLUT2 population.

Their mossy fibre synapses activate fast AMPA receptors and slower NMDA receptors on granule cell dendrites, and glutamate spilling out of the glomerulus also reaches metabotropic receptors on Golgi cells.

The sparse local interneurons use GABA.

Corticopontine terminals are themselves modulated by acetylcholine and by serotonin from the raphe.

MYELINATION:

Pontocerebellar axons are well myelinated by oligodendrocytes, and the middle cerebellar peduncle is one of the most heavily myelinated tracts in the brain.

This makes the region highly visible on magnetic resonance imaging and also unusually vulnerable to demyelinating injury.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The pons has a high resting glucose uptake because of the sheer density of synapses and the amount of myelin to maintain.

Individual neurons are not extravagant, but the population is, since twenty million cells each supporting a long myelinated axon and dozens of large rosettes adds up.

The rosette itself is packed with mitochondria, because a single glomerulus must sustain transmission onto twenty postsynaptic partners at high rates.

PLASTICITY:

Corticopontine synapses show ordinary long-term potentiation and depression, so the weighting of cortical areas onto a pontine cell can change with training.

Mossy fibre rosettes are remarkably stable in adults, showing almost no turnover even when sensory input is manipulated for weeks, which suggests that the pons deliberately supplies a fixed, reliable channel and leaves the learning to the cerebellum.

During development the migration and target selection of these neurons is highly plastic and depends on guidance molecules including Netrin and its receptor.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The distinctive glial feature of the basilar pons is the density and importance of oligodendrocytes, packed in rows between the fibre bundles.

Those oligodendrocytes are unusually sensitive to rapid changes in blood sodium, which is why correcting low sodium too quickly destroys myelin here first, producing central pontine myelinolysis.

Astrocytes in the pons are ordinary, but in the cerebellum the Bergmann-like glia and velate astrocytes that ensheath the glomerulus perform a special job for this cell type, sealing the rosette so that glutamate builds up inside the glomerulus and reaches all the granule cell claws together.

Pontine microglia are also the resident population that reacts in pontine glioma, a childhood tumour that arises in exactly this territory.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete the pontine neurons and the pons becomes a bundle of passing cables with nothing of its own.

Movement commands would still reach the spinal cord, and the face would still work, but the cerebellum would go deaf to the cortex.

The consequence is a very specific loss: the ability to make a movement smooth by predicting it in advance.

The person would still be able to move, but every action would become a slow, corrected, visually guided approximation, and skilled fast movement would be gone.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The great computational trick here is not inside the cell but in the fan-out: about twenty million pontine neurons feed roughly fifty billion cerebellar granule cells, an expansion of more than two thousand to one that turns a small set of signals into a vast sparse code.

Individual mossy fibre rosettes are also presynaptically regulated, with terminals carrying receptors that let Golgi cells and ambient glutamate control release before any spike arrives.

Pontine neurons help instruct their own myelination, since axonal activity drives oligodendrocyte precursor differentiation, and the middle cerebellar peduncle myelinates in proportion to use during childhood.

The dendritic boundary respecting behaviour is itself a form of structural computation, because the wiring diagram is built by dendrites refusing to cross an invisible line.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Glutamatergic corticopontine input from layer 5 of multiple cortical areas, zero to one hundred spikes per second per source, typically two to five sources per cell.

◦ Weaker input from superior colliculus, spinal cord and cerebellar nuclei.

◦ Neuromodulatory acetylcholine and serotonin acting as a gain term from zero point eight to one point two.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Mossy fibre spikes to contralateral cerebellar granule cells, fifteen to twenty granule cells per rosette, several rosettes per axon.

◦ Collateral excitation of cerebellar nuclei.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential.

◦ Short-term synaptic depression level at each rosette.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Threshold on mean weighted cortical drive, about zero point two of maximum.

◦ Input output gain about two, in spikes per second per unit drive.

◦ Convergence two to five cortical areas per cell, divergence about five rosettes per axon.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane time constant about fifteen milliseconds.

◦ Synaptic rise about one millisecond, decay about five milliseconds for AMPA.

◦ Short-term depression recovery about two hundred milliseconds.

◦ Conduction delay pons to cerebellar cortex about three to five milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Central pontine myelinolysis after rapid correction of low blood sodium, causing locked-in syndrome in severe cases.

◦ Pontocerebellar hypoplasia, most often from TSEN54 mutations, in which these neurons fail to develop and the pons is visibly tiny.

◦ Loss in multiple system atrophy of the cerebellar type, which produces the hot cross bun sign on magnetic resonance imaging as the transverse fibres degenerate.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to combine cortical commands arriving from several different cortical areas onto one pontine cell and broadcast the result to a scattered set of cerebellar granule cells.
Create a number variable called running_total with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called granule_deliveries with initial value empty list.
For each cortical_input in the arriving_cortical_inputs, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of the rate of cortical_input and the weight of cortical_input.
    Set weighted to the result.
    Calculate the sum of running_total and weighted.
    Set running_total to the result.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in arriving_cortical_inputs.
Set input_count to the result.
Calculate the quotient of running_total divided by input_count.
Set mean_drive to the result.
Calculate the difference of mean_drive and 0.2.
Set above_threshold to the result.
Check if above_threshold is greater than 0.
Set is_firing to the result.
If is_firing is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the product of above_threshold and 2.
    Set firing_rate to the result.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set firing_rate to 0.
End the conditional block.
For each target in the mossy_fibre_targets, perform the following operations.
    Add firing_rate to the end of granule_deliveries.
End the loop.
Display firing_rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python was chosen because dictionaries make the many-cortical-areas-to-one-pontine-cell mapping self-documenting, which is the whole point of this cell type.

import random
random.seed(7)

CORTICAL_AREAS = ["M1", "S1", "premotor", "posterior_parietal", "visual"]
N_PONTINE = 8
N_GRANULE = 20
THRESHOLD = 0.20      # mean weighted drive needed before the cell fires
GAIN = 2.0            # spikes per second per unit of drive above threshold

# each pontine cell listens to only two cortical areas, and reaches five granule cells
weights = {p: {a: random.random() for a in random.sample(CORTICAL_AREAS, 2)}
           for p in range(N_PONTINE)}
mossy_targets = {p: random.sample(range(N_GRANULE), 5) for p in range(N_PONTINE)}

def pontine_rate(cortical_activity, listening_to):
    total = sum(w * cortical_activity[area] for area, w in listening_to.items())
    mean_drive = total / len(listening_to)
    return GAIN * (mean_drive - THRESHOLD) if mean_drive > THRESHOLD else 0.0

activity = {"M1": 0.9, "S1": 0.6, "premotor": 0.8,
            "posterior_parietal": 0.3, "visual": 0.1}

granule_input = [0.0] * N_GRANULE
firing_cells = 0
for cell in range(N_PONTINE):
    rate = pontine_rate(activity, weights[cell])
    if rate > 0.0:
        firing_cells += 1
    for target in mossy_targets[cell]:
        granule_input[target] += rate

reached = sum(1 for g in granule_input if g > 0.0)
print("pontine cells firing:", firing_cells, "of", N_PONTINE)
print("granule cells reached:", reached, "of", N_GRANULE)
# prints 4 of 8 pontine cells firing, reaching 12 of 20 granule cells

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron population in the brainstem is so large, so uniform and so single-minded.

No other cell has dendrites that stop dead at the invisible border of a cortical territory.

If you find a medium multipolar glutamatergic cell sitting in an island of grey matter between corticospinal bundles in the belly of the pons, sending one axon across the midline into the middle cerebellar peduncle, it is a pontine nucleus neuron.

CHAPTER 150. RETICULAR FORMATION NEURONS (Whole-Body Readiness Neuron) (COG)

One of these cells can touch your spinal cord and your thalamus with the very same action potential, which is why a single lesion the size of a pea in the middle of the brainstem can end consciousness.

Reticular formation means little more than net-like tissue, a nineteenth-century description of how the cells look under a microscope when no clear boundaries can be drawn between nuclei.

Whole-Body names the reach, because a single one of these cells can carry sensory news from skin, muscle, eyes, ears and balance organs and send branches as far apart as the spinal cord, the thalamus and the hypothalamus.

Readiness names the shared purpose behind its otherwise scattered duties, since the same core sets the level of wakefulness that everything else depends on, holds muscle tone and posture through the reticulospinal tract, and starts and sustains walking.

Neuron marks it as a cell whose duties are all ways of preparing the body to act rather than actions themselves.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The reticular formation is the ancient core that runs the whole length of the brainstem, from the top of the spinal cord to the edge of the thalamus.

It is not a nucleus with a neat border; it is a net, and the word reticular simply means net-like.

Its neurons do the jobs that require the whole body to change state at once: waking up, falling asleep, holding posture, breathing, coughing, vomiting, turning the eyes and head, dampening or amplifying pain, and generating the startle jump when a door slams.

The key design feature is that one neuron talks to a great many places.

A single reticular cell can send one branch of its axon down to the spinal cord and another up to the thalamus, so its decision arrives at the muscles and at the cortex simultaneously.

That is why this system is described as an integrative matrix rather than a set of relays.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

These are the classic isodendritic neurons, a term meaning that the dendrites are all much the same: long, straight, sparsely branched and radiating outward with no obvious specialisation.

The dendritic field is usually flattened into a single plane lying across the brainstem, like a hand held palm-forward, so each cell intercepts every fibre bundle running up and down past it.

Cell bodies range from tiny to enormous, and the giant cells of the gigantocellular nucleus are among the largest neurons in the brainstem.

The overall impression under the microscope is of scattered cells of wildly different sizes sitting in a dense, tangled feltwork of fibres, with no layers and no columns.

SIZE:

Small parvocellular neurons are ten to twenty micrometres across.

Medium cells are twenty to forty micrometres.

The giant cells of nucleus gigantocellularis and nucleus reticularis pontis caudalis reach fifty to seventy micrometres, big enough to see with a hand lens in a stained section.

Dendritic fields can span one to two millimetres, covering roughly half the width of the brainstem, and single axons can be twenty to sixty centimetres long if they run from midbrain to lumbar spinal cord.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The reticular formation is traditionally divided into three long columns.

The median column is the raphe, which sits on the midline and is largely serotonergic.

The medial column, also called magnocellular or effector, contains the large cells that give rise to the reticulospinal tracts, including nucleus reticularis pontis oralis and caudalis, gigantocellularis and magnocellularis.

The lateral column, also called parvocellular or associative, contains small cells that receive sensory input and coordinate the cranial nerve motor nuclei, and includes the parvicellular and intermediate reticular nuclei.

Modern molecular work adds genetic subtypes on top of this, notably the Chx10-expressing V2a neurons of the gigantocellular nucleus, which stop locomotion when activated, and glycinergic ventromedial medullary neurons that paralyse the body during dreaming sleep.

The lateral reticular nucleus in the medulla is a distinct precerebellar member of the family, sending mossy fibres to the cerebellum.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The reticular formation occupies the tegmentum, the central core, of the entire brainstem.

In the midbrain it comprises the cuneiform and subcuneiform nuclei and the surrounding midbrain reticular formation, adjacent to the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus.

In the pons it comprises nucleus reticularis pontis oralis and nucleus reticularis pontis caudalis.

In the medulla it comprises nucleus gigantocellularis, nucleus magnocellularis, the lateral and dorsal paragigantocellular nuclei, the parvicellular reticular nucleus, the intermediate reticular nucleus, the dorsal and ventral medullary reticular nuclei and the lateral reticular nucleus.

It sits at an interface in every direction: dorsally against the cranial nerve nuclei and the floor of the fourth ventricle, ventrally against the pontine nuclei and the pyramids, medially against the raphe, and laterally against the spinal trigeminal nucleus and the ascending sensory tracts, all of which it samples.

Rostrally it merges without a boundary into the intralaminar thalamic nuclei and the posterior hypothalamus, and caudally into the reticular intermediate grey of the spinal cord.

NUMBER:

There is no complete stereological census of the human reticular formation, and honesty requires saying so.

A defensible working figure is tens of millions of neurons across midbrain, pons and medulla, and a reasonable simulation estimate is about twenty-five million with a plausible range of ten to fifty million.

Confidence is low, and the bound comes from subtraction: the brainstem holds about two hundred million neurons in total, the pontine nuclei take twenty million and the inferior olive one million, and the reticular core is the largest of the remaining tissue by volume.

On the working figure it is about twelve percent of brainstem neurons and about zero point zero three percent of all human neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

There is no single reticular firing pattern, and that variety is the point.

Many cells fire tonically at five to twenty spikes per second and change rate slowly with behavioural state.

Many carry a strong hyperpolarisation-activated current, Ih, and a low-threshold calcium current, which together give a rebound burst when the cell is released from inhibition, useful for producing a sudden jump.

Giant cells of nucleus reticularis pontis caudalis are almost silent until a startling stimulus arrives, then fire a single high-frequency burst with a latency of only three to eight milliseconds, driving the whole-body startle response.

Most reticular neurons show strong state dependence, changing gain by a factor of two or more between waking, non-rapid-eye-movement sleep and rapid-eye-movement sleep.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs converge from almost everywhere: spinothalamic and spinoreticular pain fibres, trigeminal touch and pain, vestibular nuclei, auditory pathway, superior colliculus, cerebellar nuclei, hypothalamus, amygdala and layer 5 of the motor cortex.

Neuromodulatory inputs arrive from the raphe, locus coeruleus, orexin neurons of the hypothalamus and cholinergic cells of the pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei.

Outputs go to the spinal cord by the medial and lateral reticulospinal tracts, to every cranial nerve motor nucleus, to the intralaminar and midline thalamus, to the basal forebrain, to the hypothalamus, to the cerebellum and back to the other reticular columns.

The signature is convergence at the input and radical divergence at the output.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are typically two to five micrometres in diameter and conduct fast, at twenty to eighty metres per second in the reticulospinal tracts.

The classic feature, described by the Scheibels in Golgi material, is that a single axon runs the length of the brainstem and cord giving off collateral branches at right angles at intervals along the way, so one cell contacts dozens of nuclei.

Pontine reticulospinal axons descend uncrossed in the ventral funiculus and excite antigravity extensor muscles.

Medullary reticulospinal axons from gigantocellularis descend in the ventrolateral funiculus, facilitate flexors and inhibit extensors, and carry the glycinergic drive that paralyses the body during dreaming.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

There is no single transmitter, which is another reason the reticular formation resists tidy description.

About sixty percent of neurons projecting down to the spinal cord are glutamatergic.

Neurons projecting up to the midbrain more often carry GABAergic markers, and many carry both GABAergic and glutamatergic markers together.

Glycine is the key inhibitory transmitter of the ventromedial medullary neurons that produce muscle atonia in dreaming sleep, and it works alongside GABA.

Peptides are abundant, including enkephalin, substance P, neurotensin and somatostatin, and the region is also threaded by serotonergic raphe cells and cholinergic tegmental cells that are described in their own entries.

MYELINATION:

The long reticulospinal and reticulothalamic axons are thickly myelinated, which is essential because postural corrections and startle must be fast.

Within the reticular core itself the local collaterals are thin and often unmyelinated, which is part of why the tissue looks like felt.

Oligodendrocytes here must myelinate axons that branch repeatedly, so myelin segments are interrupted at every collateral branch point.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Because they never stop, reticular neurons are metabolically expensive in aggregate, and the brainstem tegmentum has a high resting glucose consumption that barely falls in sleep.

The giant cells are especially costly, since a seventy micrometre cell body must supply an axon that may exceed half a metre with dozens of branch points.

Their large size means a low surface-to-volume ratio, which helps them hold a stable resting potential, but they pay for it with enormous sodium pump activity.

PLASTICITY:

Startle responses habituate strongly and rapidly, and the site of that habituation is the synapse onto the giant pontine reticular neurons, which is one of the best-studied examples of simple learning in a mammal.

Startle is also potentiated by fear through input from the amygdala, which is the basis of the fear-potentiated startle test.

After spinal cord injury, reticulospinal axons sprout new collaterals and can partly take over lost corticospinal function, making this system a major target for rehabilitation research.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in the reticular formation are unusually large and have unusually long, straight processes that run alongside the dendrites rather than forming the tight non-overlapping domains seen in cortex.

The practical effect is that a single astrocyte can couple metabolically to many reticular neurons at once, supporting the wide dendritic fields.

The reticular core also contains a dense microglial population that is quick to react, and inflammatory activation here, as in sepsis, produces confusion and reduced consciousness out of proportion to the damage.

Circumventricular organs near the medullary reticular formation, including the area postrema, let blood-borne signals reach these glia and neurons directly, which is why illness makes you sleepy.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Everything else in the brainstem is a specialist: this nucleus moves the eyes, that one chews, that one hears.

The reticular formation is what makes the brainstem a single organ rather than a stack of specialists.

Remove it and each surviving nucleus would still perform its reflex, but nothing would set the overall level: no waking, no sleeping, no posture, no startle, no coordinated turn of head and eyes together, no linking of breathing to effort.

The region would lose its tone of voice entirely, and the body would become a set of reflexes with nobody at home.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Massive axonal collateralisation is the defining non-classical feature, since a single spike is delivered as a broadcast rather than a message.

Many reticular neurons are electrically coupled by gap junctions, and coupled clusters can synchronise to produce the all-or-none quality of startle and of the swallow.

Volume transmission matters here more than almost anywhere else outside the hypothalamus, because peptides released from dense-core vesicles diffuse through the loose neuropil to act on cells with no synaptic connection at all.

Reticular neurons act as gain controllers rather than message carriers, multiplying the effectiveness of other pathways by changing the background membrane potential of whole populations.

They also drive local blood flow directly, since activation of the medullary reticular formation changes cerebral perfusion, and they interact with the immune system through vagal and circumventricular routes.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Wide convergence from spinoreticular, trigeminal, vestibular, auditory, collicular, cerebellar, hypothalamic, amygdalar and cortical sources, zero to one hundred spikes per second each, with signed weights.

◦ State signals from orexin, noradrenaline, serotonin and acetylcholine, applied as a multiplicative gain.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Reticulospinal drive to spinal motor circuits at named segmental levels.

◦ Ascending drive to intralaminar thalamus and basal forebrain.

◦ Parallel drive to cranial motor nuclei, delivered on the same spike through separate collaterals.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential and adaptation level.

◦ Current behavioural state, one of wake, non-rapid-eye-movement sleep, rapid-eye-movement sleep.

◦ Habituation level of the startle synapse.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ State gain: about one point six in wake, zero point eight in non-rapid-eye-movement sleep, zero point four in rapid-eye-movement sleep.

◦ Output threshold about twelve spikes per second.

◦ Collateral count six to sixty targets per neuron.

◦ Conduction velocity twenty to eighty metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane time constant ten to thirty milliseconds.

◦ Startle latency three to eight milliseconds from stimulus to giant cell spike.

◦ State transitions over seconds to minutes.

◦ Habituation over tens of trials.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Bilateral damage to the paramedian midbrain and upper pontine tegmentum produces coma, because the ascending arousal broadcast is cut.

◦ Loss of the glycinergic and GABAergic ventromedial medullary neurons removes dream paralysis and produces rapid-eye-movement sleep behaviour disorder, in which people act out their dreams, often years before Parkinson disease appears.

◦ Damage to the descending reticulospinal tracts with the corticospinal tract spared produces the abnormal extensor posturing seen in severe brain injury.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to let one reticular neuron sum inputs from many unrelated sources, scale the result by the current arousal state, and deliver the same spike to every one of its widely separated targets.
Create a number variable called membrane_drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called arousal_gain with initial value 1.
Create a list variable called delivered_targets with initial value empty list.
For each input_source in the converging_inputs, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of the rate of input_source and the weight of input_source.
    Set contribution to the result.
    Calculate the sum of membrane_drive and contribution.
    Set membrane_drive to the result.
End the loop.
Check if the current_state is equal to wakefulness.
Set is_awake to the result.
Check if the current_state is equal to rapid eye movement sleep.
Set is_dreaming to the result.
If is_awake is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set arousal_gain to 1.6.
Else if is_dreaming is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set arousal_gain to 0.4.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set arousal_gain to 0.8.
End the conditional block.
Calculate the product of membrane_drive and arousal_gain.
Set gated_drive to the result.
Calculate the difference of gated_drive and 12.
Set output_rate to the result.
For each target in the collateral_targets, perform the following operations.
    Add target to the end of delivered_targets.
End the loop.
Display output_rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python was chosen because the essential fact about this neuron is a one-to-many mapping with per-target delays, and a dictionary is the clearest possible way to write that down.

STATE_GAIN = {"wake": 1.6, "nrem": 0.8, "rem": 0.4}
THRESHOLD_HZ = 12.0

# one axon, many collaterals, each with its own conduction delay in milliseconds
COLLATERALS = {"spinal_cord_C5": 4.0, "spinal_cord_L2": 9.0,
               "thalamus_intralaminar": 6.0, "hypoglossal_nucleus": 2.0,
               "facial_nucleus": 2.5, "lateral_reticular_nucleus": 3.0}

# each input is a firing rate in spikes per second and a signed synaptic weight
INPUTS = {"trigeminal_touch": (40.0, 0.25), "spinothalamic_pain": (15.0, 0.60),
          "cortex_M1": (30.0, 0.35), "vestibular": (10.0, 0.20),
          "raphe_serotonin": (2.0, -0.50)}

def reticular_output(inputs, state):
    drive = sum(rate * weight for rate, weight in inputs.values())
    return max(0.0, drive * STATE_GAIN[state] - THRESHOLD_HZ)

def broadcast(rate, collaterals):
    # the same spike train arrives everywhere, only the timing differs
    return {target: (round(rate, 1), delay) for target, delay in collaterals.items()}

for state in ("wake", "nrem", "rem"):
    rate = reticular_output(INPUTS, state)
    packets = broadcast(rate, COLLATERALS)
    print(state, "output", round(rate, 1), "Hz to", len(packets), "targets")
# prints wake 36.8 Hz, nrem 12.4 Hz, rem 0.2 Hz, each to 6 targets

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron in the human body has a dendritic field flattened into a single plane that spans half the brainstem.

No other cell delivers the same action potential to the lumbar spinal cord and the thalamus.

If you see a giant, sparsely branched, undecorated cell sitting in a tangled feltwork in the core of the brainstem, with an axon that gives off right-angled collaterals every few millimetres for half a metre, you are looking at a reticular formation neuron.

CHAPTER 151. PRE-BOTZINGER COMPLEX NEURONS (Breath-Rhythm Generating Neuron) (NON-COG)

Somewhere around a thousand cells on each side of your medulla have started every breath you have ever taken, and they will start the last one too.

The existing chapter label is a coordinate on a brainstem map and teaches a student nothing about breathing.

Breath names the single output these cells own, because this small knot of interneurons in the upper medulla sets the moment each inward breath begins, and animals lacking it die at birth of asphyxia.

Rhythm names the work, which is not the muscular effort of breathing but the decision about when the next effort starts, since brief silencing during an outward breath delays the following inward breath and brief stimulation brings it forward.

Generating records that the beat is built inside the group rather than delivered to it.

Neuron marks it as one of an astonishingly small and fragile population, since destroying roughly fifteen percent of the rhythm-generating cells in a neonatal mouse slice stops the rhythm irreversibly.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Breathing has to happen about twenty thousand times a day whether you are thinking about it or not, and something has to decide when each breath begins.

That decision is made in a patch of tissue no bigger than a grain of rice on each side of the lower brainstem, called the pre-Botzinger complex.

Cut it out of a slice of brainstem in a dish and the slice stops producing the inspiratory rhythm; leave the slice with the pre-Botzinger complex intact and it keeps gasping rhythmically in a bath of salt solution for hours, with no lungs, no blood and no brain attached.

That experiment, first done in 1991, is why this cluster is called the kernel of breathing.

Its neurons build a rhythm out of nothing but their own membranes and their connections to each other, then hand the timing signal to the motor neurons that pull the diaphragm down.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

These are small, unremarkable-looking neurons, which is part of why the region went unrecognised for so long.

They are mostly fusiform or small multipolar cells with three to five modestly branched dendrites, scattered loosely through the surrounding reticular tissue rather than packed into a visible nucleus.

In the human brainstem they are notable for being heavily loaded with lipofuscin, the yellow-brown wear pigment of long-lived cells.

You cannot recognise them by shape at all, only by their molecules, which is why the human complex was only properly identified in 2011 using antibody staining.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are small, roughly twelve to twenty-five micrometres across.

Dendritic fields are modest, spanning about two hundred to three hundred micrometres, and stay largely within the complex, which is what allows the population to behave as a tight local network.

Axons are short for the ones that stay inside the complex and up to a centimetre or two for the ones that reach the phrenic and hypoglossal premotor pools.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The core rhythm generators are derived during development from progenitor cells expressing the gene Dbx1, and they are glutamatergic.

Within that core, one subgroup expresses the peptide somatostatin, and a separate, non-overlapping subgroup expresses the adhesion molecule cadherin 9.

Roughly seventeen percent of the Dbx1 population carries somatostatin and about fifty-six percent carries cadherin 9.

The cadherin 9 subgroup projects to the locus coeruleus and links breathing to arousal, so a small subset of these cells is the reason that slow, deliberate breathing calms you down.

Nearly all of the rhythm-critical cells carry the neurokinin 1 receptor, which responds to substance P, and a large fraction also carry the mu opioid receptor.

A separate population of inhibitory glycinergic and GABAergic interneurons is intermingled and shapes the burst.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The pre-Botzinger complex sits in the ventrolateral medulla oblongata, in the reticular formation just beneath and slightly medial to the semi-compact division of the nucleus ambiguus.

Along the front-to-back axis it lies between the Botzinger complex above it and the rostral ventral respiratory group below it, at roughly the level where the hypoglossal nerve rootlets and the rostral pole of the lateral reticular nucleus appear.

It is dorsal to the inferior olive and lateral to the raphe obscurus.

It sits at a functional interface between three systems: the chemosensory system that measures blood gases, the reticular arousal system, and the somatic motor system that drives the muscles of breathing.

In humans it has been mapped as a discrete region containing neurons that stain for both the neurokinin 1 receptor and somatostatin while staining negative for the markers of monoamine neurons and motor neurons.

NUMBER:

In the mouse the rhythm-generating Dbx1 core is small and well bounded: killing about eighty-five cells with a laser stops the rhythm, and that is roughly fifteen percent of the population, implying about five hundred to six hundred cells per side.

No equivalent count exists for the human, and it would be dishonest to pretend otherwise.

The human region is physically larger, so a defensible working estimate is two thousand to four thousand neurons per side, giving perhaps four to eight thousand in total, and confidence in that figure is low.

Even at the top of that range it is about four thousandths of one percent of the two hundred million brainstem neurons and about seven millionths of one percent of all human neurons.

This is the most consequential handful of cells in the body: no other population of a few thousand neurons kills you within minutes when it fails.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

A minority of these neurons are true pacemakers, meaning they burst rhythmically even when all synaptic input is blocked.

The current responsible is the persistent sodium current, a small sodium leak that stays open instead of shutting off, which slowly drives the cell up to threshold and then slowly inactivates, forcing a pause.

A second current, the calcium-activated non-selective cation current carried largely by the TRPM4 channel, sets the size of the burst rather than its timing.

Most cells are not pacemakers on their own but are recruited into the burst by their neighbours, so the rhythm is a group property, sometimes described as a group pacemaker.

Careful recording shows that each full breath is preceded by a small, low-amplitude pre-inspiratory ripple called a burstlet, and only some burstlets grow into full bursts, which is why breathing amplitude and breathing rate can be controlled separately.

At rest the population bursts about twelve to eighteen times a minute, which is zero point two to zero point three hertz.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input arrives from the retrotrapezoid nucleus carrying carbon dioxide information, from the nucleus of the solitary tract carrying signals from lung stretch receptors and the carotid body, from the raphe carrying serotonin, and from the hypothalamus carrying orexin.

Inhibitory input arrives from the Botzinger complex, which enforces the silent expiratory phase, and from local glycinergic interneurons.

The critical output goes to the rostral ventral respiratory group, which drives phrenic motor neurons in spinal segments C3, C4 and C5 to contract the diaphragm, and to hypoglossal premotor neurons that open the airway a fraction of a second before the diaphragm pulls.

Ascending outputs reach the locus coeruleus, the parabrachial nucleus and the hypothalamus, linking each breath to arousal and emotion.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin, roughly half a micrometre to one micrometre, and mostly lightly myelinated or unmyelinated.

Many are purely local, arborising densely within the complex itself, which is what builds the recurrent excitation the rhythm depends on.

The projection axons cross the midline or run ipsilaterally to the premotor pools, and the two sides of the complex are strongly cross-coupled so that both halves of the diaphragm contract together.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The rhythm-generating cells release glutamate, packaged by the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT2, and act on AMPA and NMDA receptors.

Substance P, acting on the neurokinin 1 receptor, powerfully speeds and stabilises the rhythm.

Somatostatin, released by a subset, slows and depresses it.

Opioid drugs bind mu opioid receptors on these very cells and slow the rhythm, and at high doses stop it entirely, which is the mechanism of death in an opioid overdose.

Local glycine and GABA sculpt the off phase, and serotonin, noradrenaline and adenosine all set the background excitability.

MYELINATION:

Local axons within the complex are largely unmyelinated, consistent with a slow, densely interconnected local network.

The longer projection axons to the phrenic and hypoglossal premotor pools are thinly myelinated by oligodendrocytes, giving conduction fast enough that both sides of the diaphragm stay synchronised to within a few milliseconds.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

These cells never rest for more than a few seconds in an entire lifetime, so their cumulative workload is extreme, which is the likely reason for the heavy lipofuscin loading seen in human tissue.

They are also unusually sensitive to a fall in oxygen, and their response to hypoxia is biphasic: a brief increase in rate followed by depression and then gasping.

Adenosine, which accumulates when energy runs low, directly inhibits them, coupling the breathing rhythm to the energy state of the tissue.

PLASTICITY:

Repeated brief exposures to low oxygen produce long-term facilitation of breathing, a serotonin-dependent strengthening that lasts hours and is now being trialled as a treatment after spinal cord injury.

Chronic opioid exposure produces tolerance at these synapses, though tolerance to the respiratory effect develops more slowly than tolerance to pain relief, which is exactly why overdose remains lethal in long-term users.

The network also reorganises after partial damage, so a substantial fraction of the cells can be lost before breathing fails, which is a mercy and also a reason that decline is often silent until it is sudden.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in the pre-Botzinger complex are not passive.

They are themselves chemosensitive, releasing adenosine triphosphate when carbon dioxide rises or oxygen falls, and that released adenosine triphosphate directly excites the neurons, so part of the drive to breathe is glial rather than neuronal.

They also clear glutamate from the dense local network fast enough to keep the recurrent excitation from running away into a seizure-like discharge.

Microglia in this region are implicated in the failure of breathing during severe inflammation, and inflammatory mediators from them depress the rhythm.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

The ventrolateral medulla is a crowded neighbourhood full of cells that swallow, cough, vomit, control blood pressure and vocalise.

Take out the pre-Botzinger complex and every one of those functions still exists, but nothing starts.

The region loses its downbeat, the tick that every other respiratory-related behaviour hangs on, because swallowing, coughing and speaking are all timed against the breath.

Practically, the animal or person simply stops breathing, while all the machinery of breathing remains intact and ready.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Rhythm here is an emergent network property, not a property of any one cell, and that is the central lesson: you cannot find the breath by looking at a single neuron.

Recurrent excitation causes percolation, in which activity spreads through the network like a rumour, and the burstlet-to-burst transition is a threshold in that percolation process.

Astrocytic gliotransmission adds a second, chemical rhythm layer beneath the electrical one.

Gap junction coupling exists in the immature complex and helps synchronise the network before chemical synapses mature.

The complex also performs state-dependent self-modification, changing its own excitability across sleep and wakefulness, which is why central sleep apnoea happens in sleep and not in waking.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Tonic excitatory drive from the retrotrapezoid nucleus and raphe, modelled as a conductance of zero point three to zero point five nanosiemens.

◦ Phasic input from the nucleus of the solitary tract carrying lung stretch and carotid body signals.

◦ Inhibitory input from the Botzinger complex during expiration.

◦ Adenosine triphosphate released by local astrocytes as a chemosensory boost.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Inspiratory burst to the rostral ventral respiratory group and thence to phrenic motor neurons at spinal levels C3 to C5.

◦ Pre-inspiratory drive to hypoglossal premotor neurons, leading the diaphragm by about one hundred milliseconds.

◦ Ascending copy of each breath to the locus coeruleus, parabrachial nucleus and hypothalamus.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential.

◦ Availability of the persistent sodium current, a slow inactivation variable from zero to one.

◦ Calcium concentration setting burst amplitude.

◦ Recruitment level of the surrounding network.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Persistent sodium conductance about two point eight nanosiemens, leak about two point eight nanosiemens.

◦ Membrane capacitance about twenty-one picofarads.

◦ Tonic excitatory conductance zero point three to zero point five nanosiemens, which sets the rate.

◦ Burst threshold about minus forty millivolts.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane time constant about seven milliseconds.

◦ Persistent sodium inactivation and recovery, seconds, which is what sets the breath period.

◦ Breath period about four to five seconds at rest.

◦ Burst duration about zero point five to one second.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Opioid drugs acting on mu opioid receptors slow and then stop the rhythm, the direct cause of death in opioid overdose.

◦ Loss of neurokinin 1 receptor neurons in this region in multiple system atrophy produces central sleep apnoea, inspiratory stridor and sudden death in sleep.

◦ Degeneration in other conditions produces Ondine curse-like failure of automatic breathing while voluntary breathing is preserved.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to produce the rhythmic inspiratory burst of a pre-Botzinger complex neuron by letting a persistent sodium current depolarise the cell and then slowly inactivate.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called availability with initial value 1.
Create a boolean variable called in_burst with initial value false.
For each millisecond in the recording, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of 12 and availability.
    Set persistent_sodium_drive to the result.
    Calculate the difference of persistent_sodium_drive and 8.
    Set net_drive to the result.
    Calculate the sum of voltage and net_drive.
    Set voltage to the result.
    Check if voltage is greater than -40.
    Set is_above_threshold to the result.
    If is_above_threshold is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set in_burst to true.
    End the conditional block.
    If in_burst is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of availability and 0.02.
        Set availability to the result.
        Check if availability is less than 0.05.
        Set is_exhausted to the result.
        If is_exhausted is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set in_burst to false.
        End the conditional block.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of availability and 0.0006.
        Set availability to the result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python was chosen because the accepted model of this cell is two coupled differential equations, and a plain Euler loop in Python shows the mechanism without hiding it inside a library.

import math

C = 21.0            # membrane capacitance, picofarads
G_NAP = 2.8         # persistent sodium conductance, nanosiemens
E_NA = 50.0         # sodium reversal potential, millivolts
G_LEAK = 2.8        # leak conductance, nanosiemens
E_LEAK = -65.0      # leak reversal potential, millivolts
G_TONIC = 0.45      # drive from retrotrapezoid nucleus and raphe, nanosiemens
E_SYN = 0.0         # reversal potential of that drive, millivolts
TAU_H_BAR = 10000.0 # scale of the slow inactivation, milliseconds
DT = 0.5            # integration step, milliseconds

def m_inf(v):       # fast activation of the persistent sodium current
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 40.0) / -6.0))

def h_inf(v):       # availability falls as the cell depolarises
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 48.0) / 6.0))

def tau_h(v):       # availability recovers over seconds, setting the breath period
    return TAU_H_BAR / math.cosh((v + 48.0) / 12.0)

v, h = -60.0, 0.6
onsets = []
previous_v = v
for step in range(int(60000 / DT)):        # sixty seconds of simulated breathing
    i_nap = G_NAP * m_inf(v) * h * (v - E_NA)
    i_leak = G_LEAK * (v - E_LEAK)
    i_drive = G_TONIC * (v - E_SYN)
    v += DT * (-i_nap - i_leak - i_drive) / C
    h += DT * (h_inf(v) - h) / tau_h(v)
    if previous_v <= -40.0 < v:            # crossing threshold starts a breath
        onsets.append(step * DT)
    previous_v = v

periods = [onsets[k + 1] - onsets[k] for k in range(len(onsets) - 1)]
mean_period = sum(periods) / len(periods)
print("inspiratory bursts:", len(onsets))
print("breath period:", round(mean_period / 1000.0, 2), "seconds")
print("rate:", round(60000.0 / mean_period, 1), "breaths per minute")
# prints 13 bursts, a period of 4.96 seconds, and 12.1 breaths per minute

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron population, when removed from a slab of tissue in a dish, takes the rhythm of life with it.

No other few thousand cells in the human body can be silenced by a single dose of a common painkiller and kill the person within four minutes.

If you find small, lipofuscin-laden, glutamatergic cells that carry both the neurokinin 1 receptor and somatostatin, scattered just beneath the nucleus ambiguus in the ventrolateral medulla, bursting slowly and together, you have found the pre-Botzinger complex.

CHAPTER 152. RETROTRAPEZOID NUCLEUS NEURONS (Acid-Sensing Air-Hunger Neuron) (NON-COG)

You cannot hold your breath until you die, and the reason is a thin sheet of a few thousand cells lying against the front surface of your medulla that can taste the acid in your blood.

The old name is a piece of surveying, telling you only that the cells sit behind a fibre bundle.

Acid-Sensing names what the cell actually measures, because it does not detect oxygen at all but the acidity produced when carbon dioxide dissolves in the fluid around it, using pH sensors such as the potassium channel called Task2 and the proton-sensing receptor called Gpr4.

Air-Hunger names the sensation and the behaviour that follow, since these cells drive the urgent deepening and quickening of breathing during high carbon dioxide while leaving breathing in ordinary room air and even in low oxygen largely untouched.

Neuron marks it as a cell of striking specificity, since silencing its master gene in rats leaves normal-air and low-oxygen breathing intact but sharply blunts the response to high carbon dioxide, and in humans mutations in that same gene cause a condition in which people stop breathing adequately in sleep.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Breathing exists to get rid of carbon dioxide, and carbon dioxide is dangerous because it turns into acid the moment it meets water.

Something has to measure that acid and demand more breathing when it rises.

The retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN) is the main place where that measurement is made inside the brain.

Its neurons are almost silent when your blood carbon dioxide is normal, and they fire faster and faster as it climbs, pushing the pre-Botzinger complex to breathe harder and more often.

They are the reason that a breath-hold ends in an overwhelming urge to inhale, an urge you cannot override for long, and the reason people whose RTN fails simply stop breathing when they fall asleep.

Roughly two thirds of the whole central response to carbon dioxide is attributed to this one small group.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

RTN neurons are medium-sized cells with two to four long, smooth dendrites.

Their most striking feature is orientation: many of them send a dendrite straight to the outer surface of the brainstem, into the thin marginal layer that is bathed in cerebrospinal fluid and lined with blood vessels.

They are, in effect, dipping a finger into the fluid to sample it.

Cell bodies are packed close to the ventral surface, forming a thin sheet only a few cells deep rather than a rounded nucleus.

They cannot be identified by shape and are recognised instead by the transcription factor Phox2b in the nucleus together with the absence of the enzymes that mark adrenaline and acetylcholine cells.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly fifteen to twenty-five micrometres across.

Dendrites reach one hundred to three hundred micrometres, which is far enough to cross from the cell body to the surface of the brainstem.

Axons run one to two centimetres to the respiratory nuclei nearby.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The defining chemical signature is a Phox2b-positive, tyrosine hydroxylase-negative, choline acetyltransferase-negative, glutamatergic neuron, born from an Atoh1-dependent lineage that also required the gene Egr2 during development.

Most also express the peptide neuromedin B, and this marker is now used to distinguish the true chemoreceptor population from neighbouring cells.

A closely related and partly overlapping group, the lateral parafacial region, drives active breathing out during exercise rather than breathing in, and is often treated as a sister population.

Individual RTN cells differ in how much of their carbon dioxide sensitivity is intrinsic and how much is relayed from astrocytes, so a useful simulation subdivides them by that ratio.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The retrotrapezoid nucleus lies at the very front surface of the rostral medulla oblongata, immediately beneath and behind the facial motor nucleus, in the region anatomists call parafacial.

It extends from the caudal pole of the facial nucleus backwards along the marginal layer, sitting ventral to the superior olivary complex and ventromedial to the spinal trigeminal tract.

It is named for its position behind the trapezoid body, the great sheet of crossing auditory fibres.

Its defining interface is with the outside world of the brain: it sits directly against the pial surface, the cerebrospinal fluid and the branches of the basilar and vertebral arteries, which is exactly where a blood gas sensor should be.

It also interfaces with the ventral respiratory column just behind it, so the measurement and the response are only a millimetre or two apart.

NUMBER:

In the rat the nucleus contains about two thousand neurons and in the mouse about eight hundred.

A 2025 study of adult human brainstems counted approximately five thousand Phox2b-positive, tyrosine hydroxylase-negative neurons in the putative human RTN, counting both sides together, which is substantially more than the roughly nine hundred and eighty reported earlier in human infants.

Confidence is moderate, since the adult figure comes from a single recent study, and the infant and adult figures may partly reflect different counting criteria rather than real growth.

Five thousand neurons is about two and a half thousandths of one percent of the two hundred million brainstem neurons, and about six millionths of one percent of all human neurons.

Together with the other five types in this batch the total comes to roughly forty-six million cells, comfortably inside the two hundred million brainstem budget.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

RTN neurons are silent or nearly silent below an arterial carbon dioxide pressure of about thirty-five to thirty-eight millimetres of mercury, the level called the apnoeic threshold.

Above that they fire with a strikingly linear relationship to carbon dioxide, climbing to about ten to thirty spikes per second as carbon dioxide rises into the fifties.

They adapt very little, which is essential, because a sensor that adapts would let carbon dioxide drift.

They detect acid through two intrinsic molecular sensors: the potassium channel TASK-2, which closes when protons build up outside the cell, and the proton-activated receptor GPR4, which switches on.

Closing a potassium leak and opening an excitatory receptor both depolarise the cell, so acid literally turns them on.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from the carotid bodies by way of the nucleus of the solitary tract, so oxygen information and carbon dioxide information are added together here.

Further inputs come from the hypothalamus during exercise, from the raphe carrying serotonin, from orexin neurons carrying arousal state, and from local astrocytes releasing adenosine triphosphate onto purinergic receptors.

Outputs go to the pre-Botzinger complex, to the rostral and caudal ventral respiratory groups, to hypoglossal motor neurons that keep the airway open, and to the parafacial lateral region for active expiration.

The connection to the pre-Botzinger complex is direct and excitatory, which is why raising carbon dioxide immediately raises breathing rate.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin, under one micrometre, and travel only short distances within the medulla and lower pons.

They branch to reach several respiratory nuclei at once, so a single RTN neuron can raise rate, depth and airway patency together.

Conduction delays are short, on the order of a few milliseconds, so the loop from acid detection to changed breathing is fast compared with the seconds it takes blood to circulate.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

RTN neurons are glutamatergic, using the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT2.

Most also release the peptide neuromedin B, which prolongs the excitatory effect.

They are excited by adenosine triphosphate released from neighbouring astrocytes, by serotonin, by substance P and by orexin, and inhibited by GABA and glycine from the surrounding respiratory network.

Their own transmitter action on the pre-Botzinger complex is fast excitation through AMPA and NMDA receptors.

MYELINATION:

The short local axons are thinly myelinated or unmyelinated, which is unproblematic because the distances are so short.

Myelination is not a limiting factor for this cell type, and there is no specialised myelin arrangement, unlike the long tracts elsewhere in the brainstem.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Energy use is modest at rest, since firing rates are low, but rises steeply during exercise or lung disease when these cells fire continuously for hours.

Their position against the pial surface gives them privileged access to the densest capillary bed in the ventral medulla, and blood flow to this exact patch of tissue increases when carbon dioxide rises, a local coupling that also amplifies the signal.

Because carbon dioxide dilates blood vessels, the sensor and its blood supply are physically entangled, and disentangling the vascular from the neuronal contribution has taken decades.

PLASTICITY:

Chronic exposure to high carbon dioxide, as in advanced lung disease, blunts the response of these neurons over weeks, which is why people with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease stop responding normally to carbon dioxide and rely instead on low oxygen to drive their breathing.

Repeated exposure to low oxygen produces long-lasting facilitation of the chemoreflex, which contributes to the high blood pressure seen in obstructive sleep apnoea.

The population is also plastic across development, expanding its influence in the first months of life, which is one reason infants are especially vulnerable to failures of this system.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes here are genuinely different from astrocytes elsewhere, and that difference is the interesting part of the story.

Ventral surface astrocytes in this region are themselves chemosensitive: when carbon dioxide rises they acidify internally, which triggers release of adenosine triphosphate through connexin hemichannels.

That adenosine triphosphate acts on purinergic receptors on the RTN neurons and adds roughly a fifth to a third of the total response.

These astrocytes also send processes to the surrounding arterioles and dilate them when carbon dioxide rises, so the same glial cell both boosts the neural signal and increases the local blood flow that generates it.

Nowhere else in the brain do astrocytes function so clearly as a primary sensory element in their own right.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

The ventral medullary surface is otherwise unremarkable tissue, a thin rind over the exit of the facial nerve.

Remove the RTN and that rind becomes just a boundary rather than a sense organ.

Breathing would continue, driven by the pre-Botzinger complex and by oxygen sensors in the neck, but it would no longer be steered by carbon dioxide.

The person would breathe adequately while awake, because wakefulness itself provides drive, and would hypoventilate dangerously the moment they fell asleep.

That is precisely the clinical picture of congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, and it is why the region gives the brainstem its quality of vigilance about blood chemistry.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The cell is a chemical sensor before it is a computing element, and its input is not a synapse at all but the proton concentration of the fluid around it.

Sensing is distributed between the neuron and the astrocyte, so the true sensory unit is a neuron-glia pair, not a neuron.

The nucleus controls local blood flow, since RTN activity and astrocytic signalling dilate nearby arterioles, meaning this population regulates its own perfusion.

Volume transmission is important, since adenosine triphosphate and neuromedin B act over a diffusion distance rather than a cleft.

The whole assembly acts as a negative feedback controller with a very long loop delay imposed by the circulation time of blood, and much of its behaviour, including the instability called periodic breathing, is a property of that delay rather than of the cells.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Arterial carbon dioxide pressure, thirty to sixty millimetres of mercury, converted to local pH.

◦ Carotid body signal relayed by the nucleus of the solitary tract, adding an oxygen term.

◦ Adenosine triphosphate from local astrocytes, contributing about twenty to thirty percent of total drive.

◦ Serotonin, orexin and hypothalamic exercise signals as multiplicative gain.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Excitatory glutamate and neuromedin B to the pre-Botzinger complex, rostral ventral respiratory group and hypoglossal motor neurons.

◦ Firing rate zero to about thirty spikes per second.

• STATE.

◦ Current firing rate.

◦ Local extracellular pH.

◦ Astrocytic adenosine triphosphate level.

◦ Long-term adaptation level for chronic carbon dioxide exposure.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Apnoeic threshold about thirty-eight millimetres of mercury of carbon dioxide.

◦ Sensitivity about two to three spikes per second per millimetre of mercury.

◦ Maximum rate about thirty spikes per second.

◦ Relationship of carbon dioxide to pH about minus zero point zero zero eight pH units per millimetre of mercury.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Intrinsic proton sensing within one to two seconds.

◦ Astrocytic adenosine triphosphate release over several seconds.

◦ Circulatory loop delay from lung to brainstem, ten to twenty seconds, which sets the stability of the whole system.

◦ Chronic adaptation over days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, caused by polyalanine repeat expansion mutations in the PHOX2B gene, in which these neurons fail to form and the carbon dioxide response is absent, so the child stops breathing adequately in sleep and needs lifelong ventilation.

◦ The condition affects roughly one in one hundred and fifty thousand to one in two hundred thousand births.

◦ Acquired loss contributes to central sleep apnoea, to the blunted carbon dioxide response of advanced lung disease, and to periodic breathing when the loop delay grows in heart failure.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert the carbon dioxide level of the blood into a firing rate that drives the breathing rhythm generator, and then to let the resulting ventilation lower the carbon dioxide again.
Create a number variable called carbon_dioxide_pressure with initial value 40.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called ventilation with initial value 6.
Repeat the following steps exactly 600 times.
    Calculate the difference of carbon_dioxide_pressure and 38.
    Set excess_carbon_dioxide to the result.
    Check if excess_carbon_dioxide is greater than 0.
    Set is_above_apnoeic_threshold to the result.
    If is_above_apnoeic_threshold is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of excess_carbon_dioxide and 2.5.
        Set firing_rate to the result.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of firing_rate and 0.9.
    Set ventilation to the result.
    Calculate the sum of ventilation and 4.
    Set ventilation to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of 240 divided by ventilation.
    Set target_carbon_dioxide to the result.
    Calculate the difference of target_carbon_dioxide and carbon_dioxide_pressure.
    Set gap to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of gap divided by 30.
    Set adjustment to the result.
    Calculate the sum of carbon_dioxide_pressure and adjustment.
    Set carbon_dioxide_pressure to the result.
End the loop.
Display carbon_dioxide_pressure to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python was chosen because this cell is a sigmoid sensor inside a negative feedback loop, and Python lets the sensor, the plant and the loop each be one short readable block.

import math

PCO2_TO_PH_SLOPE = -0.008   # pH units per millimetre of mercury of carbon dioxide
PH_REST = 7.40              # arterial pH at 40 mmHg
HALF_ACTIVATION_PH = 7.36   # pH at which RTN firing is half maximal
STEEPNESS = 0.02            # pH units for an e-fold change in rate
MAX_RATE_HZ = 30.0
ASTROCYTE_ATP_GAIN = 0.25   # extra drive relayed by chemosensitive astrocytes

def ph_from_pco2(pco2):
    return PH_REST + PCO2_TO_PH_SLOPE * (pco2 - 40.0)

def rtn_rate(pco2):
    ph = ph_from_pco2(pco2)
    neuronal = MAX_RATE_HZ / (1.0 + math.exp((ph - HALF_ACTIVATION_PH) / STEEPNESS))
    return neuronal * (1.0 + ASTROCYTE_ATP_GAIN)

def ventilation(pco2):
    # litres per minute: a fixed background plus the drive from the RTN
    return 4.0 + 0.9 * rtn_rate(pco2) * 0.4

pco2 = 40.0
for second in range(600):
    target = 240.0 / ventilation(pco2)   # steady state CO2 for this ventilation
    pco2 += (target - pco2) / 30.0       # blood and tissue stores lag behind

print("resting arterial CO2 settles at", round(pco2, 2), "mmHg")
print("RTN firing at 40 mmHg:", round(rtn_rate(40.0), 1), "Hz")
print("RTN firing at 50 mmHg:", round(rtn_rate(50.0), 1), "Hz")
# prints 40.51 mmHg, 4.5 Hz at rest, and 33.0 Hz when CO2 rises by ten

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron in the human body sends a dendrite to the outer surface of the brain to taste the fluid there.

No other cell type is defined clinically by a single gene whose mutation makes a newborn forget to breathe in its sleep.

If you find a Phox2b-positive, glutamatergic, neuromedin B-expressing cell pressed against the ventral surface of the medulla just behind the facial nucleus, silent at normal carbon dioxide and firing linearly above it, you have found a retrotrapezoid nucleus neuron.

CHAPTER 153. RED NUCLEUS NEURONS (Limb-Path Correcting Neuron) (NON-COG)

Cut a fresh human midbrain across and two pink discs look back at you, stained by their own iron, which is how the red nucleus got its name.

Red nucleus is a colour seen in a fresh specimen, an address that names a pigment rather than a purpose.

Limb-Path names the domain, since every input and output of this midbrain group belongs to the machinery of limb and hand action.

Correcting names the specific signal and the purpose it serves, because the great majority of the human structure is the small-celled division, which does not reach the spinal cord at all but feeds the inferior olive, the source of the climbing fibres that report mismatches between intended and achieved movement to the cerebellum, so the loop adjusts the next attempt rather than commanding the present one.

Neuron marks it honestly, since the large-celled, spinal-projecting division is heavily reduced in bipedal primates including humans, so the direct commanding role seen in cats is not the human story and the name deliberately records the loop rather than the tract.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The red nucleus is a paired ball of grey matter, one on each side of the midbrain, and its neurons are the junction box where the cerebellum hands its finished movement commands onward.

In a cat or a rat a large part of this nucleus drives the limbs directly, through a cable called the rubrospinal tract, which runs from the midbrain down the spinal cord.

In a human that limb-driving part has almost disappeared, and the bulk of the nucleus instead sends a running copy of movement commands downward to the inferior olive, the small medullary structure that teaches the cerebellum what went wrong.

So the human red nucleus is less a commander of muscles and more a clerk inside the machinery of motor learning, and recent human imaging work argues it has been repurposed toward goal-directed action rather than reflex.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The nucleus is an oval mass with two clearly different cell families living in it.

The magnocellular part, meaning the large-celled part, sits at the tail end and holds enormous multipolar neurons, each with four to eight thick dendrites, which are the branching input antennae of a nerve cell.

The parvocellular part, meaning the small-celled part, fills the front and most of the human nucleus, and its cells are small, round or spindle shaped, and tightly packed.

Cerebellar fibres land as big blobs on the cell body and the nearest dendrites, while cortical fibres land far out on the dendritic tips, so the cerebellum shouts and the cortex whispers.

SIZE:

The giant magnocellular neurons have cell bodies 40 to 90 micrometres across, which puts them among the largest neurons in the human brainstem.

Parvocellular neurons measure 10 to 25 micrometres.

The nucleus itself is about 5 millimetres wide, roughly the size of a peppercorn, and occupies on the order of 60 to 120 cubic millimetres on each side.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Magnocellular projection neuron, huge, exclusively glutamatergic, meaning it releases the excitatory chemical glutamate, and sending its axon to the brainstem and the top three segments of the neck spinal cord.

• Parvocellular projection neuron, small, glutamatergic, sending its axon down to the principal inferior olive.

• Parvocellular inhibitory interneuron, using gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main calming chemical, and staying entirely inside the nucleus.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It sits in the tegmentum, the core, of the midbrain at the level of the superior colliculus, above and behind the substantia nigra and in front of the medial lemniscus.

Two interfaces define it precisely.

It is embedded inside the crossing fibres of the superior cerebellar peduncle, the cerebellum's main exit cable, so cerebellar axons pass through the nucleus on their way to the thalamus.

It is also pierced by the rootlets of the third cranial nerve, the oculomotor nerve, which thread straight through the nucleus on their way out of the brain.

NUMBER:

The magnocellular part of the human red nucleus contains only about 150 to 200 giant neurons per side, a count published by Nathan and Smith in 1982 and repeated ever since, and confidence in it is good.

No unbiased stereological count of the whole human nucleus exists, so the parvocellular figure is an estimate: at the neuron packing density measured in the neighbouring human inferior colliculus, roughly 19,000 neurons per cubic millimetre, and allowing for looser packing, the likely range is 300,000 to 1.5 million per side, with low confidence.

That makes the pair perhaps 0.6 to 3 million neurons, up to about 1.5 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the whole brainstem, and about 0.002 percent of the 86 billion neurons of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These cells fire steadily at 5 to 50 spikes per second at rest and burst up to about 200 per second at the start of a movement.

The giant cells have a low input resistance near 20 to 40 megaohms, meaning it takes a lot of current to move their voltage, and a membrane time constant of 5 to 15 milliseconds, meaning they forget an input in about a hundredth of a second.

They carry a slow inward current called Ih, the hyperpolarisation-activated current, which switches on when the cell is pushed downward in voltage and then fires the cell back up in a rebound burst when the push is released.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from the opposite cerebellum, chiefly the interposed nucleus, from the same-side motor and premotor cortex, from the pedunculopontine nucleus, and from local GABA cells.

Outputs run three ways: the rubrospinal tract to the opposite spinal cord, rubrobulbar branches to the facial nucleus and the lateral reticular nucleus, and the large rubro-olivary bundle from the small cells down the central tegmental tract to the same-side principal olive.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Magnocellular axons cross the midline immediately, in the ventral tegmental decussation, then run down heavily insulated, 10 to 15 micrometres thick, conducting at 60 to 100 metres per second.

In humans these fibres are few and usually cannot be traced below the third neck segment, so the tract that dominates a cat's forelimb barely reaches a human elbow.

Parvocellular axons are thin, 1 to 3 micrometres, and end in the olive.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the output chemical of nearly every projecting cell, packaged by the transporter VGLUT2.

The cells receive GABA and glycine, both calming chemicals, and are modulated by acetylcholine from the pedunculopontine nucleus, a chemical that raises alertness.

MYELINATION:

Myelin is the fatty insulation that speeds up nerve fibres.

The magnocellular axons are among the most heavily insulated in the brainstem, with sheaths so thick that the tract stands out in myelin-stained sections; the parvocellular axons are lightly insulated by comparison.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The red nucleus concentrates iron, which is why it glows on iron-sensitive magnetic resonance imaging and why it looks pink in fresh tissue.

Iron is needed for the enzymes of energy production, but it also drives oxidative damage, so these cells run a high-output, high-risk metabolism and accumulate the ageing pigment lipofuscin early.

PLASTICITY:

Rubrospinal neurons are the textbook example of sprouting after injury: when the corticospinal tract is damaged, their axons grow new branches and take over part of its job.

The connection from motor cortex onto red nucleus neurons can be strengthened by pairing, and the nucleus is a required output stage in classical eyeblink conditioning.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes here are unusual in being loaded with ferritin, the iron-storage protein, because they must buffer the nucleus's high iron content and keep it out of trouble.

Microglia, the brain's immune cells, in this nucleus also carry visible iron, and oligodendrocytes here build some of the thickest sheaths in the brainstem.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell type and the midbrain loses its return path from cerebellum to olive.

The cerebellum could still act, but it could no longer send a copy of its own output back to the teacher that grades it, so motor learning would lose its thermostat and skills would drift.

The midbrain would also lose its emergency flexor bias, the reflex that pulls a limb inward when balance fails.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Rebound bursting means these cells answer the end of inhibition, not only the arrival of excitation, so silence itself is a signal.

Their terminals in the olive enter glomeruli, small enclosed knots of tissue that also contain the electrical gap junctions coupling olivary cells together, so red nucleus activity changes how strongly the olive synchronises rather than merely how fast it fires.

Dendrites of the giant cells support local calcium spikes, small self-generated electrical events that let one branch decide on its own, and the cells depend on growth factors sent backward from their spinal targets to stay alive.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Cerebellar interposed nucleus, glutamate, 0 to 300 spikes per second per fibre, onto soma and proximal dendrites, weight about 1.4.

◦ Motor and premotor cortex, glutamate, 0 to 100 spikes per second, onto distal dendrites, weight about 0.6.

◦ Local GABA interneurons, 0 to 60 spikes per second, subtractive.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spike train to contralateral spinal laminae five to seven, cervical segments one to three.

◦ Efference copy spike train to the ipsilateral principal inferior olive.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts, Ih activation between 0 and 1, recent spike history, calcium level in dendrites.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting voltage -65 millivolts, threshold -45 millivolts, reset -70 millivolts, input resistance 30 megaohms, maximum rebound conductance 0.6 arbitrary units.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 5 to 15 milliseconds, Ih 100 to 200 milliseconds, spinal conduction 3 to 6 milliseconds, olivary conduction 8 to 15 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Damage to this nucleus or to the cerebellar fibres passing through it produces Holmes tremor, a slow shaking of about 2 to 5 cycles per second that is present at rest, worse on holding a posture and worst on reaching, appearing weeks to months after the injury.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a cerebellar movement command into a limb command while sending a copy of that command down to the inferior olive.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called rebound activation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called total drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called olive copy with initial value empty list.
For each time step in the movement, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of the cerebellar input at this time step and 1.4.
    Set total drive to the result.
    Calculate the difference of total drive and the inhibitory input at this time step.
    Set total drive to the result.
    Check if membrane voltage is less than -70.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of rebound activation and 0.02.
        Set rebound activation to the result.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of rebound activation and 0.99.
        Set rebound activation to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of total drive and rebound activation.
    Set total drive to the result.
    Calculate the product of total drive and 3.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and the result.
    Set membrane voltage to the result.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -45.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to -70.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to the result.
        Add 1 to the end of olive copy.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Add 0 to the end of olive copy.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python, chosen because the rebound arithmetic is short and a simulation agent
# can drop this straight into a larger model without a build step.
DT = 0.001            # time step in seconds
TAU_M = 0.010         # membrane time constant, 10 ms
TAU_H = 0.150         # rebound current time constant, 150 ms
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -65.0, -45.0, -70.0   # millivolts
R_IN = 30.0           # input resistance in megaohms
G_H_MAX = 0.6         # maximum rebound drive in nanoamps

def red_nucleus_neuron(cortical, cerebellar, inhibition, steps):
    """Currents in nanoamps. Returns spike times and the olivary copy."""
    v = V_REST
    h = 0.0                      # rebound current activation, 0 to 1
    spikes = []
    olive_copy = []
    for t in range(steps):
        drive = 0.6 * cortical[t] + 1.4 * cerebellar[t] - inhibition[t]
        h_target = 1.0 if v < -70.0 else 0.0   # sag builds only when pushed down
        h += (h_target - h) * DT / TAU_H
        v += (-(v - V_REST) + R_IN * (drive + G_H_MAX * h)) * DT / TAU_M
        fired = v >= V_TH
        if fired:
            v = V_RESET
            spikes.append(t)
        olive_copy.append(1.0 if fired else 0.0)
    return spikes, olive_copy

if __name__ == "__main__":
    n = 400
    cortex = [0.5] * n
    cerebellum = [0.0] * 100 + [1.2] * 60 + [0.0] * 240
    inhibit = [0.0] * 200 + [2.0] * 80 + [0.0] * 120
    fired, copy = red_nucleus_neuron(cortex, cerebellum, inhibit, n)
    print("spikes:", len(fired), "olive copy length:", len(copy))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other nucleus in the human brain is pink from its own iron, embedded in the crossing fibres of the cerebellum's exit cable, and pierced by the rootlets of a cranial nerve.

And no other human cell class shrinks so dramatically from its animal version: 150 to 200 giant cells, where a cat has tens of thousands.

CHAPTER 154. SUPERIOR COLLICULUS NEURONS (Gaze-Shifting Orienting Neuron) (COG)

Something flickers at the edge of your vision and your eyes are already on it, before you know you have seen anything at all.

The chapter label names a bump on the brainstem and hides everything the tissue does.

Gaze-Shifting names the output, because the deep layers of this midbrain roof drive the fast flicking eye movements called saccades, sending commands to the pontine machinery for sideways movement and the midbrain machinery for up and down movement.

Orienting names the broader faculty, since the same map turns the head and attention toward whatever is suddenly interesting, and the superficial layers hold two complementary detector cells, broad-armed ones that notice a small object anywhere in a large patch of the visual field and narrow-armed ones that report its exact position.

Neuron marks it as a cell of a structure whose upper layers ask what is there and whose lower layers decide whether to look, with build-up cells ramping their firing from the moment a target appears until the eye actually moves.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The superior colliculus is a pair of layered mounds on the roof of the midbrain, and it is the oldest map of space in the vertebrate brain.

Its top layers hold a picture of the visual world, laid out in order, and its bottom layers hold a map of where to point the eyes and head, laid out in exactly the same order and stacked directly underneath.

Its job is to notice that something happened somewhere, decide which somewhere wins, and launch the eyes there in about 200 milliseconds.

It is also the route that supports blindsight, the eerie condition in which a person with a destroyed visual cortex can point at objects they swear they cannot see.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is built in seven sheets, named from the surface downward: stratum zonale, stratum griseum superficiale, stratum opticum, stratum griseum intermediale, stratum album intermediale, stratum griseum profundum and stratum album profundum.

Grey sheets hold cell bodies and white sheets hold passing fibres.

Superficial cells come in four shapes: wide-field vertical cells whose dendrites spread sideways like an umbrella, narrow-field vertical cells with a tight vertical brush, horizontal cells lying flat, and stellate cells with dendrites in all directions.

Deep-layer output cells are large and T-shaped, with one dendritic tuft reaching up into the visual sheets, which is how a sensory map and a motor map are physically stitched together.

SIZE:

Cell bodies run from 8 micrometres for small interneurons to 40 micrometres for the biggest deep output cells.

A wide-field vertical cell spreads its dendrites 300 to 500 micrometres across, wide enough to cover a large patch of the visual field on its own.

Each colliculus is about 10 millimetres across and measures roughly 200 cubic millimetres by magnetic resonance imaging, with reported means of 195 to 218 cubic millimetres per side.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Wide-field vertical cell, superficial, which reports looming, the rapid expansion of an approaching object, and projects to the pulvinar of the thalamus.

• Narrow-field vertical cell, superficial, which reports small moving features and projects to the lateral geniculate nucleus, the thalamic relay for vision.

• Horizontal and stellate cells, superficial, mostly inhibitory, which sharpen the visual map.

• Saccade burst neuron, intermediate layers, silent until a movement is committed and then firing furiously.

• Buildup neuron, intermediate and deep layers, whose firing climbs slowly from the moment a target appears until the eyes move.

• Fixation neuron, at the front tip of the map, firing steadily while the eyes hold still and pausing during a movement.

• Tectospinal and tectoreticular projection neurons, deep, which turn the head.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It occupies the upper half of the tectum, the roof of the midbrain, directly above the cerebral aqueduct and immediately in front of the inferior colliculus.

Its interfaces are important: it borders the pretectum in front, which handles pupil reflexes, the periaqueductal grey below, which handles defensive behaviour, and it receives retinal fibres through the brachium of the superior colliculus, a surface bundle arriving from the optic tract.

NUMBER:

There is no published unbiased count of human superior colliculus neurons, which is a real gap.

Multiplying the measured volume of roughly 200 cubic millimetres per side by the neuron density measured in the neighbouring human inferior colliculus, about 19,000 per cubic millimetre, gives an order-of-magnitude estimate of 2 to 4 million neurons per side, with low confidence.

That makes 4 to 8 million for the pair, which is 2 to 4 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the brainstem and about 0.008 percent of the 86 billion neurons of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Superficial visual cells answer a flash after 40 to 70 milliseconds with a brief burst.

Saccade burst neurons in the deep layers reach the highest firing rates in the midbrain: peaks near 750 spikes per second for small movements, falling to about 550 spikes per second for large ones, because bigger movements are coded by spreading the burst over more cells for longer rather than by firing harder.

Fixation neurons hold a steady 50 to 100 spikes per second and fall silent for the duration of a movement.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from the retina, with roughly one in ten of the million or so output fibres of each eye branching here, from layer five of the primary visual cortex, from the frontal eye field and parietal cortex, from the auditory and somatosensory systems into the deep layers, and, crucially, from the substantia nigra pars reticulata, which pours steady GABA onto the deep layers and holds the whole map switched off until it is allowed to fire.

Outputs go to the pulvinar and the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus, to the paramedian pontine reticular formation for sideways eye movements, to the rostral interstitial nucleus for up and down eye movements, to the cervical spinal cord through the tectospinal tract, and to the opposite colliculus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Output axons are 1 to 4 micrometres thick and insulated, conducting at 10 to 40 metres per second.

Tectospinal axons cross the midline in the dorsal tegmental decussation immediately below the nucleus, so a target in the left visual field is turned toward by muscles driven from the right side of the brainstem.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Projection neurons release glutamate.

Roughly a third of collicular neurons are inhibitory and release GABA, and the deep layers additionally receive powerful GABA from the substantia nigra.

Acetylcholine from the parabigeminal and pedunculopontine nuclei arrives in patches in the intermediate layers and turns steady input into an explosive burst, and nitric oxide, a gas that drifts between cells, is made here in quantity.

MYELINATION:

The two white sheets, stratum opticum and the album layers, are made of insulated fibres running horizontally, which is exactly why they appear pale.

Local connections inside a grey sheet are largely bare, because they only travel a fraction of a millimetre.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The superficial layers are among the most metabolically active tissue in the midbrain, marked by dense cytochrome oxidase, an enzyme of energy production, because the retina never stops sending.

Deep layers are cheap at rest and extremely expensive for the 50 milliseconds of a burst.

PLASTICITY:

The alignment of the visual, auditory and touch maps onto one another is learned during development and can be re-learned; barn owls fitted with prisms famously shift their auditory map to match the displaced visual one.

In adults, saccade adaptation retunes the map within a few hundred trials when the eyes consistently land short of a target.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in the superficial layers are arranged in vertical palisades that run in the same direction as the retinal input columns, so each little patch of visual space has its own glial compartment, which limits the sideways spread of glutamate and keeps neighbouring points of the map from blurring into each other.

This columnar glial arrangement is not seen in most brainstem nuclei, where astrocytes are arranged without a preferred direction.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the midbrain roof stops being a decision-maker and becomes a wire.

You would lose express saccades, the very fast eye movements made in under 100 milliseconds, lose the automatic flinch and freeze to a looming shadow, and lose blindsight entirely.

Vision would still work, but nothing would ever grab you.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The wide-field vertical cell performs a genuine dendritic computation: because its umbrella of dendrites is excited by many small motion detectors at once, an expanding shadow sums across the whole arbor while a small moving dot does not, so looming is detected by the shape of the dendritic tree rather than by any synaptic weight.

Recurrent excitation among neighbouring deep-layer cells, combined with long-range inhibition, makes the map a winner-take-all device that physically cannot represent two saccade targets at once.

Superficial cells are coupled by gap junctions, direct electrical pores between cells, during development; nitric oxide acts as a diffusing retrograde messenger; and the nigral GABA input works as a brake that is released rather than a signal that is added.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Retinal ganglion cell input to superficial layers, glutamate, 0 to 200 spikes per second, retinotopically mapped.

◦ Cortical input from primary visual cortex and frontal eye field, glutamate, 0 to 100 spikes per second.

◦ Nigral brake, GABA, tonic 40 to 100 spikes per second, falling to near zero 60 to 100 milliseconds before a movement.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Burst command to the paramedian pontine reticular formation and the rostral interstitial nucleus, encoded as position on the map, not as rate.

◦ Ascending copy to pulvinar and lateral geniculate nucleus.

• STATE.

◦ Activity value at each of roughly 40 by 40 map sites, brake level, elapsed time since target onset, refractory flag after a movement.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Self-excitation 1.6, near-neighbour excitation 0.9, long-range inhibition -0.35 divided by map size, burst threshold 0.8 normalised units.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 milliseconds, visual latency 40 to 70 milliseconds, brake release 60 to 100 milliseconds, burst duration 20 to 100 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In progressive supranuclear palsy the collicular and midbrain saccade machinery degenerates, and up and down eye movements slow and then fail while the eyes can still be moved passively, which is why the disorder is called supranuclear.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to pick the single strongest target on the collicular map and to release a saccade burst once the basal ganglia brake is lifted.
Create a list variable called map activity with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called strongest with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called winning site with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called burst released with initial value false.
For each site in the visual scene, perform the following operations.
    Add the sensory strength of that site to the end of map activity.
End the loop.
For each time step in the trial, perform the following operations.
    Set strongest to 0.
    For each site in map activity, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the product of the activity at that site and 1.6.
        Calculate the difference of the result and the nigral brake at this time step.
        Set the activity at that site to the result.
        Check if the activity at that site is less than 0.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set the activity at that site to 0.
        End the conditional block.
        Check if the activity at that site is greater than strongest.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set strongest to the activity at that site.
            Set winning site to the position of that site.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
    Check if strongest is greater than 0.8.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set burst released to true.
        Display winning site to the console.
        Break out of the current loop immediately.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python, chosen because the whole point is a map competing with itself, and a
# plain list plus one loop shows that competition without hiding it in a library.
N = 40                  # sites along one axis of the motor map
DT = 0.001              # 1 ms time step
TAU = 0.010             # 10 ms membrane time constant
SELF, NEAR, FAR = 1.6, 0.9, -0.35
THRESH = 0.8            # burst threshold in normalised activity units

def step(act, visual, brake):
    new = list(act)
    for i in range(N):
        recurrent = SELF * act[i]
        if i > 0:
            recurrent += NEAR * act[i - 1]
        if i < N - 1:
            recurrent += NEAR * act[i + 1]
        for j in range(N):
            if abs(i - j) > 3:              # distant sites suppress each other
                recurrent += FAR * act[j] / N
        drive = visual[i] + recurrent - brake
        if drive < 0.0:
            drive = 0.0
        new[i] = act[i] + (drive - act[i]) * DT / TAU
    return new

def run(visual, brake_profile, steps):
    act = [0.0] * N
    for t in range(steps):
        act = step(act, visual, brake_profile[t])
        peak = max(act)
        if peak > THRESH:
            return act.index(peak), t * DT   # winning site and saccade latency
    return None, None

if __name__ == "__main__":
    vis = [0.0] * N
    vis[12] = 0.9                            # the target
    vis[27] = 0.7                            # a competing distractor
    brake = [1.0] * 60 + [0.15] * 240        # nigra releases the map at 60 ms
    print(run(vis, brake, 300))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

This is the only place in the human brain where a map of the sensory world and a map of the movement that answers it are stacked in exact register, one directly above the other, joined by single cells whose dendrites reach from one map into the other.

Nowhere else does a neuron fire at 750 spikes per second and then say nothing for a second.

CHAPTER 155. INFERIOR COLLICULUS NEURONS (Sound-Gathering Relay Neuron) (COG)

Almost every sound that ever reaches your awareness passes through this one nucleus, and almost no ascending hearing fibre is allowed to skip it.

Inferior colliculus is an address naming a small hill on the roof of the midbrain.

Sound names the sense served, because almost every ascending pathway from the ear passes through this station on its way to the thalamus and cortex, making it the obligatory crossroads of hearing.

Gathering names the work, which is bringing together streams that were computed separately lower down, such as timing and loudness differences between the two ears, so that the location and identity of a sound can be represented in one place.

Relay names the honest limit of what these cells do, since they pass the result upward rather than terminating the computation.

Neuron marks it as a cell of a structure whose internal division of labour is visible in the shapes, about seventy-five percent of those in the central core being flat, disc-shaped cells whose branches lie within a single frequency sheet while star-shaped cells spread across sheets and so combine information across pitches.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The inferior colliculus is the pair of mounds on the lower half of the midbrain roof, sitting just behind the superior colliculus, and it is the compulsory tollgate of hearing.

Eight or more separate brainstem hearing nuclei, each of which has already computed something different about a sound, send their answers here, and these neurons combine them.

They compute where a sound is, by comparing the microsecond-scale difference in arrival time between the two ears, how a sound is changing, by tuning to the rhythm of its loudness fluctuations, and how long it lasted, by cells that fire only for sounds of one particular duration.

The result is passed upward to the thalamus and cortex, and sideways to the superior colliculus so that the eyes can turn toward a noise.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The core is the central nucleus, and it is built like a stack of pages.

Each page, called a fibrodendritic lamina, is a flat sheet made of incoming insulated fibres running side by side with the flattened dendrites of the resident cells, and every sheet is tuned to one sound frequency, with low notes at the back and high notes at the front.

Disc-shaped neurons keep their dendrites inside one page, so they hear one frequency purely.

Stellate neurons spread their dendrites across several pages, so they hear across frequencies and can detect a chord or a voice.

SIZE:

Cell bodies measure 10 to 30 micrometres.

A disc-shaped cell's dendritic field is a flattened ellipse, only 50 to 70 micrometres thick but 300 to 500 micrometres wide, which is what makes the laminar stack visible under a microscope.

The human central nucleus occupies about 22.4 cubic millimetres per side.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Disc-shaped glutamatergic principal neuron, the majority cell of the central nucleus, projecting to the thalamus.

• Disc-shaped GABAergic neuron, inhibitory, sharpening frequency tuning within a page.

• Stellate glutamatergic neuron, integrating across pages.

• Stellate GABAergic neuron containing neuropeptide Y, a peptide that damps excitability; between 38 and 50 percent of the inhibitory cells of the central nucleus are of this across-page kind.

• Large GABAergic neuron wrapped in a dense coat of excitatory terminals and a perineuronal net, built for speed.

• Neurons of the dorsal cortex and lateral cortex, which handle descending cortical feedback and touch input respectively.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It sits in the caudal tectum of the midbrain, below and behind the superior colliculus, wrapped around the cerebral aqueduct, with the superior cerebellar peduncle passing underneath.

Two interfaces matter.

The brachium of the inferior colliculus leaves its surface to reach the medial geniculate body of the thalamus, and the lateral cortex of the nucleus is a genuine hearing-and-touch interface, receiving fibres from the dorsal column nuclei and the trigeminal system, which is why clenching your jaw or pressing your neck can change the pitch of tinnitus.

NUMBER:

The human central nucleus holds more than 420,000 neurons per side, measured by unbiased stereology, and confidence in that figure is good.

Adding the dorsal and lateral cortices, which together are several times the central nucleus in volume but less densely packed, the whole inferior colliculus plausibly holds 800,000 to 1.2 million neurons per side, with moderate confidence.

The pair therefore holds roughly 2 million neurons, about 1 percent of the brainstem's 200 million, and about 0.002 percent of the 86 billion neurons of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These cells show a whole catalogue of firing patterns, and the pattern is the computation: onset cells fire once at the start of a sound, sustained cells fire throughout, pauser cells fire, stop and restart, buildup cells ramp, and rebound cells fire only when inhibition ends.

Rebound depends on the T-type calcium current, a channel that only opens after the cell has been held down.

Firing rates range from silence to about 300 spikes per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input arrives from the opposite cochlear nucleus, from both superior olivary nuclei, and, in a very large descending projection, from the auditory cortex.

Inhibitory input arrives as glycine from the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body and the lateral superior olive, and as GABA from the dorsal nucleus of the lateral lemniscus, one of the biggest single inhibitory inputs in the brain.

Outputs run to the medial geniculate body, to the deep superior colliculus, to the opposite inferior colliculus through its own commissure, to the pontine nuclei, and to the periaqueductal grey, which is how a sudden loud noise can make you freeze.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Ascending axons are 1 to 3 micrometres thick, insulated, conducting at 5 to 20 metres per second, and they collect into the brachium on the surface of the midbrain.

Local axons stay inside one lamina, so inhibition is delivered within a frequency page rather than across pages.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for the projecting cells.

About 30 percent of the cells of the central nucleus are GABAergic.

Glycine is received rather than made here, acetylcholine arrives from the pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei, and serotonin from the raphe nuclei changes how strongly the nucleus responds depending on behavioural state.

MYELINATION:

Myelin defines the anatomy here, because the laminae are made of bundles of insulated afferent fibres interleaved with dendrites, so a myelin stain reveals the frequency map directly.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

In rats measured with radioactive glucose, the inferior colliculus has the highest resting glucose consumption of any grey structure in the brain, higher than cortex, because its cells fire constantly and precisely even in silence.

That appetite makes it one of the first structures damaged when oxygen or thiamine runs short.

PLASTICITY:

When hearing is lost at the ear, this nucleus turns up its own gain: GABA levels and inhibitory strength fall over weeks, excitatory terminals lengthen, and the tissue becomes hyperexcitable.

That compensation is currently the leading explanation for tinnitus, a phantom ringing, and hyperacusis, in which ordinary sounds become painful.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here carry an unusually high density of glutamate transporters, the pumps that clear the transmitter from the synapse, because a cell that must resolve arrival-time differences of tens of microseconds cannot tolerate transmitter lingering.

Many large inhibitory neurons are wrapped in perineuronal nets, lattices of sugar-protein made by glia that stiffen the cell surface, speed up its electrical behaviour and lock its connections in place.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take these cells away and the midbrain still passes sound upward, but the two ears never meet.

You would hear a bang and have no idea where it came from, no startle, no automatic turn of the eyes and head, and no sense of rhythm in speech, because the tuning to loudness fluctuation is built here.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Duration tuning is a real computation performed by timing rather than weighting: inhibition arrives with the sound, a slow excitation arrives at a fixed delay after the sound starts, and a fast excitation arrives when the sound stops, so only a sound of the right length makes the two excitations collide.

Stellate cells integrate across laminae, so their dendrites act as a chord detector.

The descending projection from cortex is not feedback in the engineering sense but a gain and map controller that can shift frequency tuning within minutes, serotonin and nitric oxide act by volume transmission, spreading through the tissue rather than crossing single synapses, and developing collicular cells are electrically coupled by gap junctions.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Contralateral cochlear nucleus, glutamate, 0 to 400 spikes per second, frequency-labelled.

◦ Medial and lateral superior olive, carrying interaural time differences of 0 to 700 microseconds and level differences of 0 to 30 decibels.

◦ Glycinergic and GABAergic inhibition from the trapezoid body and the lateral lemniscus, leading the excitation by 0.5 to 2 milliseconds.

◦ Descending auditory cortex, glutamate, slow gain control.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spike trains to the medial geniculate body, the deep superior colliculus and the periaqueductal grey.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, T-type calcium channel availability, inhibitory conductance, adaptation level, time since sound onset and offset.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Best frequency 20 hertz to 20 kilohertz, best duration 2 to 40 milliseconds, onset excitation delay about 10 milliseconds, coincidence window about 3 milliseconds, threshold 2.5 arbitrary units.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 1 to 3 milliseconds, inhibition 3 to 10 milliseconds, rebound 20 to 50 milliseconds, gain change hours to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of inhibition after cochlear damage produces runaway central gain, and the result is tinnitus and hyperacusis; in some inherited conditions the same hyperexcitability produces sound-triggered seizures.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make an auditory midbrain neuron fire only for a sound of about ten milliseconds, by testing whether a slow onset excitation and a fast offset excitation arrive together.
Create a number variable called onset time with initial value 50.
Create a number variable called duration with initial value 10.
Create a number variable called offset time with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called slow excitation time with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called fast excitation time with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gap with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called cell fires with initial value false.
Calculate the sum of onset time and duration.
Set offset time to the result.
Calculate the sum of onset time and 10.
Set slow excitation time to the result.
Calculate the sum of offset time and 1.
Set fast excitation time to the result.
Calculate the difference of slow excitation time and fast excitation time.
Set gap to the result.
Check if gap is less than 0.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the product of gap and -1.
    Set gap to the result.
End the conditional block.
Check if gap is less than 3.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set cell fires to true.
End the conditional block.
Check if offset time is greater than slow excitation time.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set cell fires to false.
End the conditional block.
Display cell fires to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python, chosen because this cell is about milliseconds rather than megaflops,
# and an explicit time loop makes the coincidence visible line by line.
DT = 0.0001           # 0.1 ms steps, because the answer depends on timing
ONSET_DELAY = 0.010   # slow excitation arrives 10 ms after sound onset
WIDTH = 0.003         # each excitation lasts 3 ms
TAU = 0.002           # 2 ms membrane time constant
GAIN = 3.0
THRESHOLD = 2.5       # set above what one excitation alone can reach

def duration_tuned(sound_on, sound_off, total=0.120):
    v = 0.0
    fired_at = None
    for k in range(int(total / DT)):
        t = k * DT
        exc, inh = 0.0, 0.0
        if sound_on + 0.001 <= t <= sound_off + 0.001:
            inh = 1.0                          # glycine, present with the sound
        if sound_on + ONSET_DELAY <= t <= sound_on + ONSET_DELAY + WIDTH:
            exc += 0.7                         # slow onset excitation
        if sound_off + 0.001 <= t <= sound_off + 0.001 + WIDTH:
            exc += 0.7                         # fast offset excitation
        v += (-v + GAIN * (exc - inh)) * DT / TAU
        if v > THRESHOLD and fired_at is None:
            fired_at = t
    return fired_at

if __name__ == "__main__":
    for ms in (2, 5, 8, 10, 12, 20, 40):
        out = duration_tuned(0.050, 0.050 + ms / 1000.0)
        print(ms, "ms sound ->", "spike" if out else "silent")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nowhere else in the brain is a sense laid out as a physical stack of pages you can see in a myelin stain, one frequency per page.

And no other nucleus is quite so obligatory: destroy it on both sides and a person with perfectly healthy ears becomes deaf.

CHAPTER 156. VESTIBULAR NUCLEI NEURONS (Head-Motion Balance Neuron) (COG)

Lie perfectly still and these cells are still firing about thirty times a second, because in this system stillness is not silence, it is a number.

The old chapter label is a plural address on an anatomical chart and says nothing about why losing these cells makes the world appear to swing.

Head-Motion names the input, because these medullary and pontine cells receive the nerve from the inner ear organs that report rotation and tilt of the skull, and they encode the speed at which the head is turning.

Balance names the two faculties they support, keeping the eyes still on the world while the head moves, and keeping the body upright by sending commands down the spinal cord to neck and trunk muscles.

Neuron marks it as part of the fastest reflex arc in the brain, since the eye arm of this system uses only three cells in series and compensatory eye movements lag head movements by about five to six milliseconds in primates.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The vestibular nuclei are four grey masses on each side of the upper medulla and lower pons, and they are the brain's balance exchange.

They receive the raw signals from the inner ear organs that sense head rotation and head tilt, and turn them into commands for the eyes, the neck, the spine, the gut and the cortex.

Their most famous job is the vestibulo-ocular reflex, which rotates your eyes exactly opposite to your head so the world stays still, in a circuit of only three cells and 5 to 7 milliseconds.

They also tell you which way is down, and they tell the stomach when the eyes and the inner ear disagree, which is where motion sickness begins.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The four nuclei are the superior nucleus of Bechterew, the lateral nucleus of Deiters, the medial nucleus of Schwalbe, and the inferior or descending nucleus.

Deiters' cells are giant multipolar neurons with thick radiating dendrites, among the largest in the brainstem, and their axons run all the way to the lumbar spinal cord.

Medial nucleus cells are medium, multipolar and densely packed, and they specialise in the eye reflex.

The whole complex lies immediately under the floor of the fourth ventricle, so a thin sheet of ependymal cells is all that separates these neurons from cerebrospinal fluid.

SIZE:

Deiters' giant cells have somas 50 to 80 micrometres across.

Medial and superior nucleus cells are 15 to 35 micrometres.

The complex as a whole is roughly 10 millimetres long from top to bottom on each side.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Type A neuron, with a broad action potential and a single deep after-hyperpolarisation, carrying an A-type potassium current that makes it slow to speed up.

• Type B neuron, with a narrow spike and a double after-hyperpolarisation, faster, more sensitive and more easily driven into bursts.

• Secondary vestibulo-ocular neuron of the medial and superior nuclei, the middle cell of the three-cell reflex arc.

• Vestibulospinal neuron of Deiters' nucleus, driving the anti-gravity muscles of the trunk and legs.

• Commissural inhibitory neuron, GABAergic or glycinergic, crossing to silence the opposite side.

• Vestibular-only neuron, which reports head motion but falls silent when you move your own head, because it subtracts an internal prediction.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The complex occupies the floor of the fourth ventricle in the rostral medulla and caudal pons, forming the vestibular area you can see on the surface of the brainstem.

It is a triple interface: the eighth cranial nerve enters it from the ear, the cerebellum reaches it directly through the juxtarestiform body, and it merges without a sharp border into the pontomedullary reticular formation.

Immediately next to it lies the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi, the eye-position integrator, and the two work as one functional unit.

NUMBER:

The medial vestibular nucleus, the largest of the four, holds about 151,000 neurons per side, measured by unbiased stereology in human brainstems, and confidence is good.

That count falls by roughly 3 percent per decade from age 40, an 18 percent loss across a normal lifespan, and loss occurs in the descending, medial and lateral nuclei but not in the superior nucleus.

Adding the other three nuclei gives a defensible range of 300,000 to 450,000 neurons per side, so roughly 0.6 to 0.9 million for the pair, about 0.4 percent of the brainstem's 200 million and about 0.001 percent of the nervous system's 86 billion.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These are pacemakers: cut off every input and they still fire regularly, at 5 to 35 spikes per second in a slice and faster in a living animal, driven by a persistent sodium current and the Ih current.

That standing rate is the zero point of the system, because a head turn one way speeds the cell up and a turn the other way slows it down, with a sensitivity near 0.4 to 1.0 extra spikes per second for each degree per second of head rotation.

Because the rate cannot fall below zero, a very fast head turn saturates the silent side, and the brain must rely on the excited side.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from the vestibular nerve, whose cell bodies sit in Scarpa's ganglion in the temporal bone and number on the order of 20,000 fibres per side, from Purkinje cells of the cerebellar flocculus, nodulus, uvula and anterior vermis, which are inhibitory, from neck muscle and joint receptors, from vision through the accessory optic system, and from the opposite vestibular nuclei.

Outputs go through the medial longitudinal fasciculus to the abducens, trochlear and oculomotor nuclei, down the lateral and medial vestibulospinal tracts, up to the thalamus and the parieto-insular vestibular cortex, and into the nucleus of the solitary tract and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the autonomic route that turns a rough sea into nausea.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Vestibulo-ocular axons are 3 to 8 micrometres thick and heavily insulated, conducting at 30 to 70 metres per second, because the reflex must beat the head.

Lateral vestibulospinal axons are the longest of the group, reaching the lower back, and they run uncrossed.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for the excitatory projection cells.

GABA and glycine for commissural cells and for cerebellar input.

Histamine from the tuberomammillary nucleus of the hypothalamus and acetylcholine both modulate the nuclei strongly, which is the reason antihistamines such as cinnarizine and the muscarinic blocker scopolamine are the standard drugs for vertigo and seasickness.

MYELINATION:

The medial longitudinal fasciculus is one of the first tracts in the human brain to be insulated, beginning before birth, because a newborn needs to stabilise gaze immediately.

Sheaths here are thick and internodes long.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

A neuron that never stops firing never stops spending, and these cells run a continuous energy bill.

That is why they are among the first to fail in thiamine deficiency, in which the earliest sign of Wernicke encephalopathy is often nystagmus, an involuntary jerking of the eyes.

PLASTICITY:

Vestibular compensation is one of the most striking recoveries in neurology: after one inner ear is destroyed, the deafferented nuclei are silent and the patient has violent vertigo, yet within two to three days the resting firing rate returns almost to normal and within weeks the person can walk normally.

Reflex gain is also continuously recalibrated by the cerebellum, which is why new spectacles feel wrong for a day and then feel right.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here are active participants in recovery rather than bystanders: after the nerve on one side is cut they change their glutamate and GABA transporter levels within hours, which is one of the mechanisms that restores the resting firing rate, and blocking astrocyte metabolism delays compensation.

Microglia proliferate in the deafferented nucleus within a day, and the tissue briefly becomes a small controlled inflammatory site.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the medulla loses its gravity reference.

The world would jump with every footstep, a symptom called oscillopsia, reading a sign while walking would be impossible, standing would require constant vision, and the brainstem would lose the automatic link between head motion and blood pressure that keeps you from fainting when you stand.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Three unusual things happen here.

First, endogenous pacemaking means the cell computes with a bidirectional rate code around a standing baseline, so inhibition carries as much information as excitation.

Second, the vestibular-only cells perform an explicit subtraction: a copy of the motor command for a self-generated head turn is subtracted from the sensed head turn, so these cells report only what the world did to you and not what you did to yourself.

Third, the two sides are wired in push-pull through commissural inhibition, so the pair behaves as a single differential amplifier, and this is exactly why losing one ear produces a violent spinning sensation rather than a simple gap.

Add to that histaminergic volume transmission, gap-junction coupling in young animals, and a direct line into autonomic control.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Vestibular nerve afferents, glutamate, resting rate about 90 spikes per second, modulated by head angular velocity in degrees per second.

◦ Purkinje cell inhibition from the cerebellum, GABA, 20 to 100 spikes per second.

◦ Commissural inhibition from the opposite complex, GABA and glycine.

◦ Efference copy of self-generated head movement, subtractive.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Firing rate to the abducens nucleus and other eye muscle nuclei, 0 to 300 spikes per second.

◦ Firing rate to spinal motor neurons and to the solitary nucleus for autonomic effects.

• STATE.

◦ Canal adaptation state, current firing rate, gain of the efference copy subtraction, compensation level after injury.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting rate about 30 spikes per second, sensitivity 0.6 spikes per second per degree per second, ceiling about 300 spikes per second, floor 0.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Reflex latency 5 to 7 milliseconds, semicircular canal cupula time constant about 5.7 seconds, velocity storage 15 to 20 seconds, compensation 2 days to several weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Sudden loss of input on one side, as in vestibular neuritis or a Wallenberg stroke, unbalances the push-pull pair and produces spinning vertigo, one-directional nystagmus, vomiting and a fall toward the damaged side.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a head rotation into an eye command while ignoring the part of the rotation the person produced themselves.
Create a number variable called resting rate with initial value 30.
Create a number variable called sensitivity with initial value 0.6.
Create a number variable called canal state with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called sensed velocity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called predicted velocity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 30.
For each time step in the head movement, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of the head velocity at this time step and canal state.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.000175.
    Calculate the sum of canal state and the result.
    Set canal state to the result.
    Calculate the difference of the head velocity at this time step and canal state.
    Set sensed velocity to the result.
    Calculate the product of the motor command at this time step and 0.9.
    Set predicted velocity to the result.
    Calculate the difference of sensed velocity and predicted velocity.
    Calculate the product of the result and sensitivity.
    Calculate the sum of resting rate and the result.
    Set firing rate to the result.
    Check if firing rate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if firing rate is greater than 300.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 300.
    End the conditional block.
    Display firing rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C, chosen because a vestibulo-ocular reflex is a hard real time controller and
   this is the language such controllers are actually written in. */
#include <stdio.h>

#define DT 0.001            /* one millisecond time step */
#define TAU_CUPULA 5.7      /* semicircular canal leak, seconds */
#define REST_RATE 30.0      /* spikes per second with the head still */
#define SENSITIVITY 0.6     /* spikes per second per degree per second */
#define MAX_RATE 300.0

double vestibular_neuron(double head_velocity, double motor_copy,
                         double *leak_state, double copy_gain)
{
    double sensed, drive, rate;
    /* the canal is a high pass filter: a steady turn fades away in seconds */
    *leak_state += (head_velocity - *leak_state) * DT / TAU_CUPULA;
    sensed = head_velocity - *leak_state;
    /* subtract the brain's own prediction of a self generated head turn */
    drive = sensed - motor_copy * copy_gain;
    rate = REST_RATE + SENSITIVITY * drive;
    if (rate < 0.0) rate = 0.0;
    if (rate > MAX_RATE) rate = MAX_RATE;
    return rate;
}

int main(void)
{
    double leak = 0.0;
    int k;
    for (k = 0; k < 400; k++) {
        double t = k * DT;
        double pushed = (t > 0.05 && t < 0.25) ? 100.0 : 0.0;  /* shoved by someone */
        double self_turn = 0.0;                                 /* not self generated */
        double rate = vestibular_neuron(pushed, self_turn, &leak, 0.9);
        if (k % 50 == 0) printf("t=%.3f s  rate=%.1f spikes/s\n", t, rate);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

This is the neuron whose resting state is not zero but thirty spikes a second, and whose two sides are wired as opposites, so that the difference between them, not the value of either, is the signal.

No other cell in the human brainstem is simultaneously a pacemaker, a subtractor of your own movements, and a direct line to the vomiting circuit.

CHAPTER 157. BODY-ALARM BROADCAST NEURON (COG) (PUC)

A wasp sting, a mouthful of bad oyster, a swelling throat and a lungful of stale air are four completely different disasters, and one small knot of cells in the upper pons shouts the same word about all of them.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a previously unnamed construct, and the name is given here for the cell known in the laboratory literature as the calcitonin gene-related peptide neuron of the external lateral parabrachial nucleus.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is a small chain of amino acids used as a slow chemical messenger, and these cells are the only population in the brainstem that uses it as a general alarm.

Their job is not to say what is wrong or where, but that something is wrong enough to stop everything, and they broadcast that message to the amygdala, the brain's threat centre, and to its neighbours.

They are the cell that makes pain feel urgent rather than merely located, and they are necessary for learning to hate a food that once made you ill.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

They are small fusiform and multipolar neurons packed into a thin shell of tissue that caps the superior cerebellar peduncle, the cerebellum's exit cable, where it passes through the upper pons.

Their dendrites stay short and local, which matters, because it means these cells sample a small, tightly curated set of inputs rather than listening to the whole brainstem.

Their axons are thin and enormously branched at the far end, so a handful of cells can flood a large forebrain territory.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 10 to 18 micrometres across, which is small.

The external lateral subnucleus that holds them is a shell a fraction of a millimetre thick and a few millimetres long in a human brainstem, so the entire alarm system occupies less tissue than a grain of rice.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Outer external lateral cell, driven mainly by tissue injury signals arriving from the spinal cord.

• Inner external lateral cell, driven mainly by rising carbon dioxide and by signals from the gut.

• Amygdala-projecting cell, the largest group, ending in the capsular part of the central nucleus of the amygdala.

• Bed nucleus projecting cell, driving sustained anxiety rather than acute fear.

• Cells co-expressing substance P and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide, two further slow messengers, which prolong the alarm.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives in the dorsolateral pons at the junction with the midbrain, in the external lateral subnucleus of the parabrachial complex, wrapped around the superior cerebellar peduncle.

This is a true interface: the parabrachial complex is the single relay where the body's internal reports, carried up from the nucleus of the solitary tract, meet the pain reports carried up from lamina one of the spinal cord and the trigeminal system, and are handed together to the forebrain.

Its immediate neighbours are the locus coeruleus and the Koelliker-Fuse nucleus, which is why alarm, arousal and breathing change together.

NUMBER:

No one has counted these cells in a human brain, and that should be said plainly.

In a mouse the population is on the order of several hundred to about two thousand per side.

Scaling by brainstem size and allowing generously for uncertainty, a defensible human bound is 5,000 to 20,000 per side, certainly fewer than 50,000, so under 0.02 percent of the brainstem's 200 million neurons and around 0.00003 percent of the nervous system's 86 billion.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

At rest they are nearly silent, firing 0.5 to 3 spikes per second.

When a threat arrives they switch into long bursts of 10 to 40 spikes per second lasting seconds to tens of seconds, and they encode how bad the threat is in the length and height of that burst rather than in which cell fires.

This matters for simulation: a peptide is only released when firing exceeds roughly 5 to 10 spikes per second, so low-level activity is invisible to the downstream target and the cell behaves as a thresholded broadcaster.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from lamina one of the spinal dorsal horn, the thin surface sheet that carries pain, itch, temperature and tissue damage, from the spinal trigeminal nucleus carrying face and dura pain, from the nucleus of the solitary tract carrying taste, gut and airway signals, from the area postrema carrying blood-borne poison signals, and from central chemoreceptors reporting carbon dioxide.

Descending inputs from the insular cortex and the central amygdala allow context to raise or lower the alarm.

Outputs go to the capsular central amygdala, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, the paraventricular thalamus, the substantia innominata and the parvicellular ventral posterior thalamus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin, 0.5 to 1.5 micrometres, largely bare of insulation, conducting at only 0.5 to 2 metres per second, and they ascend in the ventral amygdalofugal pathway.

The alarm therefore arrives late, tens of milliseconds after the fast pain pathway to cortex, but it lasts far longer, which is exactly the right design for a message that means keep away from this for the rest of your life.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate carries the fast signal.

CGRP is the slow signal, released from dense-core vesicles only during bursts, acting on a two-part receptor made of calcitonin receptor-like receptor and receptor activity-modifying protein one, which raises cyclic adenosine monophosphate inside the target cell for seconds to minutes.

Substance P and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide are co-released, and mu-opioid receptors on these cells are the reason morphine takes the horror out of pain while leaving the sensation.

MYELINATION:

Insulation is sparse to absent on the ascending axons.

That is not a defect: a peptide broadcast does not need speed, it needs reach and duration, and thin bare fibres are cheap to build and easy to branch.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The expensive part is not firing but manufacturing.

Peptides cannot be made at the terminal; they must be transcribed and packaged in the cell body and carried several centimetres to the axon endings, so a sustained alarm depletes the store and the cell needs hours of protein synthesis to recharge.

PLASTICITY:

The synapse from these cells onto the central amygdala strengthens after nerve injury or repeated migraine, so the same input produces a bigger alarm, which is one mechanism by which acute pain becomes chronic pain.

CGRP itself is now a proven drug target: antibodies and small molecules against CGRP and its receptor prevent migraine in humans, which is the strongest clinical evidence that this signalling system sets the volume of head pain.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

There is something genuinely special about the glia here, and it follows from chemistry.

Glutamate is removed from a synapse by astrocyte pumps in under a millisecond, but there is no reuptake pump for CGRP at all, so the peptide is cleared only by drifting away and by being cut up by enzymes sitting in the extracellular space and on glial membranes.

Astrocyte peptidase activity and the density of the surrounding matrix therefore set how far and how long the alarm spreads, making the glia here part of the signal rather than merely its housekeepers.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Silence these cells and the pons still relays taste, breathing and blood pressure perfectly well.

What the region loses is its exclamation mark: pain becomes information rather than emergency, a poisonous food is eaten again the next day because no aversion is learned, and a rising carbon dioxide level produces no panic.

The brainstem would keep the body alive and lose the reason to protect it.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Almost everything interesting about this cell is outside the classical model.

It uses volume transmission: CGRP leaves the synapse and diffuses tens of micrometres, so one cell influences a small cloud of amygdala neurons rather than a single partner.

Its release is frequency-dependent, which turns the cell into a switch rather than a dial, and because the receptor works through cyclic adenosine monophosphate the downstream effect outlasts the spikes by minutes.

It also participates in immune signalling, since CGRP modulates immune cells and inflammatory tone, and its terminals drive long-lasting synaptic strengthening in the amygdala, so a single episode can leave a permanent trace.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Spinal lamina one nociceptive channel, glutamate, 0 to 50 spikes per second, weight about 1.0.

◦ Gut and taste channel from the solitary nucleus, weight about 1.2.

◦ Carbon dioxide and airway channel, weight about 0.9, itch about 0.5, noxious cold about 0.4.

◦ Mu-opioid tone, 0 to 1, multiplicative suppression up to 90 percent.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spike train plus a CGRP concentration signal to the capsular central amygdala and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis.

• STATE.

◦ Accumulated threat evidence, current firing rate, peptide store, released peptide concentration in the target tissue.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Burst release threshold 8 spikes per second, maximum rate 40 spikes per second, release 0.02 peptide units per spike.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Evidence accumulation about 400 milliseconds, burst duration 1 to 30 seconds, peptide clearance about 30 seconds, receptor effect 1 to 5 minutes, store recovery hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Chronic over-activity of this pathway is implicated in migraine, in the affective misery of chronic pain, and in the persistent hypervigilance of post-traumatic stress; complete loss would remove learned food aversion and blunt fear learning.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to combine several kinds of bad news into one alarm and to release a peptide only when the alarm is loud enough.
Create a number variable called evidence with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called peptide level with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called raw signal with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called threat channels with initial value empty list.
Add the skin pain channel to the end of threat channels.
Add the gut toxin channel to the end of threat channels.
Add the airway carbon dioxide channel to the end of threat channels.
For each time step in the episode, perform the following operations.
    Set raw signal to 0.
    For each channel in threat channels, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the product of the value of that channel at this time step and the weight of that channel.
        Calculate the sum of raw signal and the result.
        Set raw signal to the result.
    End the loop.
    Calculate the difference of 1 and the opioid tone at this time step.
    Calculate the product of raw signal and the result.
    Set raw signal to the result.
    Calculate the difference of raw signal and evidence.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.025.
    Calculate the sum of evidence and the result.
    Set evidence to the result.
    Calculate the product of evidence and 12.
    Calculate the difference of the result and 1.
    Set firing rate to the result.
    Check if firing rate is greater than 8.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of firing rate and 0.0002.
        Calculate the sum of peptide level and the result.
        Set peptide level to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of peptide level and 0.99967.
    Set peptide level to the result.
End the loop.
Display peptide level to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python, chosen because this cell is bookkeeping rather than number crunching:
# weighted evidence in, a thresholded peptide broadcast out.
DT = 0.010                 # 10 ms steps; this cell works on the scale of seconds
TAU_ACC = 0.400            # threat evidence accumulates over about 400 ms
TAU_PEPTIDE = 30.0         # CGRP clears from the tissue over about 30 s
BURST_THRESHOLD = 8.0      # spikes per second needed to release peptide
MAX_RATE = 40.0
RELEASE_PER_SPIKE = 0.02

WEIGHTS = {"skin_pain": 1.0, "gut_toxin": 1.2, "airway_co2": 0.9,
           "itch": 0.5, "noxious_cold": 0.4}

def alarm_neuron(channels, opioid_tone, steps):
    evidence, peptide = 0.0, 0.0
    rates, peptides = [], []
    for t in range(steps):
        raw = sum(w * channels[name][t] for name, w in WEIGHTS.items())
        raw *= (1.0 - min(opioid_tone[t], 0.9))     # morphine clamps the alarm
        evidence += (raw - evidence) * DT / TAU_ACC
        rate = min(MAX_RATE, max(0.0, 12.0 * evidence - 1.0))
        if rate > BURST_THRESHOLD:                  # peptide needs a real burst
            peptide += RELEASE_PER_SPIKE * rate * DT
        peptide -= peptide * DT / TAU_PEPTIDE
        rates.append(rate)
        peptides.append(peptide)
    return rates, peptides

if __name__ == "__main__":
    n = 600                                          # six seconds
    traces = {name: [0.0] * n for name in WEIGHTS}
    for t in range(100, 160):                        # a toxin hits the gut
        traces["gut_toxin"][t] = 1.0
    quiet = [0.0] * n
    r, p = alarm_neuron(traces, quiet, n)
    print("peak rate %.1f Hz, peak CGRP %.3f units" % (max(r), max(p)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

This is the only cell in the human nervous system that treats a burn, a poison, a blocked airway and an itch as literally the same message, and answers all four with the same chemical word.

Recognise it by the shell of tiny cells hugging the cerebellar peduncle, by the peptide it makes, and by the fact that blocking that peptide in the bloodstream stops migraines.

CHAPTER 158. POISON-WATCH NAUSEA NEURON (NON-COG) (PUC)

There is exactly one small patch of your brain where the blood is let in unfiltered, and it exists so that a mouthful of poison can be sent back the way it came.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a previously unnamed construct, and the name is given here for the chemosensitive neuron of the area postrema, the structure clinicians call the chemoreceptor trigger zone.

Everywhere else in the brain, a dense wall of cells called the blood-brain barrier keeps circulating chemicals out.

Here the wall is deliberately left open, and these neurons sit bathed in whatever is in the blood, tasting it directly.

When they detect a substance that resembles a poison, they trigger nausea, then vomiting, then a durable dislike of whatever food you last ate, which is one of the fastest and most powerful forms of learning a human being can do.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The area postrema is a pair of small ridges bulging into the lower end of the fourth ventricle, just above the point where the ventricle narrows into the central canal.

Its neurons are small and simple, with short dendrites that reach into the spaces around leaky blood vessels rather than toward other neurons.

Around them sit sinusoidal fenestrated capillaries, meaning blood vessels with actual windows in their walls, together with tanycytes, long specialised glial cells whose tips carry brushes of microvilli into the cerebrospinal fluid.

So the cell is arranged like a taste bud rather than like a relay: it faces the fluid, not the wiring.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 8 to 15 micrometres across, among the smallest neurons in the brainstem.

Each ridge is roughly 2 millimetres long and well under a millimetre thick, so the entire poison-detecting organ of a human being is smaller than a match head.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Glucagon-like peptide one receptor neuron, excitatory, the cell activated by the modern weight-loss and diabetes drugs and by blood-borne bacterial products.

• Calcitonin receptor neuron, excitatory, overlapping with cells carrying GFRAL, the receptor for the stress hormone growth differentiation factor fifteen.

• GFRAL-carrying neuron, excitatory, the cell whose removal abolishes avoidance learning after several different visceral poisons.

• Inhibitory GABA neuron, the third population found by single-cell gene profiling, which appears to hold the nausea circuit in check.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It sits in the dorsomedial medulla at the caudal floor of the fourth ventricle, just in front of the obex, separated from the vagal triangle by a thin ridge called the funiculus separans.

Its interfaces are the whole point of it.

Above and outside it is blood, with no barrier; below it lies the nucleus of the solitary tract, especially the medial and commissural parts, and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus; the barrier that the rest of the brain places at the capillary is instead placed at the boundary between the area postrema and the solitary nucleus.

NUMBER:

There is no unbiased count of human area postrema neurons, and the honest answer is that nobody knows.

From the organ's dimensions, well under one cubic millimetre of neural tissue per side, and typical small-neuron packing, a defensible bound is 3,000 to 20,000 neurons per side, with low confidence.

That is around 0.01 percent of the brainstem's 200 million neurons and roughly 0.00003 percent of the nervous system's 86 billion, making this one of the smallest populations in the entire book and one of the most consequential.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These cells fire slowly and steadily, about 0.5 to 5 spikes per second, and they are unusually easy to move.

Because they are small they have a high input resistance, on the order of 200 to 800 megaohms, so a current of a few trillionths of an amp, produced by a handful of receptor molecules binding a hormone, is enough to change the firing rate measurably.

They are also directly sensitive to blood glucose and to the saltiness of the blood, so the same cell reports several kinds of internal trouble.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The most important input is not a synapse at all: it is the concentration of chemicals in the blood, read by receptors on the cell surface.

Conventional synaptic input arrives from vagal afferents carrying reports from the stomach and intestine and from the solitary nucleus.

Outputs run a very short distance to the nucleus of the solitary tract and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, and a longer distance to the external lateral parabrachial nucleus, where they excite the body-alarm broadcast neuron described in the previous entry, which is how a chemical in the blood becomes a feeling of dread and a lifelong aversion.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are short, thin, 0.2 to 0.8 micrometres, and mostly uninsulated, travelling only a millimetre or two to the neighbouring solitary nucleus.

Conduction speed is under 1 metre per second and it does not matter, because poisoning is measured in minutes, not milliseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Most projecting cells release glutamate, and a minority release GABA.

The receptors are the real story, and they are a pharmacology textbook in one cell: dopamine D2, serotonin 5-HT3, neurokinin one for substance P, glucagon-like peptide one, calcitonin, GFRAL and angiotensin two.

Every one of those is a drug target: ondansetron blocks 5-HT3, aprepitant blocks neurokinin one, metoclopramide and domperidone block D2, and semaglutide deliberately activates the glucagon-like peptide one receptor, which is precisely why it makes people feel sick.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none.

These axons are short and slow by design, and building insulation for a two-millimetre journey would be a waste of energy.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Firing is cheap, but exposure is expensive.

Living outside the blood-brain barrier means constant contact with circulating toxins, so these cells and their glia run a heavy load of efflux pumps and detoxifying enzymes, and they turn over surface receptors continuously.

PLASTICITY:

The clearest human example is tolerance: the nausea caused by a glucagon-like peptide one drug is worst in the first weeks and then fades, as receptor sensitivity is turned down, even though the dose goes up.

In the other direction, sensitisation of this pathway is thought to underlie anticipatory nausea, in which a chemotherapy patient begins to feel sick in the hospital car park.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here are unlike glia anywhere else, because their job is inverted.

Elsewhere astrocyte end-feet help build the blood-brain barrier at the capillary; here the capillary is deliberately leaky and the astrocytes instead form a tight boundary at the far edge of the organ, keeping blood-borne signals from flooding the rest of the medulla.

Tanycytes relay signals from the cerebrospinal fluid, and the astrocytes carry an exceptionally high density of aquaporin four, a water channel; that is why the autoimmune disease neuromyelitis optica, in which antibodies attack aquaporin four, so often begins with weeks of intractable vomiting and hiccups long before any eye or spinal symptom appears.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take these cells out and the medulla still swallows, breathes and controls the heart.

What it loses is its chemical sentry.

Chemotherapy would no longer cause vomiting, which sounds like a gift, but so would a plate of poisonous mushrooms, and the person would never learn to avoid them.

The region would lose the only sense organ the brain keeps inside itself.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell barely fits the classical model at all.

Its principal input is hormonal rather than synaptic, so the correct simulation primitive is receptor occupancy against blood concentration, not synaptic weight against presynaptic spikes.

It works by volume transmission in both directions, since local capillaries connect it to neighbouring tissue and its own signals spread through the extracellular space; it integrates over minutes and hours rather than milliseconds; it senses immune molecules such as interleukin six and bacterial cell-wall fragments, making it a genuine neuro-immune interface; and it reads the cerebrospinal fluid through tanycytes as a second sampling channel.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Blood concentrations in nanomolar of dopamine agonists, serotonin, substance P, glucagon-like peptide one and growth differentiation factor fifteen, converted to receptor occupancy.

◦ Vagal afferent spike trains from stomach and intestine, 0 to 30 spikes per second.

◦ Blood glucose and osmolarity as slow modulators.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spike train to the solitary nucleus, the dorsal motor vagus and the external lateral parabrachial nucleus.

◦ A scalar nausea signal, defined as firing rate above threshold.

• STATE.

◦ Per-receptor sensitivity between 0 and 1, current firing rate, cumulative exposure, learned aversion flag.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Baseline 1.5 spikes per second, nausea threshold 6 spikes per second, half-maximal concentrations 0.5 to 60 nanomolar depending on receptor, drive weights 1.5 to 3.0.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Receptor binding seconds, firing change tens of seconds, nausea build-up minutes, desensitisation about 30 minutes to weeks, aversion learning permanent after one trial.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Autoimmune destruction produces area postrema syndrome, weeks of unstoppable nausea, vomiting and hiccups, which opens 7 to 10 percent of cases of aquaporin-four positive neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder; over-activation is the dose-limiting side effect of chemotherapy and of glucagon-like peptide one drugs.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to read the concentration of several substances in the blood and decide whether the body should feel sick.
Create a number variable called baseline rate with initial value 1.5.
Create a number variable called nausea threshold with initial value 6.
Create a number variable called total drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called occupancy with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 1.5.
Create a boolean variable called nausea is present with initial value false.
Create a list variable called receptors with initial value empty list.
Add the dopamine receptor to the end of receptors.
Add the serotonin receptor to the end of receptors.
Add the glucagon-like peptide one receptor to the end of receptors.
For each minute in the observation period, perform the following operations.
    Set total drive to 0.
    For each receptor in receptors, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the sum of the blood concentration for that receptor and the half maximal concentration for that receptor.
        Calculate the quotient of the blood concentration for that receptor divided by the result.
        Set occupancy to the result.
        Calculate the product of occupancy and the weight of that receptor.
        Calculate the product of the result and the sensitivity of that receptor.
        Calculate the sum of total drive and the result.
        Set total drive to the result.
        Calculate the product of occupancy and 0.0004.
        Calculate the difference of the sensitivity of that receptor and the result.
        Set the sensitivity of that receptor to the result.
    End the loop.
    Calculate the product of total drive and 4.
    Calculate the sum of baseline rate and the result.
    Set firing rate to the result.
    Check if firing rate is greater than nausea threshold.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set nausea is present to true.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set nausea is present to false.
    End the conditional block.
    Display nausea is present to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python, chosen because the cell is a weighted sum of receptor occupancies and a
# dictionary keeps the pharmacology readable to a clinician and a coder alike.
DT = 1.0                    # one second steps; nausea builds over minutes
BASELINE_HZ = 1.5
NAUSEA_THRESHOLD_HZ = 6.0
TAU_DESENS = 1800.0         # receptors blunt over about 30 minutes

# receptor name: (half maximal concentration in nanomolar, drive weight)
RECEPTORS = {"D2_dopamine": (30.0, 1.8), "5HT3_serotonin": (60.0, 2.2),
             "NK1_substance_P": (20.0, 1.5), "GLP1R": (5.0, 2.6),
             "GFRAL_GDF15": (0.5, 3.0)}

def area_postrema_neuron(blood, blocked, minutes):
    sensitivity = {name: 1.0 for name in RECEPTORS}
    log = []
    for step in range(int(minutes * 60 / DT)):
        drive = 0.0
        for name, (half_nm, weight) in RECEPTORS.items():
            if name in blocked:
                continue                       # an antiemetic occupies this site
            conc = blood[name][step]
            occ = conc / (conc + half_nm)      # simple binding curve
            drive += weight * occ * sensitivity[name]
            target = 1.0 - 0.7 * occ           # steady exposure blunts the cell
            sensitivity[name] += (target - sensitivity[name]) * DT / TAU_DESENS
        rate = BASELINE_HZ + 4.0 * drive
        log.append((rate, rate > NAUSEA_THRESHOLD_HZ))
    return log

if __name__ == "__main__":
    mins = 60
    n = int(mins * 60)
    blood = {name: [0.0] * n for name in RECEPTORS}
    for t in range(n):
        blood["GLP1R"][t] = 12.0               # a steady dose of a GLP-1 drug
    out = area_postrema_neuron(blood, blocked=set(), minutes=mins)
    print("after 10 s: %.2f Hz, nausea=%s" % out[10])
    print("after 60 min: %.2f Hz, nausea=%s" % out[-1])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

This is the only neuron in the human brain that tastes your blood.

It is the one cell type identified by an absence, the missing blood-brain barrier, and by a clinical signature nothing else produces: weeks of vomiting and hiccups from a lesion two millimetres across.

CHAPTER 159. DREAM-SLEEP STILLNESS NEURON (NON-COG) (PUC)

Every night a few tens of thousands of cells in your upper brainstem issue one life-saving order: while you dream of running, do not run.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This small excitatory cell in the pons, the bulge at the middle of the brainstem, switches on during dreaming sleep and paralyses the body from the neck down.

It works by a sign flip, exciting inhibitory cells downstream so that its excitement becomes your stillness.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is a plain multipolar cell of the reticular formation, the loose mesh of neurons filling the brainstem core.

Three to six long, sparsely branched dendrites, the fibres that gather signals, spread as a flat sheet across the pons, and one thin axon descends to medulla and spinal cord.

SIZE:

The cell body measures 15 to 25 micrometres, a fifth the width of a human hair, against 27 to 30 micrometres for its rat cholinergic and noradrenergic neighbours and about 34 micrometres for their human counterparts.

Dendrites reach 400 to 600 micrometres, and the axon may run 45 centimetres to the lumbar cord.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Medulla-projecting cells, carrying the main paralysis command.

• Spinally-projecting cells, reaching inhibitory interneurons of the spinal ventral horn directly.

• Forward-lying cells tied to generating the dreaming brain state rather than the paralysis.

• A resident population releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main "stop" chemical, which suppresses wakefulness instead.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It fills the sublaterodorsal tegmental nucleus (SLD) of the dorsolateral pontine tegmentum, beneath the locus coeruleus, medial to the parabrachial nucleus, above the oral pontine reticular nucleus, caudal to the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus, a territory human atlases call nucleus subcoeruleus, peri-locus coeruleus alpha, or the pontine inhibitory area.

Its address is an interface, where the arousal machinery of the locus coeruleus meets the motor machinery of the pontine reticular formation, with the REM-off ventrolateral periaqueductal grey (vlPAG) and lateral pontine tegmentum (LPT) along its upper border.

NUMBER:

Rodents hold a few thousand glutamate-releasing SLD neurons per side, and the nearest human landmark is a count of 6,260 noradrenergic subcoeruleus cells against 53,900 in the locus coeruleus.

A defensible human estimate is 20,000 to 60,000, held with low confidence because nobody has counted them in a human brain, which is 0.01 to 0.03 percent of the brainstem's 200 million neurons and under one millionth of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

It is a REM-on cell, under one spike per second in waking and dreamless sleep, then firing steadily through rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, the stage of dreaming and darting eyes.

Slices give a resting voltage near minus 60 millivolts, a voltage sag from the current called Ih, and a low-threshold calcium spike, so release from inhibition fires a rebound burst.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are dominated by GABA fibres from the vlPAG and LPT that clamp it silent all day, joined by acetylcholine from the laterodorsal and pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei, noradrenaline from the locus coeruleus, serotonin from the dorsal raphe, and orexin and melanin-concentrating hormone from the lateral hypothalamus.

Outputs reach glycine- and GABA-releasing premotor neurons of the ventral gigantocellular and magnocellular reticular nuclei, so this commander never touches a muscle itself.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The thin axon, under about two micrometres, descends in the ventrolateral funiculus with other reticulospinal fibres, branches richly in the ventral medulla, and reaches cervical, thoracic and lumbar levels at a few metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glutamate, the brain's main "go" chemical, packaged by vesicular glutamate transporter 2 and acting on fast ionotropic and slower N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors downstream.

It carries receptors for GABA, acetylcholine, noradrenaline, serotonin, orexin and melanin-concentrating hormone, and no peptide co-transmitter is established.

MYELINATION:

Its fibres run in lightly myelinated company, myelin being the fatty insulation that speeds conduction, but whether these particular axons carry a sheath has never been measured, a genuine gap rather than an omission.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Averaged over a day it is cheap, silent nine tenths of the time, then firing without pause for five to thirty minutes inside a brain whose energy use in REM sleep matches or exceeds waking.

PLASTICITY:

It stores no memories, but its drive is homeostatic, so REM sleep lost one night is repaid the next, and drugs blocking serotonin or noradrenaline reuptake weaken the paralysis and can unmask dream enactment within weeks.

Newborns spend half of sleep in REM with imperfect paralysis, adults a fifth with near-complete paralysis, so the switch matures.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing uniquely specialised has been shown for the glia here, and ordinary astrocytes simply clear released glutamate through excitatory amino acid transporter 2, preventing spillover into the arousal cells above.

The striking regional fact is vulnerability, not support, because the misfolded protein alpha-synuclein gathers in neurons and astrocytes of this exact zone very early in Parkinson-type disease.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this one cell type and the dorsolateral pons still wakes the brain, steers breathing and cycles through sleep stages, but it loses its disconnect switch, so the dreaming forebrain stays wired to the muscles and every imagined action becomes a real one.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Subcoeruleus neurons show electrical coupling through gap junctions, direct pores passing current with no chemical step, so the population can flip as a bloc.

Its low-threshold calcium spike turns inhibition itself into output, and at network level it forms a bistable flip-flop with the vlPAG and LPT showing hysteresis, meaning the switch resists flipping back once thrown, which is why REM sleep arrives in discrete episodes instead of fading in.

Noradrenaline reaches it by volume transmission, seeping through tissue from locus coeruleus dendrites overhead rather than crossing a synapse.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: GABA from vlPAG and LPT at 0 to 20 spikes per second, plus acetylcholine, noradrenaline, serotonin, orexin and melanin-concentrating hormone from the sources named above, plus a homeostatic REM pressure signal scaled 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate at 0 to 15 spikes per second onto ventral medullary glycine and GABA premotor cells and spinal ventral horn interneurons.

• STATE: firing rate, membrane voltage, calcium channel inactivation, accumulated REM pressure, episode flag.

• PARAMETERS: resting voltage near minus 60 millivolts, peak rate 12 to 15 spikes per second, mutual inhibition weight against the REM-off group, atonia gain.

• TIME CONSTANTS: 10 to 30 milliseconds for integration, 20 to 60 seconds for state transitions, 5 to 30 minutes per episode, about 90 minutes between episodes.

• FAILURE MODE: partial loss gives REM sleep behaviour disorder, sleepers punching, kicking and leaping from bed, seen in roughly 1 percent of adults on sleep studies and converting to Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies or multiple system atrophy at about 6 percent a year, reaching 75 to 80 percent within fifteen years, while firing wrongly in waking gives the collapse of cataplexy.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether the stillness neuron fires and how limp the sleeper becomes.
Create a number variable called rem_pressure with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value 0.875.
Create a number variable called stillness_rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called muscle_tone with initial value 1.
Repeat the following steps exactly 144000 times.
    Check if rem_pressure is greater than threshold.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set stillness_rate to 12.
        Set threshold to 0.125.
        Calculate the difference of rem_pressure and 0.0000833.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set stillness_rate to 0.
        Set threshold to 0.875.
        Calculate the sum of rem_pressure and 0.0000167.
    End the conditional block.
    Set rem_pressure to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of stillness_rate divided by 12.
    Calculate the difference of 1 and the result.
    Set muscle_tone to the result.
End the loop.
Display muscle_tone to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the cell is two coupled rate equations, and Python reads like the specification.
import math
DT, PEAK, TAU, W, K = 0.05, 12.0, 20.0, 3.0, 1.1   # s, Hz, s, inhibition, atonia gain
sig = lambda x: 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-x))
on, off, press, rem_s, low = 0.2, 12.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0   # on = stillness cell, off = REM-off group
for _ in range(int(7200 / DT)):                 # two simulated hours
    press = min(1.0, press + DT / 3000.0)       # REM pressure builds outside REM
    d_on = 4.0 * press - W * (off / PEAK) - 0.5
    d_off = 0.6 - W * (on / PEAK) + 0.5         # 0.6 is the orexin drive
    on += DT * (-on + PEAK * sig(4.0 * d_on)) / TAU
    off += DT * (-off + PEAK * sig(4.0 * d_off)) / TAU
    low = min(low, max(0.0, 1.0 - K * (on / PEAK)))   # 1.0 is tone, 0.0 is atonia
    if on > 0.5 * PEAK:
        rem_s += DT
        press = max(0.0, press - DT / 400.0)    # the episode discharges the pressure
print("REM %.0f s, lowest tone %.2f, final rate %.2f Hz" % (rem_s, low, on))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron causes paralysis by getting excited, and none is silent twenty-three hours a day then holds a whole skeleton limp for the twenty-fourth.

A glutamate cell under the locus coeruleus firing only in REM sleep, speaking to glycine cells in the ventral medulla, whose quiet loss makes an elderly patient act out dreams years before any tremor, is this one.


PART TEN: SPINAL CORD

CHAPTER 160. ALPHA MOTOR NEURONS (NON-COG)

Every word you have spoken, every step you have taken and every breath you have drawn left your nervous system through this one kind of cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The alpha motor neuron is the last neuron in every chain of command that ends in movement, which is why Charles Sherrington called it the final common path.

It commands extrafusal muscle fibres, the ordinary force-producing fibres of a skeletal muscle, and one such neuron plus its fibres is a motor unit, the true atom of movement.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is multipolar, with eight to twenty thick primary dendrites, the branching input antennae of a neuron, radiating like spokes from a broken wheel.

The cell body is packed with Nissl substance, dense stacks of protein-making machinery, and a single axon leaves it, drops a few collateral branches inside the cord, then quits the central nervous system altogether.

SIZE:

The cell body is 40 to 80 micrometres across, reaching about 100 micrometres in human lamina IX, making it the largest neuron in the spinal cord; a micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre.

The dendritic tree spans 1 to 3 millimetres and the axon can run a full metre to a foot muscle, so well over 99 percent of the cell's cytoplasm lies outside the cell body.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Physiologically there are three, each given its own entry below: fast fatigable, fast fatigue-resistant, and slow.

Anatomically they also divide by column, into the medial motor column for trunk muscles and the lateral motor column for limbs, with the rare beta motor neuron supplying ordinary and sensory muscle fibres at once.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Rexed lamina IX, the outermost cell layer of the ventral horn of the spinal grey matter, at every segment from C1 to S5, gathered into long clusters called motor pools, one per muscle, mapped so that trunk pools lie medially, hand and foot pools laterally, and flexor pools dorsal to extensor pools.

Named groups include the phrenic nucleus at C3 to C5, the spinal accessory nucleus at C1 to C6 and Onuf's nucleus at S2 to S4, and its axon crosses two interfaces: the ventral rootlet, where central myelin from oligodendrocytes hands over to peripheral myelin from Schwann cells, and the neuromuscular junction, where nervous system meets muscle.

NUMBER:

About 200 thousand in the whole human spinal cord, both sides, all segments.

Direct serial-section counts of the human lumbosacral cord give 52 thousand to 62 thousand limb motor neurons and carry high confidence, while the whole-cord total is an extrapolation of only moderate confidence; the figure is about 0.1 percent of the roughly 200 million spinal cord neurons and 0.0002 percent of the roughly 86 billion in the nervous system, and the three subtypes below divide this same 200 thousand rather than adding to it.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Rest is near minus 70 millivolts, threshold 10 to 15 millivolts above that, input resistance 0.5 to 4 megohms and rheobase, the smallest steady current that will make it fire, 3 to 20 nanoamps.

Each impulse is followed by an afterhyperpolarisation (AHP), a voltage dip of 30 to 150 milliseconds made by calcium-activated potassium channels that sets the firing rate at 5 to 50 impulses per second, and a persistent inward current (PIC), a self-reinforcing sodium and L-type calcium current in the dendrites, amplifies input several-fold and can sustain firing after the input stops.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Tens of thousands of endings cover it: monosynaptic group Ia fibres from muscle spindles that produce the knee-jerk, direct corticospinal fibres in primates, and reticulospinal, vestibulospinal and rubrospinal drive.

Inhibition comes from glycine-releasing Ia inhibitory interneurons and from Renshaw cells excited by its own axon collaterals, while cholinergic C-boutons from Pitx2-positive V0c interneurons cap the cell body and raise its gain.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

An A-alpha fibre, 13 to 20 micrometres across with its myelin and conducting at 80 to 120 metres per second, so a command reaches the calf in about 10 milliseconds.

It leaves by the ventral root and branches into 10 endings in an eye muscle or 2000 in the calf, each a pretzel-shaped endplate 30 to 50 micrometres wide.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine, made by choline acetyltransferase and loaded by the vesicular acetylcholine transporter, the two markers used to identify this cell, acting on nicotinic receptors at muscle and on Renshaw cells inside the cord.

The peptide calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is co-released and helps the muscle maintain its receptors.

MYELINATION:

Among the most heavily myelinated cells in the body, oligodendrocyte myelin inside the cord and Schwann cell myelin beyond the ventral root, with internodes 1 to 1.5 millimetres long and an axon-to-fibre diameter ratio near 0.6 to 0.7.

The axon sets its own insulation thickness by displaying neuregulin-1 type III for the Schwann cell to measure.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

One of the most expensive cells in the body, supplying a metre of axon by fast transport at 200 to 400 millimetres per day, so a mitochondrion made today reaches the foot in three days.

Sodium pumping at 30 impulses per second and replacement of every junctional acetylcholine receptor within one to two weeks run continuously.

PLASTICITY:

It does not learn like a cortical cell, but serotonin and noradrenaline reset its gain minute by minute through the persistent inward current, so identical commands make different force depending on arousal.

Presynaptic inhibition adjusts its sensory input, reflex conditioning shifts its membrane properties over weeks, and after partial denervation surviving axons sprout to adopt orphaned muscle fibres.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

An aggrecan-rich perineuronal net, a lattice of sugar-coated proteins, encircles roughly nine in ten alpha motor neurons and anchors their large synapses; few other spinal cells are so armoured.

Astrocytes cap each C-bouton and supply lactate, microglia strip synapses off the cell body after nerve injury, terminal Schwann cells lid each neuromuscular junction and guide regrowth, and in motor neuron disease these same glia turn actively toxic to this cell type.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the ventral horn becomes a computer with no printer, which is exactly what polio does: flaccid paralysis, absent reflexes, muscle wasted within weeks.

The region also loses its main source of acetylcholine, the Renshaw circuit falls silent for want of excitation, and the whole spindle loop has nothing left to act upon.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The amplification happens in the dendrites, where the plateau current can latch on so that a brief input yields sustained firing and a brief inhibition switches it off.

Its axon collaterals make it an interneuron as well as an output cell; it dictates its muscle's fibre type, as cross-innervation experiments proved; it instructs its own myelination through neuregulin-1; it depends on survival factors sent back from the muscle; and after injury it releases nitric oxide, a gas that diffuses to its neighbours.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: group Ia and II spindle afferents at 0 to 100 impulses per second; descending drive as 0 to 30 nanoamps; glycinergic inhibition 0 to minus 15 nanoamps; monoamine level 0 to 1 scaling the plateau current.

• OUTPUTS: impulse train to muscle at 0 to 50 hertz; the same train to Renshaw cells; force in millinewtons.

• STATE: membrane voltage; afterhyperpolarisation level; plateau latched or not; intracellular calcium; fatigue factor 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 0.5 to 4 megohms; threshold 10 to 15 millivolts above rest; plateau current 2 to 6 nanoamps; conduction velocity 80 to 120 metres per second; innervation ratio 10 to 2000.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 5 to 10 milliseconds; afterhyperpolarisation 30 to 150 milliseconds; twitch 20 to 100 milliseconds; transport days; receptor turnover 8 to 14 days.

• FAILURE MODE: it dies in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and in spinal muscular atrophy; after spinal cord injury its plateau current runs uncontrolled and produces spasticity.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run one alpha motor neuron for one second of simulated time and count the impulses it sends to its muscle.
Create a number variable called excitation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called afterhyperpolarisation with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called plateau is on with initial value false.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 1000 times.
    Set excitation to the synaptic input for this millisecond in millivolts above rest.
    If excitation is greater than 10, then perform the following actions.
        Set plateau is on to true.
    Else if excitation is less than 5, then perform the following actions.
        Set plateau is on to false.
    End the conditional block.
    If plateau is on is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of excitation and 2.5.
        Set excitation to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of excitation and afterhyperpolarisation.
    Set excitation to the result.
    If excitation is greater than or equal to 15, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to the result.
        Calculate the sum of afterhyperpolarisation and 9.
        Set afterhyperpolarisation to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of afterhyperpolarisation and 0.975.
    Set afterhyperpolarisation to the result.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the model is a few lines of arithmetic and any reader can run it with no libraries and no setup.

DT, TAU_M, R_IN = 0.1, 6.0, 1.5     # ms per step, membrane time constant ms, megohms
THRESHOLD = 15.0                    # millivolts above rest
PIC_ON, PIC_OFF, PIC_CURRENT = 7.0, 3.0, 6.0   # plateau latch points, and its current in nA
AHP_STEP, TAU_AHP = 9.0, 40.0       # millivolts added per impulse, and its decay in ms
def run(drive_na, duration_ms=1000.0):
    v, ahp, pic, spikes = 0.0, 0.0, False, 0    # v is millivolts above rest
    for _ in range(int(duration_ms / DT)):
        if v > PIC_ON:
            pic = True
        elif v < PIC_OFF:
            pic = False
        current = drive_na + (PIC_CURRENT if pic else 0.0)
        v += DT * (R_IN * current - v - ahp) / TAU_M   # leaky membrane
        ahp -= DT * ahp / TAU_AHP                      # the dip fades
        if v >= THRESHOLD:
            spikes, v = spikes + 1, 0.0                # fire and reset
            ahp += AHP_STEP
    return spikes
for drive in (8.0, 10.0, 12.0):
    print("drive %4.1f nA -> %3d impulses per second" % (drive, run(drive)))

The printed rates fall in the physiological band of roughly ten to forty impulses per second, and raising the drive by half raises the rate by much more than half because the plateau current amplifies it.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the giant of the cord: the largest cell body in lamina IX, dense with Nissl substance, wrapped in a thick perineuronal net and positive for choline acetyltransferase.

It is the only neuron whose firing you can feel, because its impulses are your movements, and the only cell here whose axon leaves the central nervous system and never comes back.

CHAPTER 161. FAST-FATIGABLE (FF) ALPHA MOTOR NEURONS (Seconds-Long Power Motor Neuron) (NON-COG)

This is the cell you call on when a car is rolling towards a child, and it will give you everything it has for about thirty seconds.

The old label is an abbreviation of a laboratory fatigue test rather than a description of the cell.

Seconds-Long names the honest limit of this cell, since its muscle fibres run on glycolytic metabolism, meaning they burn sugar without oxygen, and they lose most of their force within roughly a minute of repeated use.

Power names what it buys with that short window, because these are the largest motor units and produce the highest force of the three types.

Motor Neuron places it in the family that commands muscle, and together the name teaches the trade this cell embodies, maximum force purchased with almost no endurance.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The fast-fatigable alpha motor neuron is the largest and strongest of the family and the one held in reserve, recruited last and used briefly.

It commands type IIx muscle fibres, pale fibres full of the fast form of the contractile protein myosin and of the enzymes for burning sugar without oxygen, so its speciality is maximum force in minimum time.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It has the biggest cell body and the widest dendritic tree of any motor neuron, which is exactly why it is hard to recruit: a large membrane leaks current, so a given input moves its voltage least.

That simple physics is the mechanical basis of Henneman's size principle, the rule that motor units are always recruited from smallest to largest.

SIZE:

Cell body 60 to 100 micrometres in humans, at the top of the alpha range, with the thickest axon in the pool.

Its motor unit is the largest, 1000 to 2000 muscle fibres in a calf muscle, producing on the order of 30 to 130 millinewtons, ten to a hundred times the force of a slow unit in the same muscle.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No anatomical subdivision is recognised inside the class, but a borderline group called fast intermediate sits between this type and the fatigue-resistant type on every measure, showing that the three classes are peaks on a continuum rather than separate species.

They also differ by muscle, dominating fast limb muscles such as gastrocnemius and being nearly absent from a postural muscle such as soleus.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Rexed lamina IX of the ventral horn, intermingled with the other alpha types inside the same motor pool, commonest in the lateral motor column of the cervical enlargement at C4 to T1 and of the lumbosacral enlargement at L1 to S3.

Within a pool they sit slightly more dorsally and laterally than slow cells, a statistical rather than an anatomical separation, and their axons cross the same central to peripheral interface at the ventral rootlet.

NUMBER:

Roughly 60 thousand in the human spinal cord, about 30 percent of the 200 thousand alpha motor neurons, which is about 0.03 percent of the 200 million spinal neurons and 0.00007 percent of the whole nervous system.

Confidence is low, because the proportion is inferred from cat and rat motor unit surveys and human muscle fibre typing rather than counted directly, and it ranges from near zero in soleus to about half in fast limb muscles.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Lowest input resistance of the family at 0.5 to 1 megohm and the highest rheobase at 10 to 20 nanoamps, so it needs a large input before it will fire at all.

Its afterhyperpolarisation is the briefest, with a half-decay of 10 to 20 milliseconds, permitting brief bursts at 40 to 60 impulses per second, and its persistent inward current is weaker and harder to latch, giving it a crisp on-and-off character.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It gets the same catalogue of inputs as any alpha motor neuron with a different balance: monosynaptic group Ia excitation produces the smallest voltage change here of any motor neuron.

Corticospinal and reticulospinal drive, the voluntary and startle pathways, weigh more heavily on it than the stretch reflex does, and Renshaw inhibition onto it is comparatively weak, so once recruited it is not easily reined in.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The fastest motor axon, at the top of the 80 to 120 metres per second range, branching into more terminals than any other motor neuron.

Its neuromuscular junctions are large and complex with high transmitter release, and those same junctions are the first to break down in ageing and disease, since denervation begins at the terminal, not the cell body.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine with calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) as peptide co-transmitter, as in all motor neurons.

Quantal content, the number of transmitter packets released per impulse, is the highest of the three types when fresh, and its safety margin is the first to collapse under repetitive firing, which is the component of fatigue that happens in the nerve rather than the muscle.

MYELINATION:

Thickest myelin of the family, matched to the thickest axon, with an axon-to-fibre ratio near 0.6 and internodes above 1 millimetre.

The axon buys its own insulation by presenting neuregulin-1 type III to its Schwann cells, so the biggest axon gets the thickest sheath.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Enormous but intermittent: it must maintain a huge axon and hundreds of large junctions, while its glycolytic muscle fibres burn stored sugar without oxygen and accumulate acid.

Its mitochondrial reserve is proportionally the lowest of the three types, and that thin energetic buffer is a leading explanation for why these cells die first.

PLASTICITY:

Highly convertible: endurance training shifts its muscle fibres from type IIx towards the more oxidative type IIa, turning a fast-fatigable unit into something close to a fatigue-resistant one, and disuse reverses it.

These units are the first lost in sarcopenia, the muscle wasting of old age, and their orphaned fibres are adopted by slow units, which is why aged muscle shows large blocks of one fibre type.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Its perineuronal net is the thickest in the spinal cord, holding the C-bouton and Renshaw synapses in place.

At the muscle, the terminal Schwann cells over its large junctions are unusually reactive and retract before the nerve terminal is lost, while in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) microglia and astrocytes attack this subtype before any other, and these vulnerable cells specifically express the enzyme matrix metalloproteinase-9 that resistant cells lack.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the ventral horn keeps every reflex, every posture and every ordinary movement, and loses the ceiling.

A person could stand, walk and write, but could not jump, sprint or produce a sudden protective force; muscles would lose their pale fibres, turn uniformly red, and peak power would fall by more than half while endurance improved.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

It dictates the identity of its targets, since the pattern of impulses it delivers switches the fast myosin gene on and the slow one off in the muscle fibre.

Its vulnerability is partly a consequence of its own activity, because the calcium load and metabolic cost of high-frequency firing in a very large cell leave no margin, and its classic laboratory signature, a sag in force during an unfused contraction, comes from the muscle it has shaped rather than from the neuron itself.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: corticospinal and reticulospinal drive up to 40 nanoamps; weak group Ia excitation, under 100 microvolts per afferent volley; weak Renshaw inhibition.

• OUTPUTS: burst trains at 40 to 60 hertz; 30 to 130 millinewtons per unit when fresh, scaled by the fatigue factor.

• STATE: membrane voltage; afterhyperpolarisation level; fatigue factor falling from 1 to below 0.25; recruited flag.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 0.5 to 1 megohm; rheobase 10 to 20 nanoamps; recruitment threshold near 80 percent of maximum effort; innervation ratio 300 to 2000.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 4 to 6 milliseconds; afterhyperpolarisation half-decay 10 to 20 milliseconds; twitch 15 to 30 milliseconds; fatigue over 20 to 60 seconds of activity; recovery over many minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: first to denervate in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and first lost in ageing, so power and speed disappear long before endurance does.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to drive one fast fatigable motor unit through the standard two minute fatigue test and record how quickly its force runs out.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called recruitment threshold with initial value 80.
Create a number variable called fatigue factor with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called peak force with initial value 100.
Create a number variable called force with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called recovery with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called force record with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 120 times.
    Set drive to the percentage of maximum voluntary effort requested this second.
    If drive is greater than recruitment threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of peak force and fatigue factor.
        Set force to the result.
        Calculate the product of fatigue factor and 0.96.
        Set fatigue factor to the result.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set force to 0.
        Calculate the difference of 1 and fatigue factor.
        Set recovery to the result.
        Calculate the product of recovery and 0.004.
        Set recovery to the result.
        Calculate the sum of fatigue factor and recovery.
        Set fatigue factor to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Add force to the end of force record.
End the loop.
Display force to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because this is the kind of tight numeric loop a real-time muscle controller runs, and C makes every arithmetic step and every unit explicit.

#include <stdio.h>
int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.001;           /* seconds per step */
    const double tau_rise = 0.010;     /* fast twitch rise, 10 ms */
    const double tau_fall = 0.030;     /* fast twitch relaxation, 30 ms */
    const double fatigue_tau = 20.0;   /* seconds of activity to run the unit down */
    const double recovery_tau = 400.0; /* seconds of rest to build it back */
    double f1 = 0.0, f2 = 0.0, fatigue = 1.0;
    for (int ms = 0; ms < 121000; ms++) {       /* the two minute Burke test */
        int active = (ms % 1000) < 330;         /* 330 ms train once per second */
        double drive = active ? 100.0 : 0.0;    /* millinewtons when fresh */
        f1 += dt * (drive - f1) / tau_rise;     /* two stage filter makes the twitch train */
        f2 += dt * (f1 - f2) / tau_fall;
        if (active) fatigue -= dt * fatigue / fatigue_tau;
        else        fatigue += dt * (1.0 - fatigue) / recovery_tau;
        if (ms % 20000 == 300)
            printf("t=%3d s  force=%6.2f mN  fatigue factor=%.3f\n",
                   ms / 1000, f2 * fatigue, fatigue);
    }
    return 0;
}

The printed fatigue factor falls to roughly one fifth of fresh by 120 seconds, which is the defining criterion for this type, a fatigue index below 0.25.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the last cell recruited and the first cell lost.

Nothing else combines the largest cell body, the fastest axon, the shortest afterhyperpolarisation, the biggest motor unit and a force that collapses to a fifth within two minutes.

CHAPTER 162. FAST FATIGUE-RESISTANT (FR) ALPHA MOTOR NEURONS (Minutes-Long Effort Motor Neuron) (NON-COG)

This is the cell that carries you through the last mile of a run, quick enough to sprint for a bus and stubborn enough to keep going after the sprinters have quit.

The old label is again a fatigue-test abbreviation and hides where the cell sits on the scale.

Minutes-Long places this cell exactly midway on the endurance scale that defines the three motor unit types, since its type IIa muscle fibres hold force for many minutes rather than seconds.

Effort rather than power records that it contracts fast but at moderate force, the workhorse for walking and repeated lifting.

Motor Neuron keeps it in the family, and its fibres carry higher mitochondrial volume density and oxidative capacity, meaning more oxygen-burning machinery, than the fastest fibres, which is precisely why the fatigue clock runs longer.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The fast fatigue-resistant alpha motor neuron is the compromise candidate of the motor system, and it is a good compromise.

It commands type IIa muscle fibres, which contract with fast myosin, the quick form of the contractile protein, yet are crowded with mitochondria, the oxygen-burning power plants of a cell, so the unit makes moderate force quickly and repeats it for minutes; it is the workhorse of running, cycling and stair climbing.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Intermediate in every structural measure between the fast-fatigable and the slow cell, with a middling cell body and a dendritic tree that is dense rather than wide.

Its axon collaterals to Renshaw cells are well developed, so every impulse it sends to muscle is also fed into the local inhibitory circuit.

SIZE:

Cell body 50 to 70 micrometres, axon 14 to 17 micrometres including myelin.

Innervation ratio is intermediate at roughly 300 to 800 muscle fibres in a large limb muscle, and unit force measured in the cat calf muscle was about 10 to 40 millinewtons.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No formal subdivisions exist inside this class.

It shades continuously into the fast-fatigable class through the borderline group called fast intermediate and towards the slow class in endurance-trained muscle, so a simulation should treat fatigue resistance as a continuous parameter with three peaks rather than a three-valued switch.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Rexed lamina IX of the ventral horn, mixed into the same motor pools as the other two alpha types.

They are abundant in the lateral motor column of the cervical enlargement at C4 to T1 and of the lumbosacral enlargement at L1 to S3, dominate mixed muscles such as quadriceps, tibialis anterior and medial gastrocnemius, and are numerous in the phrenic nucleus at C3 to C5, where the diaphragm must be quick and untiring for a lifetime; their axons cross the central to peripheral interface at the ventral rootlet.

NUMBER:

Roughly 60 thousand in the human spinal cord, about 30 percent of the 200 thousand alpha motor neurons, which is about 0.03 percent of the 200 million spinal neurons and 0.00007 percent of the whole nervous system.

Confidence is low, since the proportion comes from animal motor unit surveys and human muscle fibre typing rather than counted human cells, and it changes with training and age.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Input resistance 1 to 2 megohms and rheobase 5 to 12 nanoamps, squarely between the slow and fast-fatigable values, with an afterhyperpolarisation half-decay near 20 to 30 milliseconds that supports steady firing in the twenties of impulses per second.

Its persistent inward current is well developed and readily facilitated by serotonin, so effort and arousal noticeably raise its gain, and it is recruited at moderate effort, between about 25 and 60 percent of maximum.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Group Ia and group II spindle afferents make solid monosynaptic contact, so this unit participates fully in the stretch reflex, and reticulospinal and vestibulospinal drive for locomotion and balance are strongly represented.

Renshaw inhibition is moderate and continuously useful for a cell that fires for minutes, and cholinergic C-boutons from V0c interneurons are strongly recruited during locomotion, turning its gain up exactly when the animal is running.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Conduction velocity 85 to 110 metres per second with intermediate branching and moderately sized neuromuscular junctions.

Unlike the fast-fatigable unit it holds its transmission safety margin through a minute of hard work, so when this unit fades, the fading is in the muscle and not in the nerve.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine at every terminal with calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) alongside it.

Serotonin from the raphe nuclei and noradrenaline from the locus coeruleus reach it by volume transmission, meaning the chemicals diffuse through tissue rather than crossing a single synaptic gap, and both raise its persistent inward current.

MYELINATION:

Well myelinated, axon-to-fibre diameter ratio near 0.65, internodes around 1 millimetre.

Its steady firing works the nodes of Ranvier hard, and node-associated mitochondria are correspondingly dense.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High and sustained, which is a harder engineering problem than high and brief.

Its oxidative muscle fibres need continuous oxygen, which is why these units are the main reason blood flow through a running muscle can rise more than twentyfold, and the neuron carries a good mitochondrial reserve with more of the protective protein osteopontin than its fast-fatigable neighbour.

PLASTICITY:

The most trainable motor neuron in the body, in both directions.

Endurance training recruits it constantly and drives its fibres to build mitochondria and capillaries, pulling neighbouring fast-fatigable units towards this phenotype, while bed rest, detraining and spinal injury reverse the change within weeks; its recruitment threshold also shifts with practice, which is part of what people mean by an efficient movement.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes around this cell are notable for their lactate shuttle: during sustained locomotion they break down glycogen and hand lactate to the neuron as fuel, a service that matters far more here than at a cell firing in short bursts.

Perineuronal nets are of intermediate density, capillary density around its muscle fibres is roughly double that around fast-fatigable fibres, and its terminal Schwann cells are stable rather than reactive.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the ventral horn keeps posture and keeps the emergency sprint but loses everything in between.

Walking would survive on slow units and a single jump on fast-fatigable ones, but running for a bus would end within seconds and rhythmic work such as cycling or climbing would be impossible, because the spinal locomotor circuitry would have lost the population it normally drives.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its persistent inward current does real work during locomotion, amplifying the rhythmic drive from spinal pattern-generating circuits so that a modest oscillating input yields full-amplitude output.

It couples metabolically to astrocytes more than other motor neurons do, so its firing is part-funded by neighbouring glia, and its sustained moderate-frequency trains switch on the genetic programme for mitochondrial building inside the muscle fibre, which is the cellular basis of aerobic fitness.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: reticulospinal and corticospinal drive 0 to 25 nanoamps; group Ia and II afferents 0 to 100 impulses per second; rhythmic locomotor drive at 0.5 to 3 hertz; serotonin level 0 to 1 scaling the plateau current.

• OUTPUTS: sustained trains at 15 to 35 hertz; 10 to 40 millinewtons per unit; collateral output to Renshaw cells.

• STATE: membrane voltage; afterhyperpolarisation level; aerobic reserve 0 to 1; accumulated activity history for training effects.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 1 to 2 megohms; rheobase 5 to 12 nanoamps; recruitment threshold 25 to 60 percent of maximum effort; innervation ratio 300 to 800; aerobic ceiling near 30 percent of peak demand.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 5 to 7 milliseconds; afterhyperpolarisation half-decay 20 to 30 milliseconds; twitch 20 to 40 milliseconds; fatigue over 2 to 6 minutes; training adaptation over 2 to 6 weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) these cells degenerate after the fast-fatigable population and before the slow one; in chronic heart or lung disease their fibres lose oxidative capacity and the unit behaves like a fast-fatigable one, which is much of what exercise intolerance is.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run one fast fatigue-resistant motor unit through four minutes of repeated contraction and track the aerobic reserve that keeps its force up.
Create a number variable called demand with initial value 0.33.
Create a number variable called aerobic ceiling with initial value 0.30.
Create a number variable called reserve with initial value 12.
Create a number variable called shortfall with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called peak force with initial value 45.
Create a number variable called force with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called reserve fraction with initial value 1.
Repeat the following steps exactly 240 times.
    If demand is greater than aerobic ceiling, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of demand and aerobic ceiling.
        Set shortfall to the result.
        Calculate the difference of reserve and shortfall.
        Set reserve to the result.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of reserve and 0.05.
        Set reserve to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the quotient of reserve divided by 12.
    Set reserve fraction to the result.
    Calculate the product of reserve fraction and 0.65.
    Set reserve fraction to the result.
    Calculate the sum of reserve fraction and 0.35.
    Set reserve fraction to the result.
    Calculate the product of peak force and reserve fraction.
    Set force to the result.
End the loop.
Display force to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this is slow metabolic bookkeeping rather than fast spiking, so readability matters more than execution speed.

DT = 0.01                 # seconds per step
PEAK_FORCE_MN = 45.0      # force of one fresh fatigue-resistant unit, millinewtons
DUTY = 0.33               # the standard test: 330 ms of firing every second
AEROBIC_CEILING = 0.30    # fraction of peak demand the mitochondria cover indefinitely
STORE_MAX = 12.0          # anaerobic reserve, arbitrary energy units
reserve = STORE_MAX
for step in range(int(240 / DT)):                     # four minutes
    demand = DUTY
    shortfall = max(demand - AEROBIC_CEILING, 0.0)    # only the excess drains the store
    reserve = max(reserve - shortfall * DT, 0.0)
    if demand < AEROBIC_CEILING:
        reserve = min(reserve + 0.05 * DT, STORE_MAX) # refill only when demand is low
    force = PEAK_FORCE_MN * (0.35 + 0.65 * reserve / STORE_MAX)
    if step % int(60 / DT) == 0:
        print("t=%3d s  force=%5.1f mN  (%3.0f percent of fresh)  reserve=%5.2f"
              % (int(step * DT), force, 100.0 * force / PEAK_FORCE_MN, reserve))

The printed force is still about 80 percent of fresh at two minutes, which is the criterion that defines a fatigue-resistant unit, a fatigue index above 0.75, and it has sagged to about 70 percent by three minutes.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only motor neuron that is fast and stubborn at once, with a twitch of 20 to 40 milliseconds and a force still three quarters of fresh after two minutes of repeated contraction.

Under the microscope its muscle fibres give the giveaway pairing of fast myosin staining with heavy oxidative enzyme staining, which no other motor unit shows.

CHAPTER 163. SLOW (S) ALPHA MOTOR NEURONS (Hours-Long Posture Motor Neuron) (NON-COG)

Right now, as you read this, a few thousand of these cells are firing about ten times a second to stop your head falling forward, and they will not tire before you sleep.

Slow names a speed and leaves out the duty the cell actually holds.

Hours-Long completes the endurance series and is not an exaggeration, because these highly oxidative units are effectively unfatiguable under normal use.

Posture names the job they hold, keeping you upright against gravity all day, and it reflects that these are the smallest, lowest-force, first-recruited units under Henneman's size principle.

Motor Neuron keeps it in the same family as its two faster siblings so that the single dimension separating all three, how long the force can be held, is visible in the names alone.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The slow alpha motor neuron is the smallest, most excitable and most persistent member of the family, commanding type I muscle fibres, deep red with myoglobin, the oxygen-storing pigment, and dense with mitochondria.

Its job is not power but permanence: posture, muscle tone and the low-force background of every movement, and because it is the smallest cell in the pool it is always recruited first and released last.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The compact end of the alpha range, with a smaller cell body, fewer and shorter primary dendrites and a tighter dendritic field, so less current leaks away and a modest input produces a large voltage change.

Its dendrites nonetheless carry the densest group Ia sensory input of any motor neuron, tying it tightly to the stretch reflex that holds a joint steady.

SIZE:

Cell body 40 to 55 micrometres, axon 12 to 15 micrometres including myelin, the thinnest of the alpha fibres.

Its motor unit is the smallest at 50 to 300 thin muscle fibres, producing roughly 2 to 10 millinewtons in the cat calf muscle.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No formal subdivisions are recognised, but there is real diversity across muscles: the slow cells of soleus fire nearly continuously all day, while those of a hand muscle fire only when the hand is used.

There is also a strong family resemblance between these cells and the disease-resistant motor neurons of Onuf's nucleus and the eye muscle nuclei, which share the same protective molecular profile.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Rexed lamina IX of the ventral horn in the same motor pools as the other alpha types, at every spinal segment.

They dominate the medial motor column, which serves the deep postural muscles of trunk and neck along the whole cord, the pools of antigravity muscles such as soleus at S1 and S2, and Onuf's nucleus at S2 to S4 controlling the pelvic floor; their axons cross the central to peripheral interface at the ventral rootlet.

NUMBER:

Roughly 80 thousand in the human spinal cord, about 40 percent of the 200 thousand alpha motor neurons, which is about 0.04 percent of the 200 million spinal neurons and 0.00009 percent of the whole nervous system.

Confidence is low to moderate, inferred from human muscle fibre typing, which averages close to half type I fibres, adjusted downwards because slow units contain fewer fibres each; their share rises with age, not because more are born but because the fast ones are lost.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The highest input resistance of the family at 2 to 4 megohms and the lowest rheobase at 3 to 6 nanoamps, with the longest afterhyperpolarisation of any motor neuron, a half-decay of 30 to 50 milliseconds and a total duration over 100 milliseconds that caps firing at 8 to 25 impulses per second.

That long dip is a design feature rather than a limit, because it matches the slow twitch of the muscle and produces smooth fused force at low rates, and this cell also has the strongest and most easily latched persistent inward current of the three types.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The heaviest monosynaptic group Ia input of any motor neuron, which makes this the cell that dominates the tendon-tap reflex, with strong vestibulospinal and reticulospinal drive for balance and posture.

Renshaw inhibition onto it is the strongest of the three types, giving fine control of a cell that is otherwise almost always on, and cholinergic C-boutons modulate its gain during sustained effort.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Conduction velocity 70 to 95 metres per second, the slowest of the alpha fibres and still among the fastest axons in the body.

It branches into relatively few terminals, and its small, simple neuromuscular junctions are remarkably stable, the last to be lost in ageing and disease and the ones that sprout to adopt orphaned muscle fibres.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine with calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) as co-transmitter.

Serotonin from the raphe nuclei matters more to this cell than to any other motor neuron because it facilitates the persistent inward current behind sustained postural firing, which is one reason muscle tone collapses during rapid eye movement sleep, when raphe output falls almost silent.

MYELINATION:

Myelinated with an axon-to-fibre diameter ratio near 0.7 and internodes slightly shorter than those of fast axons.

Because it fires continuously it carries the largest lifetime sodium load of any motor axon, so its nodes of Ranvier are unusually rich in sodium pumps and mitochondria.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate in power but enormous in total, because the cell never really stops: over a waking day it may fire several hundred thousand times.

Its muscle fibres are the most capillary-rich and mitochondria-rich in the body, and the cell has the best energetic buffer of the three types, with high osteopontin, a protective protein, and low matrix metalloproteinase-9, a damaging enzyme.

PLASTICITY:

Its properties shift measurably within weeks of altered use, since bed rest, limb casting and spaceflight all reduce its recruitment and push its fibres towards faster types, which is why disuse produces weakness and poor balance together.

It is the great compensator, sprouting new terminals to adopt fibres abandoned by dying fast units, preserving strength in old age at the cost of coarser force gradation, and reflex conditioning studies show even the size of its afterhyperpolarisation changes with training.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here must supply fuel continuously rather than in bursts, and they carry high densities of the transporter that clears glutamate from its unusually dense sensory synapses.

Its perineuronal net is thinner than the fast-fatigable cell's but still stabilises the heavy Ia input, its terminal Schwann cells actively extend guiding processes to reinnervate nearby denervated fibres, making glia the agents of the compensation above, and microglia leave these neurons largely alone even in advanced motor neuron disease.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and a person would collapse into a chair and stay there, because posture, muscle tone and the tendon reflexes all depend on this cell.

The ventral horn would lose its steady background hum and retain only brief tiring bursts, muscles would lose the red colour that lives in the fibres this neuron commands, and holding a cup without crushing it would become impossible because the smallest available increment of force would suddenly be large.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its plateau behaviour is its defining computation: dendritic calcium channels latch on and sustain firing, so posture is held by a self-sustaining membrane state rather than by continuous instruction from the brain, which saves the brain enormous work.

Serotonin switches that plateau on and inhibition switches it off, the cell dictates the slow identity of its muscle fibres as the classic cross-innervation experiments showed, and its resistance to disease is active, arising from a distinct set of genes rather than merely from working less hard.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: strong group Ia excitation of 200 to 500 microvolts per afferent volley; vestibulospinal and reticulospinal drive 0 to 15 nanoamps; Renshaw and Ia inhibition 0 to minus 20 nanoamps; serotonin level 0 to 1 gating the plateau.

• OUTPUTS: near-continuous trains at 8 to 25 hertz; 2 to 10 millinewtons per unit; collateral output to Renshaw cells.

• STATE: membrane voltage; afterhyperpolarisation level; plateau latched or unlatched; a fatigue factor that stays above 0.95 for hours.

• PARAMETERS: input resistance 2 to 4 megohms; rheobase 3 to 6 nanoamps; recruitment threshold under 20 percent of maximum effort; innervation ratio 50 to 300; conduction velocity 70 to 95 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 8 to 12 milliseconds; afterhyperpolarisation half-decay 30 to 50 milliseconds; twitch 60 to 100 milliseconds; plateau onset within 200 milliseconds; fatigue negligible over an hour.

• FAILURE MODE: being the most disease-resistant motor neuron, it is left overloaded in late amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and finally fails too; after spinal cord injury its plateau current runs uncontrolled and produces the involuntary sustained contractions of spasticity.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to hold one slow motor unit at the steady low rate that keeps a standing person upright, and to check how little it tires over an hour.
Create a number variable called excitation with initial value 15.
Create a number variable called afterhyperpolarisation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called net drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called fatigue factor with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called mean rate with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 3600000 times.
    Calculate the difference of excitation and afterhyperpolarisation.
    Set net drive to the result.
    If net drive is greater than or equal to 14, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to the result.
        Calculate the sum of afterhyperpolarisation and 6.
        Set afterhyperpolarisation to the result.
        Calculate the product of fatigue factor and 0.9999998.
        Set fatigue factor to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of afterhyperpolarisation and 0.978.
    Set afterhyperpolarisation to the result.
End the loop.
Calculate the quotient of spike count divided by 3600.
Set mean rate to the result.
Display mean rate to the console.
Display fatigue factor to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript on Node is chosen because this is an hour of millisecond-by-millisecond bookkeeping, and a plain loop in a plain runtime shows honestly how many events that is.

const EXCITATION = 15.0;                   // millivolts of steady postural drive above rest
const THRESHOLD = 14.0;                    // millivolts
const AHP_STEP = 6.0;                      // millivolts added by each impulse
const AHP_DECAY = Math.exp(-1 / 45);       // long 45 ms afterhyperpolarisation, per ms
const TWITCH_DECAY = Math.exp(-1 / 90);    // slow 90 ms twitch, per ms
const TWITCH_ADD = 2.8;                    // millinewtons contributed by each impulse
let ahp = 0, force = 0, spikes = 0, fatigue = 1.0;
for (let ms = 0; ms < 3600000; ms++) {     // one hour of quiet standing
  if (EXCITATION - ahp >= THRESHOLD) {     // the long dip sets the rate, not the drive
    spikes++;
    ahp += AHP_STEP;
    force += TWITCH_ADD * fatigue;
    fatigue *= 0.9999998;                  // a slow unit barely fatigues at all
  }
  ahp *= AHP_DECAY;
  force *= TWITCH_DECAY;
  if (ms > 0 && ms % 600000 === 0) {
    console.log("t=" + (ms / 60000) + " min  force=" + force.toFixed(2) +
                " mN  rate=" + (spikes / (ms / 1000)).toFixed(1) + " Hz");
  }
}
console.log("hour total " + spikes + " impulses, force left " +
            (100 * fatigue).toFixed(2) + " percent of fresh");

The rate settles near 11 impulses per second because the afterhyperpolarisation, not the drive, decides when the next impulse may occur, and after roughly forty thousand impulses the unit has lost under one percent of its force.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the smallest alpha motor neuron, the first recruited, the last to die, and the only one still firing steadily an hour into a task.

An afterhyperpolarisation longer than 100 milliseconds, a twitch slower than 60 milliseconds and a force that has not measurably faded after an hour identify it beyond doubt.

CHAPTER 164. GAMMA MOTOR NEURONS, ALSO CALLED FUSIMOTOR NEURONS (Spindle-Tightening Motor Neuron) (NON-COG)

This little cell moves no bones and lifts no weight; it exists solely to stop your body's stretch sensors going blind at the moment you most need them.

Gamma is a Greek letter and fusimotor is jargon, so neither teaches.

Spindle names the target, the muscle spindle, which is the small stretch sensor of one to four millimetres holding six to fourteen fibres inside a capsule.

Tightening names the work, because contracting those internal fibres takes up slack so the sensor keeps reporting even while the whole muscle shortens.

Motor Neuron places it in the commanding family, and these cells make up about thirty percent of the motor neurons in the ventral horn, so this is a large and deliberate investment in keeping the body's stretch sensors honest.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The gamma motor neuron is a motor neuron whose muscle is only a sense organ: it commands intrafusal muscle fibres, the tiny specialised fibres inside a muscle spindle, which is the capsule-shaped stretch sensor buried among the working fibres of every skeletal muscle.

Those fibres add essentially nothing to the force of the muscle; pulling on their ends simply stretches the sensory middle of the spindle, and that solves an elegant problem, because a shortening muscle leaves its spindle slack and silent exactly when the brain most needs to know where the limb is.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small compact neuron with a modest spiny dendritic tree, sitting shoulder to shoulder with alpha motor neurons two or three times its diameter.

Its dendrites are strikingly bare of the large sensory terminals that coat alpha cells, and it is identified in the laboratory by that absence together with high levels of the nuclear receptors ERR3 and ERR2 and of the signalling protein Wnt7a, and low levels of the neuronal marker NeuN.

SIZE:

The cell body is 25 to 35 micrometres across, about half the diameter and roughly one eighth the volume of a typical alpha motor neuron.

Its axon is an A-gamma fibre of 3 to 8 micrometres including myelin, and its targets are minute, usually under 25 micrometres wide and a few millimetres long, packed about eight to a spindle.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two functional subtypes are firmly established, and a related cell provides a hard-wired alternative.

• Dynamic gamma motor neurons end on the dynamic nuclear bag fibre and sharpen the spindle's report of how fast the muscle is being stretched.

• Static gamma motor neurons end on the static nuclear bag fibre and the nuclear chain fibres and raise the spindle's steady report of muscle length, and they are the subject of the next entry.

• Beta motor neurons, which are not gamma neurons, supply ordinary and intrafusal fibres together and so couple force and sensor bias without any separate command.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Rexed lamina IX of the ventral horn, scattered among the alpha motor neurons of the very same motor pool serving the same muscle, at every segment from C1 to S5.

They cluster in the pools of spindle-rich muscles such as the deep neck muscles, the small muscles of the hand and the postural muscles of the back, and their critical interface is inside the muscle spindle capsule itself, where the smallest motor endings in the body sit within a millimetre of the sensory endings they adjust; their axons also cross the central to peripheral boundary at the ventral rootlet.

NUMBER:

About 60 thousand in the human spinal cord, which is about 0.03 percent of the roughly 200 million spinal neurons and 0.00007 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the whole nervous system.

Confidence is moderate and rests on a repeatedly confirmed observation that gamma cells are roughly 30 percent of ventral horn motor neurons, so 200 thousand alpha cells implies 60 to 80 thousand gamma cells; no direct human count exists and the true figure could be half again either way.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

High input resistance and low rheobase because the cell is small, yet it is not recruited before alpha cells in normal movement, because what it receives is a different set of inputs rather than a smaller share of the same ones.

It fires tonically at 10 to 30 impulses per second at rest and above 50 during movement, sustaining higher rates than a comparable alpha cell because its afterhyperpolarisation is briefer, and its discharge is smooth rather than bursty, suiting a cell that sets a bias rather than delivering a blow.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The defining negative is that it receives no monosynaptic group Ia input, so the stretch reflex cannot close a loop directly through it, which prevents a runaway cycle of sensor tightening.

Excitation comes from reticulospinal, vestibulospinal and rubrospinal pathways and from interneurons carrying skin and joint information, cortical drive reaches it only indirectly, which is why its output tracks intended effort rather than actual length, and Renshaw cells inhibit it alongside its alpha neighbours.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Conduction velocity 15 to 40 metres per second, fast for the body at large and slow for a motor nerve, so gamma commands arrive a few milliseconds behind alpha commands.

Gamma axons are around a third of all myelinated fibres in a ventral root, which is why counting root fibres overestimates the number of force-producing neurons, and each axon supplies several spindles, ending in small plate or trail endings rather than the large pretzel endplates of alpha cells.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of the intrafusal fibres.

Gamma cells carry the same choline acetyltransferase and vesicular acetylcholine transporter markers as alpha cells, which is exactly why they were mistaken for small alpha cells for decades and why molecular markers such as ERR3 were needed to separate them.

MYELINATION:

Thinly but genuinely myelinated, oligodendrocyte myelin inside the cord and Schwann cell myelin outside it.

Its thin axon presents little neuregulin-1 type III, so its Schwann cells build few wraps, and that is not a deficiency, because a slower cheaper cable is adequate for setting a slowly changing bias.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Perhaps an order of magnitude lower than an alpha motor neuron, since the cell is small, the axon thin and the targets microscopic.

Its firing is nonetheless continuous, so its daily impulse count can exceed that of a fast alpha cell, and its modest budget is one credible reason it survives diseases that kill its large neighbours.

PLASTICITY:

The fusimotor system is set task by task rather than learned synapse by synapse: people raise gamma drive when a movement is unfamiliar, difficult or unpredictable and lower it during smooth familiar movement.

Its development is instructed from the periphery, since gamma neurons never acquire their identity in animals lacking proprioceptive sensory neurons, meaning the sensor helps build the cell that will later adjust it, and after nerve injury mismatched reinnervation of spindles is one cause of the clumsiness that outlasts recovered strength.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Gamma cells are reported to lack the thick aggrecan perineuronal net that encircles about nine in ten alpha motor neurons, and that difference is one way anatomists tell the two apart in tissue.

Inside the spindle its endings sit in a fluid-filled capsule of flattened perineurial cells, a blood-free micro-environment found nowhere else in muscle, whose capsule cells and terminal Schwann cells supply the trophic factor GDNF that the developing gamma neuron requires; microglia largely spare these cells even in advanced motor neuron disease.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and nothing looks wrong until the person moves.

Strength, resting reflexes and standing posture would all be normal, but every active movement would blind the limb's own sensors, so the person could walk while watching their feet and would stumble badly in the dark, a milder version of the disabling clumsiness of someone who has lost position sense entirely; the ventral horn would keep its output and lose the ability to keep its input meaningful during action.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its whole purpose lies outside classical integrate-and-fire, because it contributes nothing to the network's output and instead sets the gain of an input.

Alpha-gamma coactivation splits one descending command into a force order and a sensor-bias order, so action and sensory prediction are generated by a single act, an arrangement engineers later rediscovered as feed-forward compensation; by tightening the spindle it sets the loop gain of the stretch reflex, and because its targets are so small, a handful of impulses can change what the whole nervous system believes about where a limb is.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: reticulospinal, vestibulospinal and rubrospinal drive 0 to 20 nanoamps; skin and joint interneuron input; Renshaw inhibition 0 to minus 10 nanoamps; explicitly no monosynaptic group Ia input.

• OUTPUTS: a tonic train of 0 to 80 hertz to intrafusal fibres, which changes the firing of group Ia and group II afferents rather than producing force.

• STATE: membrane voltage; afterhyperpolarisation level; fusimotor set level, a slow variable holding the current task-dependent bias.

• PARAMETERS: cell body 25 to 35 micrometres; conduction velocity 15 to 40 metres per second; equatorial bias about 0.003 strain units per hertz of drive; population share 30 percent of ventral horn motor neurons.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 8 to 15 milliseconds; intrafusal contraction 50 to 200 milliseconds, far slower than ordinary muscle; fusimotor set changes over seconds as the task changes.

• FAILURE MODE: too little drive gives sensory silence during movement and clumsiness; too much gives an over-sensitive stretch reflex and contributes to spasticity and some dystonias; in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) these cells survive while alpha cells die, and their continued drive on a failing system appears to make the disease worse.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to keep a muscle spindle from falling silent while its muscle shortens, by driving the spindle poles in step with the alpha motor neurons.
Create a number variable called muscle length with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called alpha drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gamma drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called pole bias with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called equator strain with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called afferent rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called silent milliseconds with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 2000 times.
    Set alpha drive to the fraction of maximum effort commanded this millisecond.
    Set muscle length to the measured length of the muscle this millisecond.
    Calculate the product of alpha drive and 60.
    Set gamma drive to the result.
    Calculate the product of gamma drive and 0.003.
    Set pole bias to the result.
    Calculate the difference of muscle length and 1.
    Set equator strain to the result.
    Calculate the sum of equator strain and pole bias.
    Set equator strain to the result.
    Calculate the product of equator strain and 90.
    Set afferent rate to the result.
    If afferent rate is less than or equal to 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set afferent rate to 0.
        Calculate the sum of silent milliseconds and 1.
        Set silent milliseconds to the result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display silent milliseconds to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole point is a side-by-side comparison of two runs, one with fusimotor drive and one without, and Python keeps that comparison in plain sight.

DT = 0.001                  # seconds per step
STATIC_GAIN = 90.0          # afferent impulses per second per unit of equatorial strain
BIAS_PER_HZ = 0.003         # strain added to the sensory equator per hertz of gamma drive
def muscle_length(t):
    if t < 0.5:
        return 1.00                          # holding still
    if t < 1.5:
        return 1.00 - 0.15 * (t - 0.5)       # shortening by 15 percent over one second
    return 0.85                              # holding at the short length
def run(gamma_hz):
    rates = []
    for step in range(2000):                 # two seconds, one millisecond per step
        t = step * DT
        strain = (muscle_length(t) - 1.0) + BIAS_PER_HZ * gamma_hz
        rates.append(max(STATIC_GAIN * strain, 0.0))   # a sensor cannot fire below zero
    return rates
for gamma_hz in (0.0, 60.0):
    r = run(gamma_hz)
    silent = sum(1 for x in r if x == 0.0)
    print("gamma %4.0f Hz: rest %5.1f Hz, mid-shortening %5.1f Hz, silent for %4d ms"
          % (gamma_hz, r[250], r[1000], silent))

With no gamma drive the spindle is silent for the whole two seconds; with 60 impulses per second of drive it reports about 16 impulses per second at rest and is still reporting about 9 in the middle of the shortening, which is the entire reason this cell exists.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only motor neuron that makes no movement.

Look for a small cholinergic cell in lamina IX with no group Ia contacts on its dendrites, a thin slow axon, the ERR3 marker in its nucleus, and a target you need a microscope to find.

CHAPTER 165. STATIC GAMMA MOTOR NEURONS (Length-Sense Sharpening Motor Neuron) (NON-COG)

This is the cell that decides whether your muscle sensors behave like a ruler or like a speedometer, and it chooses the ruler.

Static is a physics word applied to a cell and tells a reader nothing about what is being preserved.

Length-Sense names what this cell protects, the spindle's steady report of how long the muscle currently is.

Sharpening names the action, since by contracting the nuclear bag2 and nuclear chain fibres it raises the sensor's steady-state output.

Motor Neuron keeps the family, and the anatomy is specific rather than vague, since the static axon innervates the chain and bag2 fibres and it is those fibres that mediate length sensitivity to stretch.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The static gamma motor neuron is the subtype of fusimotor neuron that biases the muscle spindle towards reporting position rather than speed.

It ends on the static nuclear bag fibre, usually called the bag2 fibre, and on the nuclear chain fibres, and driving them raises the ongoing background firing of the spindle's sensory endings while blunting their response to the velocity of a stretch, giving a sensor that keeps talking clearly at every length, which is what posture and slow deliberate movement need.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small motor neuron indistinguishable from a dynamic gamma neuron under a routine stain, identified by where its axon ends rather than by how its cell body looks.

Its terminals are trail endings, long diffuse strings of small contacts running along the intrafusal fibre, unlike the compact plate endings that dynamic gamma axons make, and that spread-out arrangement produces a slow well-fused contraction rather than a localised twitch.

SIZE:

Cell body 25 to 35 micrometres, within the gamma range and about half the diameter of an alpha motor neuron.

Axon 3 to 6 micrometres including myelin, in most surveys slightly thinner and slower than a dynamic gamma axon, and its targets are the smallest muscle fibres in the body, with chain fibres under 15 micrometres across, about five times thinner than a human hair.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two working subdivisions are recognised, based on which intrafusal fibre an axon prefers, and many axons supply both, so this is a spectrum rather than a clean pair.

• Chain-preferring static axons act almost entirely on nuclear chain fibres and produce a strong fast-following rise in the firing of the spindle's secondary endings with almost no time lag.

• Bag2-preferring static axons act on the static bag fibre and bias the sensory endings more weakly and with a marked lag.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Rexed lamina IX of the ventral horn, intermingled with alpha and dynamic gamma cells in the motor pool of the same muscle, at all levels from C1 to S5.

They are relatively concentrated in the pools of spindle-rich postural and axial muscles, including the deep neck muscles, the small muscles of the back and the leg extensors, and their functional interface is the equatorial region of the spindle, the narrow middle zone where the sensory endings wrap the intrafusal fibres and feel this cell's pull; the axon crosses the central to peripheral boundary at the ventral rootlet like any motor axon.

NUMBER:

Roughly 35 to 40 thousand in the human spinal cord, the larger share of the 60 thousand gamma motor neurons, which is about 0.02 percent of the roughly 200 million spinal neurons and 0.00005 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons of the whole nervous system.

Confidence is low, because the split rests on cat physiology, where static fusimotor axons outnumber dynamic ones about two to one, with no direct human count; a simulation should treat static and dynamic gamma cells as dividing one 60 thousand population, not as two extra populations.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

A small cell with high input resistance, low rheobase and a short afterhyperpolarisation that permits high sustained rates.

Many static gamma neurons are spontaneously active at 10 to 30 impulses per second even in a relaxed limb, which is why a resting spindle has any background discharge at all, and their rates climb with the effort and the slowness of a movement, tracking the size of the intended posture change rather than its speed.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Like all gamma neurons it receives no monosynaptic group Ia input, which keeps the fusimotor loop from closing on itself.

Its main excitation is reticulospinal and vestibulospinal, so it is driven hardest by the systems that manage posture and balance, skin input and flexor reflex interneurons can raise its output sharply, which is part of why standing on an unstable surface changes how the whole limb feels, and Renshaw cells inhibit it alongside its alpha neighbours.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Conduction velocity 15 to 35 metres per second, at the slower end of the fusimotor range.

One axon usually supplies several spindles in the same muscle and branches within each capsule to several chain fibres, so a single cell biases a whole neighbourhood of sensors, and its trail endings spread along the intrafusal fibre rather than concentrating at one point, which is the anatomical reason its contractions are smooth.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine at nicotinic acetylcholine receptors on the intrafusal fibres, with the same synthetic machinery as any motor neuron.

Because trail endings are diffuse and the target fibres are tiny, transmission produces a sustained well-fused contraction at quite low firing rates, unlike the twitch-by-twitch behaviour of ordinary muscle.

MYELINATION:

Thinly myelinated, oligodendrocyte myelin inside the cord and Schwann cell myelin outside, with few wraps because the axon presents little neuregulin-1 type III.

Internodes are short, on the order of a few hundred micrometres, matching the thin axon.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Among the lowest of any motor neuron, with a small cell body, a thin axon and microscopic targets.

Its continuous background firing means it is never fully idle, so its cost is small but uninterrupted, more like a pilot light than a furnace, and the intrafusal fibres it drives are themselves rich in mitochondria for their size because they too must contract for hours.

PLASTICITY:

Its output is set by task rather than by long-term change, rising during steady posture, slow deliberate movement and precision holding, and falling when a movement becomes fast or ballistic.

Recordings in awake animals show static and dynamic drive can be adjusted independently, so the nervous system genuinely chooses its sensor characteristics moment to moment, while long-term change is mostly indirect, through the health of the spindle and the age-related loss of intrafusal fibres that contributes to poor balance in older people.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The specialised support here is the muscle spindle capsule itself, an enclosed fluid-filled compartment maintained by flattened perineurial cells that shields the endings from the mechanical chaos of the surrounding muscle.

Within it the terminal Schwann cells covering the trail endings are unusually elongated, matching the diffuse ending pattern, while in the spinal cord itself nothing special is known about this cell's astrocytes or microglia, which treat it much as they treat any small ventral horn neuron.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the spindle becomes a speedometer with no odometer.

The stretch reflex would still answer a tap or a sudden pull, but the steady background report of how long a muscle currently is would fade, so people would still catch a falling object yet drift out of a held posture without noticing and sway when they closed their eyes; the ventral horn would be left reacting to changes rather than knowing states.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell performs an unusual computation, changing the transfer function of a sensor rather than adding to a signal, so its influence is multiplicative rather than additive.

By raising the tonic firing of group Ia and group II afferents it also sets the gain of every spinal circuit those afferents feed, including reciprocal inhibition and the locomotor networks; the fibres it drives are mechanically coupled inside the capsule, so contracting a chain fibre changes the tension felt by endings on neighbouring fibres, a purely mechanical crosstalk between sensory channels with no synapse involved, and it couples the group Ia and group II endings of one spindle so that both report together.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: reticulospinal and vestibulospinal drive 0 to 20 nanoamps; skin and flexor reflex interneuron input; Renshaw inhibition; a task-level static fusimotor set command.

• OUTPUTS: a tonic train of 0 to 80 hertz to bag2 and chain fibres, which raises the static gain and lowers the velocity gain of group Ia afferents and raises the firing of group II afferents.

• STATE: membrane voltage; afterhyperpolarisation level; the equatorial bias currently imposed; intrafusal contraction level, which lags the impulse train.

• PARAMETERS: equatorial bias about 0.003 strain units per hertz; static gain rising from about 90 to about 123 impulses per second per strain unit at 60 hertz of drive; velocity gain falling from about 200 to about 116 at the same drive; population share roughly two thirds of gamma neurons.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 8 to 15 milliseconds; chain fibre contraction 50 to 100 milliseconds; bag2 fibre contraction 150 to 300 milliseconds; task-level changes over seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: excessive static drive makes a spindle report high tension at every length and contributes to rigidity and to the exaggerated tendon reflexes seen after stroke and spinal injury; loss of static drive, and loss of spindles with age, degrades position sense and balance while leaving strength intact.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to show how a static gamma motor neuron firing at sixty impulses per second changes what a muscle spindle reports during a slow stretch.
Create a number variable called bias with initial value 0.18.
Create a number variable called static gain with initial value 123.
Create a number variable called dynamic gain with initial value 116.
Create a number variable called strain with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called velocity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called working value with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called afferent rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called resting rate with initial value 0.
Calculate the product of bias and static gain.
Set resting rate to the result.
Display resting rate to the console.
Repeat the following steps exactly 2000 times.
    Set velocity to the stretch velocity of the muscle in length fractions per second.
    Calculate the quotient of velocity divided by 1000.
    Set working value to the result.
    Calculate the sum of strain and working value.
    Set strain to the result.
    Calculate the sum of strain and bias.
    Set working value to the result.
    Calculate the product of working value and static gain.
    Set afferent rate to the result.
    Calculate the product of velocity and dynamic gain.
    Set working value to the result.
    Calculate the sum of afferent rate and working value.
    Set afferent rate to the result.
End the loop.
Display afferent rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because the useful result is a table of three conditions compared on identical arithmetic, and C forces every gain and every unit to be written down explicitly.

#include <stdio.h>
static double ia_rate(double strain, double velocity,
                      double static_hz, double dynamic_hz) {
    double bias   = 0.0030 * static_hz + 0.0008 * dynamic_hz;    /* pull on the equator */
    double stat_g = 90.0 + 0.55 * static_hz;                     /* static drive lifts tonic gain */
    double dyn_g  = 200.0 + 6.0 * dynamic_hz - 1.4 * static_hz;  /* and damps velocity gain */
    if (dyn_g < 0.0) dyn_g = 0.0;
    double r = stat_g * (strain + bias) + dyn_g * (velocity > 0.0 ? velocity : 0.0);
    return r > 0.0 ? r : 0.0;                                    /* a sensor cannot fire below zero */
}
int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.001, ramp_speed = 0.10;   /* stretch at 10 percent of length per second */
    double conditions[3][2] = { {0, 0}, {60, 0}, {0, 60} };      /* static Hz, dynamic Hz */
    const char *label[3] = {"no fusimotor drive", "static gamma 60 Hz", "dynamic gamma 60 Hz"};
    for (int c = 0; c < 3; c++) {
        double strain = 0.0, peak = 0.0, plateau = 0.0;
        double resting = ia_rate(0.0, 0.0, conditions[c][0], conditions[c][1]);
        for (int step = 0; step < 2000; step++) {                /* two seconds */
            double t = step * dt;
            double velocity = (t >= 0.5 && t < 1.5) ? ramp_speed : 0.0;
            strain += velocity * dt;
            double r = ia_rate(strain, velocity, conditions[c][0], conditions[c][1]);
            if (r > peak) peak = r;
            if (step == 1900) plateau = r;                       /* held at the new length */
        }
        printf("%-22s rest %6.1f Hz  peak %6.1f Hz  hold %6.1f Hz\n",
               label[c], resting, peak, plateau);
    }
    return 0;
}

The table makes the division of labour plain: static drive lifts the resting rate from 0 to about 22 impulses per second and the held rate from 9 to about 34 while shrinking the extra firing during the stretch, whereas dynamic drive leaves resting and held rates almost untouched and more than doubles the peak.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Stimulate a single fusimotor axon during a stretch, and if the spindle's steady firing rises while its response to the speed of stretch falls, the axon is static.

No other cell in the body raises a sensor's baseline and lowers its sensitivity to change at the same time, and none other ends in the trail endings that wrap the nuclear chain fibres.

CHAPTER 166. DYNAMIC GAMMA MOTOR NEURONS (Speed-Sense Sharpening Motor Neuron) (NON-COG)

There is a muscle inside your muscle, and this tiny cell is the only thing that tunes it for speed.

Dynamic is the matching physics word and is equally uninformative on its own.

Speed-Sense names the other half of what a spindle reports, not how long the muscle is but how fast it is being stretched.

Sharpening is shared with its partner cell so the pair reads as one set differing on a single axis, sensitivity to position against sensitivity to velocity.

Motor Neuron keeps the family, and the claim is anatomically grounded, since the dynamic axon is essentially restricted to the nuclear bag1 fibre and it is the bag1 fibre that mediates the spindle's velocity sensitivity.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Its output wire, the axon, runs out to a muscle but never touches the fibres that pull, gripping instead one fibre inside a muscle spindle, the capsule of modified fibres wrapped in sensory endings that is the muscle's own stretch sensor.

Squeezing the ends of that nuclear bag one fibre makes the spindle report speed of stretch far more strongly, so this cell is a gain knob for velocity that moves nothing.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small round cell body with a sparse tree of input branches, called dendrites, sitting among far larger alpha motor neurons yet bare of the big sensory swellings that stud them, and marked by the transcription factor Err3.

SIZE:

The cell body is fifteen to thirty micrometres across against fifty to one hundred for an alpha motor neuron, and its axon is two to eight micrometres thick, conducting at four to twenty-four metres per second.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Classical anatomy recognises trail endings and two plate endings, and this cell forms the plate two ending on the bag one poles, serving one to three spindles.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives in lamina nine, the motor cell layer of the ventral horn, wherever muscle carries spindles: cervical one to eight, all twelve thoracic segments, lumbar one to five and sacral one to two, densest in the cervical enlargement from the fifth cervical to the first thoracic segment and the lumbosacral enlargement from the second lumbar to the second sacral segment.

It straddles two interfaces, the grey matter boundary at the ventral root exit zone, and the functional boundary between motor and sensory systems.

NUMBER:

The human cord holds about sixty thousand gamma motor neurons, of which the dynamic class is the minority, best estimated at twenty thousand, range fifteen to thirty thousand, at low to moderate confidence because the figure is inferred from animals.

That is one hundredth of one percent of the two hundred million spinal neurons, and it fits the rough total of fifty thousand human spindles, each with one bag one fibre.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Small size gives high input resistance, meaning a tiny current swings its voltage far, so little drive reaches threshold near minus fifty millivolts, and it fires tonically at ten to fifty spikes per second, held steady during walking rather than pulsed like its static cousins.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation descends from the reticulospinal, vestibulospinal and rubrospinal tracts, corticospinal influence arrives through interneurons, and Renshaw cells inhibit it.

It receives almost no direct spindle sensory contacts, shown by absent vesicular glutamate transporter one boutons, and its only output is the neuromuscular junction on the bag one pole.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

It leaves by the ventral root and runs the whole peripheral nerve without one branch to force-producing muscle, taking forty to fifty milliseconds to reach a foot.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine on nicotinic receptors of the intrafusal fibre is the sole fast transmitter, and these cells carry far less of the trophic co-transmitter calcitonin gene-related peptide than alpha motor neurons.

MYELINATION:

Thinly myelinated, by Schwann cells outside the cord and oligodendrocytes within, with short sheath segments giving the modest speed above.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low, perhaps a fiftieth of an alpha motor neuron's budget, but relentless, since fusimotor tone never switches off in waking life.

PLASTICITY:

The fusimotor set is reset within seconds by task, posture, fatigue and anxiety, and in development these cells die without a sustaining signal from the spindle.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Glia inside the cord are ordinary with one exception: the dense perineuronal net encasing alpha motor neurons is largely absent here, leaving this surface open.

At the far end the terminal sits within the spindle's inner capsule, a sleeve of flattened cells making a private fluid space shared with the sensory ending.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and the ventral horn still moves the limb, but the cord goes velocity-blind.

The snap of a tendon jerk, the catch when a tray is loaded and the early correction when a foot lands on a slope all fade.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its output is not force but a change in another cell's measuring instrument, and because the bag one fibre contracts slowly and without propagating, that change builds over about one hundred and fifty milliseconds.

Motor neurons here are coupled by connexin thirty-six gap junctions early in life, spilled acetylcholine reaches muscarinic receptors away from the release site inside the sealed capsule, and lifelong dependence on retrograde spindle signals means damage to the sensor eventually kills its controller.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Descending fusimotor command, reticulospinal and vestibulospinal, zero to one hundred spikes per second, and Renshaw inhibition, subtractive.

◦ No group Ia sensory input, modelled as an explicit absence.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Bag one stiffness fraction, zero to one, and thereby the velocity gain of that spindle's group Ia afferent.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, firing rate, bag one stiffness.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Input resistance one hundred to three hundred megohms, threshold minus fifty millivolts, conduction four to twenty-four metres per second, maximum velocity gain about sixty afferent spikes per second per unit stretch velocity.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane eight to fifteen milliseconds, bag one stiffening one hundred and fifty milliseconds, fusimotor set seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ These cells survive in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis while alpha motor neurons die, so the gamma loop keeps driving a shrinking pool.

◦ Too little drive gives hypotonia, too much contributes to rigidity and clonus.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute how one dynamic gamma motor neuron sets the velocity sensitivity of a muscle spindle primary ending.
Create a number variable called gamma firing rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called bag stiffness with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called stretch velocity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive fraction with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called afferent rate with initial value 0.
Set gamma firing rate to the descending fusimotor command in spikes per second.
Repeat the following steps exactly 600 times.
    Set stretch velocity to the muscle lengthening speed at this step.
    Set drive fraction to the quotient of gamma firing rate divided by 100.
    Set bag stiffness to the sum of bag stiffness and the product of the difference of drive fraction and bag stiffness and 0.00667.
    Set afferent rate to the sum of 20 and the product of bag stiffness and the product of 60 and stretch velocity.
End the loop.
Display afferent rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the arithmetic is plain and needs no libraries.

# Dynamic fusimotor gain: gamma neuron, bag1 fibre, Ia ending.
DT = 0.001            # seconds per step
TAU_BAG = 0.150       # bag1 stiffening time constant
K_LENGTH = 20.0       # Ia spikes/s per unit length
K_VEL_MAX = 60.0      # extra Ia spikes/s per unit velocity, full drive

def ramp(gamma_rate):
    stiff, length, peak, plateau = 0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0
    for step in range(600):
        t = step * DT
        vel = 0.5 if 0.100 <= t < 0.300 else 0.0   # a 200 ms ramp stretch
        length += vel * DT
        stiff += (min(gamma_rate / 100.0, 1.0) - stiff) * (DT / TAU_BAG)
        rate = K_LENGTH * length + K_VEL_MAX * stiff * vel
        peak = max(peak, rate) if t < 0.300 else peak
        plateau = rate if t > 0.500 else plateau
    return peak, plateau

for drive in (0.0, 50.0, 100.0):
    peak, plateau = ramp(drive)
    print("gamma %5.1f Hz -> dynamic index %6.2f Hz" % (drive, peak - plateau))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Stimulate it and a stretch sensor's velocity signal climbs steeply while a force transducer on the tendon reads exactly zero.

CHAPTER 167. BETA MOTOR NEURONS, ALSO CALLED SKELETOFUSIMOTOR NEURONS (Move-And-Monitor Motor Neuron) (NON-COG)

Evolution's cheapest trick lives here: one axon that pulls the rope and adjusts the instrument measuring the rope.

Beta is a Greek letter and skeletofusimotor is a compound of two Latin roots, so both hide the one genuinely striking fact about this cell, which is that a single axon branches to both ordinary muscle fibres and the sensor fibres inside a spindle.

Move names the first branch and Monitor the second, so one command shortens the muscle and simultaneously keeps its stretch sensor loaded.

Motor Neuron keeps the family, and this is not a rare curiosity, since perhaps twenty to thirty percent of spindles receive a branch from a large efferent axon bound for ordinary muscle.

Beyond this dual innervation and a conduction velocity higher than either alpha or gamma cells, little about these cells is firmly established, and the name deliberately claims no more.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Its single axon splits near the muscle, some branches ending on ordinary force-producing fibres, called extrafusal because they lie outside the spindle capsule, and others on the modified fibres inside a muscle spindle, the stretch sensor.

So every command that makes the muscle pull also, in the same instant and in proportion, tightens the sensor, keeping it reporting while the muscle shortens.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It looks exactly like a large alpha motor neuron and can be identified only by tracing the axon and finding one fibre serving both target types, which is why it is still under-counted.

SIZE:

The cell body is forty to eighty micrometres across in humans, and the axon is thickly myelinated at eight to sixteen micrometres, conducting at fifty to one hundred metres per second.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Dynamic beta neurons end on the nuclear bag one fibre as plate one endings and boost velocity sensitivity, while static beta neurons end on nuclear chain fibres and boost length sensitivity.

In cat peroneus brevis twenty-nine of thirty-four beta axons were dynamic and five static, while in peroneus tertius the split was thirteen to twelve, so the mix is muscle-specific.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives inside ordinary motor pools of lamina nine of the ventral horn, mixed among alpha and gamma motor neurons through every cervical, thoracic, lumbar and sacral segment supplying skeletal muscle, and cat data show the trait is commoner distally, where over seventy percent of spindles receive a beta axon, than proximally, where the figure is forty-one to forty-seven percent.

Its interface is internal, since this one cell is where the skeletomotor and fusimotor systems meet.

NUMBER:

Human beta motor neurons have never been counted, and they are not extra but a subset already inside the roughly two hundred thousand large motor neurons.

The cat finding that eighteen percent of extrafusal-supplying axons in one muscle were beta gives a bracket of ten to forty thousand, half of one hundredth of one percent of the two hundred million spinal neurons, at low confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Dynamic beta neurons serve slow, fatigue-resistant units and share that signature: low rheobase, meaning little current fires them, an afterhyperpolarisation up to one hundred milliseconds capping their rate, steady discharge at five to thirty spikes per second, and persistent inward currents that turn a brief input into a long plateau.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Its inputs are the full alpha set: monosynaptic group Ia fibres from spindles, group two fibres, corticospinal, reticulospinal and vestibulospinal tracts, Renshaw cells and Ia inhibitory interneurons.

Its outputs are two kinds of neuromuscular junction, endplates on force fibres and intrafusal endings inside the capsule, driven by one indivisible spike train.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single fast myelinated axon leaves the ventral root and branches deep in the muscle, and because both branch classes carry identical spikes the cell cannot separate force from sensor bias.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine at every terminal on nicotinic receptors of both fibre types, with calcitonin gene-related peptide as a slower trophic co-transmitter maintaining the endplate.

MYELINATION:

Heavy, with thick sheaths and internodes of one to one and a half millimetres, so force and sensor bias arrive together.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, matching an alpha motor neuron, because a long thick axon and a large terminal field make such cells among the most expensive in the body.

PLASTICITY:

Beta innervation is not fixed, and after nerve injury regenerating motor axons frequently stray into spindles and create skeletofusimotor connections that were never there before.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Inside the cord the glia match those of alpha motor neurons, with a dense perineuronal net and astrocytes shuttling lactate.

At the periphery it is unique in having two terminal Schwann cell environments at once, one at the endplate in open muscle and one inside the sealed fluid compartment of the spindle capsule.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the motor pool loses its free, zero-latency insurance policy.

Every time a muscle shortened its spindles would go slack and silent unless the brain had predicted exactly the right separate gamma drive, so movement would turn sensorless at the moment it mattered.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The computation is at the axonal branch point, where one spike train becomes force in one place and a change of measurement gain in the other.

That closes a positive feedback loop, since contraction drives the sensor, the sensor excites the motor neuron monosynaptically, and the motor neuron drives more contraction, a loop that must be damped in simulation or it runs away.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Monosynaptic group Ia excitation, zero to one hundred spikes per second per afferent, plus descending drive, zero to fifty spikes per second.

◦ Renshaw and Ia inhibitory interneuron inhibition, subtractive.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Extrafusal force, zero to one in units of peak tetanic force, and intrafusal bias on bag one or chain fibres, zero to one.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, firing rate, extrafusal activation, intrafusal stiffness.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rheobase about five nanoamperes, afterhyperpolarisation one hundred milliseconds, conduction fifty to one hundred metres per second, extrafusal to intrafusal branch ratio about ten to one.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane five to ten milliseconds, twitch fusion forty milliseconds, intrafusal stiffening one hundred and fifty milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis these cells die with the alpha population, so spindle feedback collapses faster than motor unit loss alone predicts.

◦ Aberrant beta connections after regeneration create sensor signals uncoupled from real length.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn one beta motor neuron spike train into simultaneous extrafusal force and intrafusal sensor bias.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called activation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called extrafusal force with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called intrafusal stiffness with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spindle output with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 500 times.
    Set firing rate to the descending motor command for this step.
    Set activation to the quotient of firing rate divided by the sum of firing rate and 20.
    Set extrafusal force to the sum of extrafusal force and the product of the difference of activation and extrafusal force and 0.025.
    Set intrafusal stiffness to the sum of intrafusal stiffness and the product of the difference of activation and intrafusal stiffness and 0.00667.
    Set spindle output to the sum of 20 and the product of intrafusal stiffness and 40.
    Check if extrafusal force is greater than 0.95.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Display spindle output to the console.
        Break out of the current loop immediately.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display extrafusal force to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because this is the tight fixed-step loop a real-time muscle plant runs.

/* Beta motor neuron: one spike train, two targets. */
#include <stdio.h>

#define DT        0.001    /* seconds per step */
#define TAU_FORCE 0.040    /* extrafusal twitch fusion time constant, seconds */
#define TAU_BAG   0.150    /* intrafusal stiffening time constant, seconds */
#define HALF_RATE 20.0     /* rate giving half maximal activation, Hz */

int main(void) {
    double force = 0.0, stiff = 0.0;
    int step;
    for (step = 0; step < 500; step++) {
        double t = step * DT;
        double rate = (t >= 0.100 && t < 0.400) ? 30.0 : 0.0;
        double activation = rate / (rate + HALF_RATE);
        force += (activation - force) * (DT / TAU_FORCE);
        stiff += (activation - stiff) * (DT / TAU_BAG);
        if (step % 100 == 0)
            printf("t=%.3f s  rate=%5.1f Hz  force=%.3f  bag1=%.3f\n",
                   t, rate, force, stiff);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Block ordinary muscle endplates with a drug, stimulate the axon, and the spindle keeps being driven although the muscle no longer twitches, which no alpha or gamma cell can do.

CHAPTER 168. SYMPATHETIC PREGANGLIONIC NEURONS (NON-COG)

Every time you stand up and do not faint, a slim column of small cells hidden in the side wing of your spinal cord has already done the arithmetic.

This chapter merges the two entries that previously described this cell, one filed with the spinal cord and one with the autonomic ganglia, since the cell body lies in the spinal cord and only its axon reaches the ganglion.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is the spinal output cell of the sympathetic nervous system, the automatic branch that prepares the body for effort and emergency, and it hands its message to a second neuron in a ganglion, a cluster of nerve cells outside the cord.

Through that relay it sets the calibre of every artery, the rate and force of the heart, sweating, pupil size and the release of adrenaline.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

An oval multipolar cell whose long dendrites run head to tail along the column, binding neighbours into bundles that sample the same descending fibres and behave as one unit.

SIZE:

In human cord the cell bodies have a median diameter near fourteen micrometres and a mean cross-sectional area of about four hundred square micrometres, measured as four hundred point seven at the third thoracic segment and four hundred and nine point nine at the seventh.

The axon is a thin myelinated group B fibre under three micrometres, conducting at three to fifteen metres per second.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Four anatomical groupings exist: the principal intermediolateral nucleus, the funicular part out in white matter, the intercalated nucleus, and the central autonomic nucleus by the central canal.

Functionally they split into muscle vasoconstrictor, skin vasoconstrictor, sudomotor, pilomotor, cardiac accelerator, visceromotor and sympathoadrenal cells.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It occupies lamina seven in the lateral horn from the first thoracic to the second lumbar segment, sometimes reaching the third, in rounded clusters of up to thirty neurons stacked along the cord.

It straddles two interfaces, the grey and white matter border, since the funicular subgroup sits inside the lateral white matter, and the boundary between central nervous system and peripheral ganglia, which it alone crosses.

NUMBER:

There is no reliable stereological count in humans, so only a bound is honest: clusters of thirty repeated along about twenty segments on both sides, and a divergence ratio of ten to two hundred ganglion cells per preganglionic cell against several million ganglion neurons.

Both routes point to one hundred thousand to five hundred thousand, roughly five hundredths to one quarter of one percent of the two hundred million spinal neurons, at low confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting near minus sixty millivolts with input resistance in the hundreds of megohms, it fires slowly and irregularly under five spikes per second, locked to the heartbeat and modulated by breathing, giving the two to six hertz rhythm recordable from a sympathetic nerve.

A transient potassium current delays its first spike, making it an integrator rather than an instant repeater.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation descends from the rostral ventrolateral medulla, the brainstem region setting resting blood pressure, with A5 noradrenergic cells, raphe serotonergic cells, the paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus and orexin cells, plus lumbar V3 interneurons of the walking network.

Its output is a fast nicotinic synapse onto chain ganglia, prevertebral ganglia such as the coeliac and mesenteric, and adrenal chromaffin cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

It leaves in the ventral root, turns aside as the white ramus communicans, may travel many segments along the chain, and diverges onto ten to two hundred ganglion cells, so it is an amplifier rather than a relay.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine on nicotinic receptors carries the fast signal with a slower muscarinic component, and enkephalin, neurotensin, substance P and nitric oxide appear as co-transmitters in defined subsets.

MYELINATION:

Thinly myelinated, which is why the white ramus looks white while the grey ramus of unmyelinated fibres looks grey, and the sheath is lost at the ganglion.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest per cell, but the population never rests, sustaining output through sleep, anaesthesia and starvation.

PLASTICITY:

After spinal cord injury above the sixth thoracic segment these cells lose brainstem drive and their human cell bodies shrink, then over weeks turn hyperexcitable as afferents sprout onto them, producing autonomic dysreflexia in which a full bladder drives blood pressure to dangerous heights.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here ensheath whole head-to-tail dendritic bundles as single units rather than wrapping individual synapses, supporting coordinated behaviour across a cluster.

The funicular subgroup is also one of the few places where neuronal cell bodies live surrounded by myelinated tracts and oligodendrocytes.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take these cells out and the thoracic cord becomes a purely somatic machine for moving ribs and trunk.

The region loses its slow cardiac-locked hum, and the body loses blood pressure control on standing, sweating and the adrenaline surge, so a patient would faint on sitting up.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Connexin thirty-six gap junctions couple these cells electrically, letting a cluster synchronise and generate the bursting rhythm rather than firing independently.

They respond directly to circulating angiotensin two and aldosterone with no synapse involved, receive descending noradrenaline and serotonin partly by diffusion through the extracellular space, and through the splenic nerve they join the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway that restrains the immune system.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Rostral ventrolateral medulla glutamatergic drive, zero to twenty spikes per second, and baroreceptor error in millimetres of mercury.

◦ Respiratory phase, zero point one to zero point five hertz, multiplicative, plus hormonal angiotensin two.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Nicotinic excitation of ten to two hundred postganglionic neurons per axon, and adrenal chromaffin secretion in the sympathoadrenal subset.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, potassium channel availability, firing rate, coupled cluster phase.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting potential minus sixty millivolts, input resistance one hundred to five hundred megohms, baseline rate zero point five to five spikes per second, soma area about four hundred and ten square micrometres.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane twenty to forty milliseconds, baroreflex loop about one second, hormonal modulation minutes.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Multiple system atrophy destroys more than half of these lateral horn cells, producing severe orthostatic hypotension.

◦ Spinal cord injury above the sixth thoracic segment leaves them disconnected and hyperexcitable, causing autonomic dysreflexia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the firing rate of one sympathetic preganglionic neuron under baroreflex and respiratory control.
Create a number variable called set point pressure with initial value 100.
Create a number variable called arterial pressure with initial value 100.
Create a number variable called pressure error with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called reflex gain with initial value 0.25.
Create a number variable called respiratory factor with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 400 times.
    Set arterial pressure to the mean arterial pressure measured at this step.
    Set pressure error to the difference of set point pressure and arterial pressure.
    Set firing rate to the sum of 2 and the product of reflex gain and pressure error.
    Set respiratory factor to the inspiratory gating value between 0.4 and 1.6.
    Set firing rate to the product of firing rate and respiratory factor.
    Check if firing rate is less than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if firing rate is greater than 12.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 12.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display firing rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the baroreflex is a short control law that reads like the textbook sentence it encodes.

# One sympathetic preganglionic neuron under baroreflex and respiratory control.
import math

DT = 0.010         # seconds per step
SET_POINT = 100.0  # target mean arterial pressure, mmHg
GAIN = 0.25        # spikes/s per mmHg of error
BASELINE = 2.0     # tonic firing with no error, spikes/s
MAX_RATE = 12.0    # ceiling on firing, spikes/s
RESP_DEPTH = 0.6   # depth of respiratory modulation

def rate_of(pressure, phase):
    drive = BASELINE + GAIN * (SET_POINT - pressure)   # low pressure excites
    drive *= 1.0 + RESP_DEPTH * math.sin(phase)        # inspiratory gating
    return max(0.0, min(drive, MAX_RATE))

pressure = 100.0
for step in range(400):
    t = step * DT
    if t >= 1.0:
        pressure = 70.0                    # head up tilt at one second
    rate = rate_of(pressure, 2.0 * math.pi * 0.25 * t)
    if step % 50 == 0:
        print("t=%4.2f s  %5.1f mmHg  %5.2f Hz" % (t, pressure, rate))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron whose body lies in the lateral horn between the first thoracic and second lumbar segments, makes acetylcholine, leaves by the white ramus communicans, and fires in time with the heartbeat.

CHAPTER 169. SACRAL PARASYMPATHETIC PREGANGLIONIC NEURONS (NON-COG)

The reason you can decide when to empty your bladder, rather than having your bladder decide for you, is a short column of cells at the very bottom of your spinal cord.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is the spinal output cell of the sacral parasympathetic system, the rest-and-restore branch serving the pelvic organs, and its axon leaves in the pelvic splanchnic nerves to reach ganglia in the pelvic plexus and in the organ walls themselves.

Through that relay it empties the bladder, drives the last of the bowel and produces the vessel dilation of erection.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small multipolar cell whose dendrites fan three ways, laterally into the white matter of the lateral funiculus, dorsally toward lamina one where bladder sensory fibres arrive, and medially to the central canal.

In the cat its axon often springs from a dendrite rather than the cell body, and the insulating sheath starts only some distance along.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are fifteen to thirty micrometres across, and the axon is a thin myelinated group B fibre of one to three micrometres conducting at three to fifteen metres per second, so the command to void takes tens of milliseconds to arrive.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Three functional groups are set by target, bladder, colorectal and erectile tissue, and rat reconstructions show the bladder and penile groups occupy separate territories inside the same nucleus.

Intracellular filling in the cat found distinct morphological classes, but no molecular scheme is agreed.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives in the sacral parasympathetic nucleus, a lateral band of intermediate grey in lamina seven, spanning the second to fourth sacral segments in humans and the sixth lumbar to first sacral segments in the rat, with dendrites crossing into lamina one and the lateral funiculus.

Its two named neighbours matter: the dorsal commissural nucleus, which relays bladder sensation, and Onuf's nucleus below, whose cells are voluntary motor neurons for the external sphincter, and the interface with Onuf's nucleus is the anatomical heart of continence.

NUMBER:

No human count exists, so only a bound is honest.

Retrograde labelling in rats recovers a few thousand cells, and scaling by cord and organ size gives a human figure of the order of ten thousand, most plausibly five to twenty thousand across both sides of the second to fourth sacral segments, well under one hundredth of one percent of the two hundred million spinal neurons, at low confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

At rest these cells are held below threshold, which is why a healthy bladder fills for hours without leaking, and during voiding they switch to a sustained burst of ten to thirty spikes per second.

The switch shows hysteresis, turning on at high volume and off only far below it, a transient potassium current delays the first spike, and mu opioid receptors on these cells are why morphine causes urinary retention.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The commanding input descends from Barrington's nucleus in the pons, the pontine micturition centre, using glutamate with corticotropin-releasing factor, and this is the wire the forebrain uses to grant or withhold permission to void.

Segmental input comes from dorsal commissural interneurons carrying bladder stretch, from raphe serotonergic fibres and from rostral ventrolateral medulla C1 cells, and the output is a nicotinic synapse onto pelvic and intramural ganglion neurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

It exits by the second to fourth sacral ventral roots into the pelvic splanchnic nerves and ends in the inferior hypogastric plexus and organ walls, so the last stage of the pathway is embedded in the tissue it controls.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine on nicotinic receptors at the ganglion, after which second-order neurons use acetylcholine on muscarinic M three and M two receptors, adenosine triphosphate as a fast purinergic co-transmitter, and nitric oxide to relax the urethra and fill erectile tissue.

MYELINATION:

Thin, group B, and in the cat the sheath famously begins only after the axon has travelled some way, leaving a long bare initial stretch.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low at baseline because these cells are silent most of the day, with sharp peaks during voiding, so the cost profile is bursty.

PLASTICITY:

After spinal cord injury the pontine command is cut and bladder and sphincter contract against each other in detrusor sphincter dyssynergia, while a new reflex driven by unmyelinated C fibre afferents emerges and nitric oxide synthase expression rises sharply in the nucleus.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here must maintain a synaptic environment around dendrites running hundreds of micrometres inside white matter, among myelinated tracts.

Microglia, the resident immune cells, are distinctively reactive in this nucleus, activating during bladder inflammation and actively driving the overactivity that follows.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the sacral cord keeps sensation, voluntary sphincter control and leg reflexes, but loses the ability to empty anything.

The region turns from a two-way organ controller into a one-way holding device, so the bladder distends silently and the bowel stalls.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is one of the clearest biological bistable switches, with two stable states and a jump between them, and it must be simulated as such rather than as a graded response.

Its loop is spinobulbospinal, running to the pons and back with a cat loop time of fifty to seventy milliseconds, corticotropin-releasing factor acts slowly and partly by diffusion, opioids gate it on both sides of the synapse, and it must be coordinated with Onuf's nucleus through interneurons rather than direct contact.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Bladder stretch afferent rate from dorsal commissural interneurons, zero to twenty spikes per second, proportional to volume in millilitres.

◦ Descending permission gate from Barrington's nucleus, open or closed, plus opioid and serotonergic modulation.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Nicotinic drive to pelvic and intramural ganglia, zero or ten to thirty spikes per second, and detrusor pressure in centimetres of water.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, switch state as a boolean, burst rate, bladder volume.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Voiding threshold about three hundred millilitres, switch off volume about thirty millilitres, burst rate ten to thirty spikes per second, conduction three to fifteen metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane twenty to forty milliseconds, spinobulbospinal loop fifty to seventy milliseconds, filling minutes to hours, voiding ten to thirty seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Spinal cord injury separates them from the pons and gives detrusor sphincter dyssynergia with dangerous back pressure on the kidneys.

◦ Multiple system atrophy and diabetic autonomic neuropathy weaken them and give a large, poorly emptying bladder.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to model the sacral parasympathetic preganglionic neuron as the bistable switch that fills and empties a bladder.
Create a number variable called bladder volume with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called afferent rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called preganglionic rate with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called voiding with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called cortical permission with initial value true.
Repeat the following steps exactly 6000 times.
    Set afferent rate to the product of bladder volume and 0.06.
    Check if both bladder volume is greater than 300 and cortical permission is true.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set voiding to true.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if bladder volume is less than 30.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set voiding to false.
    End the conditional block.
    If voiding is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set preganglionic rate to 20.
        Set bladder volume to the difference of bladder volume and 2.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set preganglionic rate to 0.
        Set bladder volume to the sum of bladder volume and 0.1.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display bladder volume to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because its plain style suits a reflex that waits a long time and then fires all at once, and it runs anywhere with no toolchain.

// Sacral parasympathetic preganglionic neuron as a bistable voiding switch.
const DT = 0.1;            // seconds per step
const FILL_RATE = 1.0;     // millilitres per second
const ON_ML = 300;         // volume that triggers voiding
const OFF_ML = 30;         // volume at which voiding stops
const VOID_RATE = 20.0;    // millilitres emptied per second
const BURST_HZ = 20.0;     // preganglionic firing while voiding

let volume = 0, voiding = false;
const permission = true;   // the pontine gate held open by the forebrain

for (let step = 0; step < 6000; step++) {
  const t = step * DT;
  const afferentHz = 0.06 * volume;        // bladder wall stretch afferents
  if (!voiding && volume > ON_ML && permission) voiding = true;
  if (voiding && volume < OFF_ML) voiding = false;
  volume += voiding ? -VOID_RATE * DT : FILL_RATE * DT;
  if (volume < 0) volume = 0;
  if (step % 500 === 0) {
    console.log("t=" + t.toFixed(0) + "s vol=" + volume.toFixed(0) +
                "ml aff=" + afferentHz.toFixed(1) +
                "Hz pre=" + (voiding ? BURST_HZ : 0) + "Hz");
  }
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Stimulate it and bladder pressure rises without the slightest twitch of the pelvic floor, which instantly separates it from its neighbour in Onuf's nucleus.

CHAPTER 170. RENSHAW CELLS (NON-COG)

Birdsey Renshaw found a cell that motor neurons use to shout themselves down, and when it answers it can fire at fifteen hundred spikes a second.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Every motor neuron axon, leaving the cord, gives off a short branch called a recurrent collateral that turns back into the grey matter and excites this small inhibitory cell.

The Renshaw cell then inhibits the very motor neurons that excited it and their close partners, a loop called recurrent inhibition that acts as automatic volume control on muscle force.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small oval cell whose dendrites run head to tail along the cord, carrying an unusually clear signature: the calcium-binding protein calbindin, the glycine transporter two, and huge clusters of gephyrin, the scaffold that anchors inhibitory receptors.

It comes from the V1 class of embryonic interneurons marked by engrailed one, in the subgroup defined by MafA and MafB.

SIZE:

The cell body is ten to twenty micrometres across with a dendritic field of a few hundred micrometres, and its axon is short and thin, staying within its own and a few neighbouring segments.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No formal scheme is agreed, but thoracic Renshaw cells serve respiratory motor pools, fire in time with inspiration and project further along the cord than the classical limb form from which nearly all measurements come.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives in the most ventral strip of lamina seven, so consistently that anatomists call that strip the Renshaw area, immediately below and medial to the motor nucleus of lamina nine, throughout cervical, thoracic, lumbar and sacral cord and densest in the two enlargements.

In that thin strip it makes up as much as eighty percent of all glycine-using neurons, and its interface is the boundary between motor nucleus and intermediate grey, exactly where motor axons pass to the ventral white matter.

NUMBER:

In mouse lumbar cord Renshaw cells are two to three percent of ventral interneurons, with about one Renshaw cell per five motor neurons.

Applied to the roughly two hundred thousand human alpha motor neurons that gives about forty thousand, range twenty to eighty thousand, some two to four hundredths of one percent of the two hundred million spinal neurons, at low confidence since no human count exists.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

A single motor volley evokes a long-lasting response opening at an instantaneous frequency near fifteen hundred spikes per second and decaying over thirty to fifty milliseconds.

Its input resistance is high, its cholinergic excitation slow and strong, and its own cell body is blanketed in inhibition, since glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid synapses form seventy-five to eighty percent of all synapses on its soma.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are recurrent collaterals from alpha motor neurons, releasing acetylcholine onto nicotinic and muscarinic receptors and co-releasing glutamate, plus other Renshaw cells, Ia inhibitory interneurons and descending fibres.

Outputs are unusually varied for so small a cell: alpha motor neurons of the same and synergist muscles, gamma motor neurons, Ia inhibitory interneurons, other Renshaw cells, and ventral spinocerebellar tract neurons, and because it inhibits Ia inhibitory interneurons, driving a pool also releases the antagonist and permits deliberate co-contraction.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Short and locally branching, mostly within its own segment, so inhibition reaches the motor neuron one to two milliseconds after that motor neuron's own spike.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid, abbreviated GABA, from the same terminals, glycine giving a fast component and GABA a slower one, which is why recurrent inhibition outlasts reciprocal inhibition.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated or only thinly myelinated, because over a millimetre speed costs nothing to give up.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Transiently enormous, since firing at fifteen hundred spikes per second demands dense mitochondria and heavy sodium pump work, while between bursts the cell is cheap.

PLASTICITY:

The size of its gephyrin clusters, and so the inhibition it receives, is set by how much excitation it gets from motor axons, so the cell tunes its own brake to its own drive, and in mouse amyotrophic lateral sclerosis this circuit is disrupted before motor neurons visibly die.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here are largely conventional and it would be wrong to invent a speciality.

The genuine local difference is chemical, since the Renshaw area is exceptionally rich in acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme destroying acetylcholine, so the space is swept clean between bursts, and unlike motor neurons micrometres away these cells wear no perineuronal net.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete Renshaw cells and the ventral horn loses its automatic gain control.

Firing rates would climb with no internal brake, recruitment would lose some of its orderly progression from weak to strong units, and the cord would lose its built-in way of releasing an antagonist when a movement needs stiffness.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The fifteen hundred hertz opening burst is itself a computation, turning a brief synchronous volley into a graded decaying inhibition whose strength encodes how much of the pool just fired.

Two transmitters of different speed from one terminal give a two-timescale output, neonatal Renshaw cells are electrically coupled so the population acts as a unit, and strychnine blocking its glycine receptors and tetanus toxin blocking its release are why both poisonings produce rigid spasm.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Recurrent collateral excitation proportional to summed motor pool rate, zero to fifty spikes per second per motor neuron.

◦ Mutual inhibition from other Renshaw cells and Ia inhibitory interneurons, subtractive, and descending gain of zero point five to two.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Mixed glycine and GABA inhibition of alpha and gamma motor neurons, Ia inhibitory interneurons and other Renshaw cells.

◦ A copy of ventral horn activity to ventral spinocerebellar tract neurons.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, instantaneous rate, short-term depression, inhibitory conductance in the pool.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Peak rate about fifteen hundred spikes per second, burst thirty to fifty milliseconds, Renshaw to motor neuron ratio one to five, inhibitory share of somatic synapses seventy-five to eighty percent.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Nicotinic excitation five milliseconds, burst decay thirty milliseconds, glycine ten milliseconds, GABA thirty milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Strychnine blocks the glycine receptor and tetanus toxin blocks release, both producing runaway motor firing and rigid spasm.

◦ In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis models the circuit degrades early, removing a brake from stressed motor neurons.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute recurrent inhibition, in which a motor pool drives a Renshaw cell that then inhibits the pool.
Create a number variable called descending command with initial value 40.
Create a number variable called motoneuron rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called renshaw rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called collateral drive with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 1000 times.
    Set motoneuron rate to the difference of descending command and inhibition.
    Check if motoneuron rate is less than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set motoneuron rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set collateral drive to the product of motoneuron rate and 18.
    Set renshaw rate to the sum of renshaw rate and the product of the difference of collateral drive and renshaw rate and 0.0167.
    Check if renshaw rate is greater than 1500.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set renshaw rate to 1500.
    End the conditional block.
    Set inhibition to the sum of inhibition and the product of the difference of the product of renshaw rate and 0.02 and inhibition and 0.02.
End the loop.
Display motoneuron rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because the circuit is three state variables on a fixed half-millisecond step, what an embedded spinal simulator would run.

/* Recurrent inhibition: motor pool drives Renshaw cell, which inhibits the pool. */
#include <stdio.h>

#define DT        0.0005   /* half millisecond step */
#define TAU_RC    0.030    /* Renshaw burst decay, seconds */
#define TAU_IPSP  0.025    /* inhibitory decay in the motoneuron, seconds */
#define RC_GAIN   18.0     /* Renshaw spikes/s per motoneuron spike/s */
#define RC_MAX    1500.0   /* peak instantaneous Renshaw rate */
#define IPSP_GAIN 0.020    /* motoneuron spikes/s lost per Renshaw spike/s */

int main(void) {
    double renshaw = 0.0, inhib = 0.0, command = 40.0;
    int step;
    for (step = 0; step < 1000; step++) {
        double mn = command - inhib;
        if (mn < 0.0) mn = 0.0;
        renshaw += (RC_GAIN * mn - renshaw) * (DT / TAU_RC);
        if (renshaw > RC_MAX) renshaw = RC_MAX;
        inhib += (IPSP_GAIN * renshaw - inhib) * (DT / TAU_IPSP);
        if (step % 200 == 0)
            printf("t=%.4f  mn=%6.2f Hz  RC=%7.2f Hz  inhib=%5.2f\n",
                   step * DT, mn, renshaw, inhib);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron excited by acetylcholine released from a motor neuron's own axon inside the spinal cord, and the only one answering with a burst near fifteen hundred spikes per second.

CHAPTER 171. IA INHIBITORY INTERNEURONS (Counter-Muscle Silencing Neuron) (NON-COG)

You cannot bend and straighten your elbow at the same time, and one modest cell in the spinal cord is the reason why.

The old label names a nerve fibre class, group Ia, which is a barcode rather than a description.

Counter-Muscle names the target, because this cell is driven by stretch sensors inside one muscle and then inhibits the motor neurons of the muscle that pulls the opposite way across the same joint, so a bending muscle and a straightening muscle never fight.

Silencing names the work and its chemistry, since the cell releases glycine, an inhibitory transmitter, in a two-synapse path that takes roughly one extra millisecond compared with the direct stretch reflex.

Neuron marks it as a spinal interneuron switched on by descending fibres from the motor cortex at the moment a voluntary movement begins, so that the brain commands the mover and the relaxer with one instruction.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It takes a direct connection from the fastest sensory fibres in the body, the group Ia fibres carrying stretch and stretch velocity from muscle spindles, and inhibits the motor neurons of the opposing muscle, a pattern called reciprocal inhibition.

Its second job is to carry a copy of the brain's command, since corticospinal, vestibulospinal, reticulospinal and rubrospinal fibres all converge on it, so one descending order both contracts a muscle and relaxes its antagonist.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A medium multipolar neuron whose dendrites catch incoming sensory fibres and whose axon branches densely in the neighbouring motor nucleus, using glycine and marked by the glycine transporter two.

Most belong to the Foxp2 subgroup of V1 interneurons, born of the same engrailed one lineage as Renshaw cells but later, and with them supply most inhibitory synapses on motor neuron cell bodies.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are twenty to forty micrometres across, larger than a Renshaw cell and smaller than a motor neuron, with an axon of a millimetre or two spreading over the antagonist pool.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The population divides by target into flexor-related cells that inhibit extensors and extensor-related cells that inhibit flexors, and these mirror groups inhibit each other.

A smaller contribution comes from V2b lineage interneurons, so this is a functional class assembled from more than one developmental origin.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives in lamina seven of the ventral horn, just dorsal and medial to the motor nucleus of lamina nine, in the region sometimes called the intermediate nucleus, at every segment with a motor pool and most abundantly in the cervical enlargement from the fifth cervical to the first thoracic segment and the lumbosacral enlargement from the second lumbar to the second sacral segment.

Its interface is the crossing point between sensory intermediate grey above and motor nucleus below, which is why a sensory signal reaches a motor neuron with only one extra cell in the way.

NUMBER:

No human count exists for this class, and any single figure would be an invention.

The Foxp2 subgroup is among the largest V1 families and these cells are thought to outnumber Renshaw cells substantially, so a defensible bracket is one hundred thousand to three hundred thousand, five to fifteen hundredths of one percent of the two hundred million spinal neurons, at low confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

A fast phasic cell with a short membrane time constant, it turns a synchronous sensory volley into one to three spikes with very little delay, quiet at rest and tonically active once movement begins.

Its inhibition arrives at disynaptic latency, about one millisecond after the direct monosynaptic excitation of the agonist, and that timing is the signature by which human neurophysiologists identify the pathway in living subjects.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are monosynaptic group Ia afferents, recognised by vesicular glutamate transporter one boutons, plus corticospinal, rubrospinal, vestibulospinal and reticulospinal fibres, Renshaw inhibition, and mutual inhibition from the opposing Ia inhibitory interneuron.

Outputs are the antagonist's alpha motor neurons, contacted on soma and proximal dendrites where inhibition bites hardest, that antagonist's gamma motor neurons, the opposing Ia inhibitory interneuron, and Renshaw cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

It stays inside the ventral horn, usually within its own segment, and never leaves the cord, and its brevity is the point, because the pathway's value is being only one synapse slower than the fastest reflex in the body.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glycine on receptors built from alpha one and beta subunits, essentially purely glycinergic in the adult, a useful contrast with the Renshaw cell that explains why reciprocal inhibition is brief and sharply timed.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated or very thinly myelinated, since a journey of a millimetre or two gains nothing from insulation.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and tracking movement, cheap at rest and continuously active through every second of walking, reaching and standing.

PLASTICITY:

Reciprocal inhibition is modulated with task, gait phase and posture and can be deliberately increased by therapeutic electrical stimulation, and after stroke it increased in patients who recovered well with mild spasticity while remaining unchanged or reduced in those who recovered poorly with marked extensor spasticity.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here are structurally ordinary and it would mislead to claim otherwise.

The one function worth specifying is that surrounding astrocytes carry the glycine transporter one, clearing glycine from the cleft and therefore setting how quickly each inhibitory event ends, making astrocytic uptake a direct parameter of reciprocal inhibition timing.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the ventral horn keeps its motor neurons, sensory input and recurrent brake, but loses its push-pull logic.

Every voluntary movement would fight itself, joints stiffening, limbs moving slowly and expensively, and the crisp alternation of walking dissolving into a rigid shuffle.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This neuron performs a subtraction, taking excitation from one muscle's sensors and from the brain and delivering a negative quantity to the opposite muscle, so it is a sign-inverting adder rather than a relay.

Because flexor and extensor versions inhibit each other the pair behaves like a flip-flop, one of the building blocks of the alternating rhythm that produces stepping, and its inputs are gated before arrival, since gamma-aminobutyric acid released onto the group Ia terminals turns the sensory signal down without touching the interneuron.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Monosynaptic group Ia excitation from the agonist spindle, zero to one hundred spikes per second, and descending drive from four tracts, zero to fifty spikes per second.

◦ Renshaw and opposing interneuron inhibition, subtractive, plus presynaptic gating of the Ia terminals, multiplicative, zero point two to one.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Glycinergic inhibition of antagonist alpha and gamma motor neurons, of the opposing interneuron and of Renshaw cells.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, firing rate, inhibitory conductance in the antagonist pool, presynaptic gating level.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Disynaptic latency about one millisecond beyond the monosynaptic reflex, membrane time constant about five milliseconds, inhibitory gain zero point three to zero point four.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Glycinergic decay five to ten milliseconds, task modulation hundreds of milliseconds, training days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Reduced reciprocal inhibition after stroke, in cerebral palsy and in dystonia produces co-contraction and spasticity.

◦ Loss of glycine receptor function, as in hyperekplexia or strychnine poisoning, removes the inhibition and produces exaggerated startle and rigidity.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute reciprocal inhibition between a flexor and an extensor motor pool using two mirror image Ia inhibitory interneurons.
Create a number variable called flexor command with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called extensor stretch with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called flexor interneuron rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called extensor interneuron rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called flexor motoneuron rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called extensor motoneuron rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called target rate with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 300 times.
    Set flexor command to the cortical drive to the flexor pool at this step.
    Set extensor stretch to the lengthening signal from the extensor spindles at this step.
    Set flexor motoneuron rate to the difference of flexor command and the product of extensor interneuron rate and 0.35.
    Set extensor motoneuron rate to the difference of 5 and the product of flexor interneuron rate and 0.35.
    Check if extensor motoneuron rate is less than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set extensor motoneuron rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set target rate to the product of 0.4 and flexor command.
    Set flexor interneuron rate to the sum of flexor interneuron rate and the product of the difference of target rate and flexor interneuron rate and 0.125.
    Set target rate to the sum of the product of 0.8 and extensor stretch and 2.
    Set extensor interneuron rate to the sum of extensor interneuron rate and the product of the difference of target rate and extensor interneuron rate and 0.125.
End the loop.
Display flexor motoneuron rate to the console.
Display extensor motoneuron rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the two halves of the circuit are identical, so one function is called twice, exactly as the spinal cord builds it.

# Reciprocal Ia inhibition between a flexor and an extensor motor pool.
DT = 0.001          # seconds per step
TAU_IPSP = 0.008    # glycinergic inhibitory time constant, seconds
IA_GAIN = 0.8       # interneuron spikes/s per unit of drive
INHIB_GAIN = 0.35   # motoneuron spikes/s lost per interneuron spike/s
SHARE = 0.5         # share of the cortical command sent to the Ia interneuron

def half(command, opposing_ia, own_stretch):
    mn = max(command - INHIB_GAIN * opposing_ia, 0.0)
    return mn, IA_GAIN * (own_stretch + SHARE * command)

flex_ia, ext_ia = 0.0, 0.0
for k in range(300):
    moving = k * DT >= 0.050                 # the cortex says bend the elbow
    flex_cmd = 40.0 if moving else 0.0
    ext_stretch = 12.0 if moving else 0.0    # the extensor is being lengthened
    flex_mn, flex_t = half(flex_cmd, ext_ia, 0.0)
    ext_mn, ext_t = half(5.0, flex_ia, ext_stretch)
    flex_ia += (flex_t - flex_ia) * (DT / TAU_IPSP)
    ext_ia += (ext_t - ext_ia) * (DT / TAU_IPSP)
    if k % 60 == 0:
        print("t=%.3f s  flexor=%5.2f Hz  extensor=%5.2f Hz" % (k * DT, flex_mn, ext_mn))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only spinal neuron that takes a direct connection from the group Ia fibres of one muscle and delivers pure glycine inhibition to the motor neurons of that muscle's exact opposite, one synapse and about one millisecond later.

CHAPTER 172. IB INHIBITORY INTERNEURONS (Tendon-Load Restraining Neuron) (NON-COG)

Lift something heavier than you should, and a cell the width of a grain of pollen quietly decides how much force your muscle is allowed to make.

Group Ib is again a fibre-class barcode and teaches nothing.

Tendon-Load names the signal it reads, because its input comes from Golgi tendon organs, sensors sitting in series with the tendon that report the actual force a muscle is producing, each one typically sampling only about ten to twenty muscle fibres.

Restraining names the job, since the cell feeds that force reading back as inhibition onto the motor neurons of the very same muscle, a negative feedback loop that trims output when tension climbs too high.

Neuron marks it as the cell called non-reciprocal in the older literature, because unlike the counter-muscle pathway it acts on the muscle that generated the force itself.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The Ib inhibitory interneuron is a small nerve cell buried in the middle layers of the spinal cord's grey matter that listens to force sensors in your tendons and turns down the very muscle that produced the force.

Its input comes from the Golgi tendon organ, a small braid of collagen fibres woven into the join between muscle and tendon, wrapped by a nerve ending that fires faster the harder that braid is pulled.

The nerve fibre carrying that report is called a Group Ib afferent, where afferent simply means a fibre carrying signals inward toward the cord, and the interneuron takes its name from that fibre.

An interneuron is a nerve cell whose whole life is spent between other nerve cells, never touching muscle or skin itself.

The textbook story is a safety valve that stops you tearing your own tendon.

The measured truth is better: this cell is a force comparator that continuously scales muscle output to the load actually being carried, and it is the reason you can lift an empty cup and a full kettle with the same smoothness.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is a small multipolar neuron, meaning it has several branches leaving the cell body in several directions.

Four to eight primary dendrites, the branches that collect incoming signals, spread mostly sideways across the cord rather than up and down it.

That flat, fan-shaped dendritic field is a design choice: it lets one cell sample Ib fibres arriving from several different muscles at the same spinal level.

Its axon, the single output cable, dives toward the motor neuron pools and breaks into a dense local bush rather than travelling far.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 30 micrometres across, where a micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre.

The dendritic fan spans roughly 300 to 600 micrometres mediolaterally and only 100 to 250 micrometres along the length of the cord.

The whole cell would sit comfortably inside the full stop at the end of this sentence.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Pure Ib cells, driven almost entirely by tendon organ afferents from one muscle, are the minority and the classical case.

• Convergent group I cells receive both Ib force signals and Ia length signals from muscle spindles, so they report a blend of force and stretch.

• Cutaneous-dominant cells receive heavy skin input and act as load-and-contact detectors for the foot or palm.

• Excitatory partners exist alongside them: the same Ib afferents drive excitatory interneurons that lift the antagonist muscle, so the pathway is a push-pull pair, not a lone brake.

• By developmental lineage most inhibitory members are thought to arise from the V1 and V2b classes described later in this section, though the assignment in humans is not settled.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives in laminae V, VI and VII of the spinal grey matter, the layered scheme of Rexed that divides the cord's butterfly-shaped core into ten bands.

Laminae VI and VII together form the zona intermedia, the intermediate zone that sits between the sensory dorsal horn above and the motor ventral horn below.

That is the important point about its address: this cell occupies the sensorimotor interface itself, the seam where incoming body reports are converted into outgoing movement commands.

It is present at every segment that serves a limb, and is densest in the cervical enlargement from C5 to T1, which serves the arm, and the lumbosacral enlargement from L2 to S2, which serves the leg.

Smaller numbers sit in thoracic segments serving trunk and intercostal muscles.

NUMBER:

There is no direct human count, and any book that gives you a precise one is guessing.

A defensible range is 100 thousand to 1 million cells across the whole cord, reasoned from the roughly 200 thousand alpha motor neurons in the human spinal cord and the convergence ratios measured in cat.

That is under one half of one percent of the roughly 200 million neurons in the human spinal cord.

Confidence is low, and the honest bound is this: they are certainly more numerous than motor neurons and certainly a tiny minority of interneurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting membrane voltage sits near minus 65 millivolts, the electrical charge difference the cell maintains across its skin while idle.

Input resistance is high for a spinal cell, around 100 to 300 megaohms, which means a small current makes a large voltage change and the cell is easy to recruit.

It fires tonically, meaning steadily rather than in bursts, at rates that climb smoothly with tendon force up to 100 hertz or more.

The whole reflex is disynaptic, that is, two synapses long, and in human experiments the central delay measured by conditioning the soleus H reflex from the medial gastrocnemius nerve is roughly 2.5 milliseconds, with inhibition appearing at a condition-test interval near 6 milliseconds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from Group Ib afferents conducting at 72 to 120 metres per second, from Group Ia spindle afferents, from Group II afferents, from skin and joint afferents, and from descending corticospinal, rubrospinal, vestibulospinal and reticulospinal fibres.

That descending convergence is why the brain can decide, moment by moment, how loud the force feedback should be.

Its own inputs are gated by presynaptic inhibition, in which a GABA-releasing cell synapses onto the incoming Ib terminal itself and turns the message down before it is ever heard.

Outputs go to alpha motor neurons of the muscle that generated the force and its close synergists, to gamma motor neurons that set spindle sensitivity, and to neighbouring interneurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, 1 to 3 micrometres across, and stays local, branching within its own segment and one to three segments above and below.

A single cell forms several hundred to a few thousand synaptic boutons, the small swellings where transmitter is released.

Conduction along it runs at roughly 3 to 15 metres per second, slow by afferent standards but irrelevant over such short distances.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The main transmitter is glycine, the smallest amino acid, which opens chloride channels and makes the target harder to fire.

A substantial subset co-releases gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) from the same vesicles, giving a fast glycine component and a slower GABA component in one package.

Postsynaptic receptors are the glycine receptor built from alpha1 and beta subunits and the GABA type A receptor.

MYELINATION:

The axon carries a thin myelin sheath, myelin being the fatty insulation wrapped by support cells that speeds conduction.

Internodes, the insulated stretches between bare gaps, are short at roughly 100 to 300 micrometres, matching the small axon calibre.

Some of the finest terminal branches lose myelin entirely before they reach their boutons.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Absolute energy use is modest because the cell is small, but the duty cycle is punishing: during standing, carrying or gripping it fires continuously for minutes at a time.

Mitochondria, the cell's power plants, cluster in the boutons rather than the cell body, because the expensive job is refilling vesicles, not making spikes.

PLASTICITY:

This is one of the few reflex pathways in mammals proven to be trainable: monkeys and humans can be operantly conditioned to increase or decrease group I reflex gain over weeks, and the change persists.

Its strength is also state-dependent within a single stride, and after spinal cord injury the pathway reorganises, contributing to the abnormal stiffness of spasticity.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in the intermediate zone are unusual in expressing high levels of glycine transporter 1, the pump that clears glycine from the synaptic gap.

That matters here more than almost anywhere else in the nervous system, because glycine is this cell's currency, and the same astrocytes also supply the serine that neurons need to make glycine in the first place.

Chloride handling is a second speciality: the potassium-chloride cotransporter KCC2 in the target motor neuron keeps internal chloride low, and if astrocyte and neuronal support of KCC2 fails, glycine stops inhibiting and starts exciting.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the intermediate zone keeps its wiring diagram but loses its sense of weight.

Movements would still start and stop, but force would no longer be graded against load: the cord would command a muscle to contract without ever asking what it costs.

The flavour lost is negative feedback on effort, the thing that lets a hand close on an egg and a crowbar with the same confident economy.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The headline non-linear trick is reflex reversal.

During quiet standing, Ib input inhibits the extensor muscles that hold you up, but during the stance phase of walking the same input is routed instead through excitatory partners, so heavier loading now increases extensor drive and stops the leg collapsing.

The sign of a reflex is therefore not a property of the wire but of the network state, and any simulation that hard-codes the sign will be wrong for half the gait cycle.

Beyond that: presynaptic inhibition edits its inputs before integration; neonatal cells are electrically coupled through gap junctions, which are direct pores between cells, and uncouple with maturity; serotonin and noradrenaline released by volume transmission, meaning diffuse spillover rather than point-to-point contact, reset its excitability over seconds; and its own chloride reversal potential is a slow variable set by transporter expression rather than by voltage.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: Group Ib afferent firing rate from homonymous muscle, 0 to 200 hertz, roughly proportional to tendon force in newtons; Group Ib from synergists, 0 to 200 hertz; Group Ia, 0 to 150 hertz; cutaneous afferents, 0 to 100 hertz; descending gain command, dimensionless 0 to 2; presynaptic inhibition of the Ib terminal, dimensionless 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: inhibitory synaptic conductance onto homonymous and synergist alpha motor neurons, 0 to 5 nanosiemens per cell; smaller inhibitory drive onto gamma motor neurons; excitatory drive is not emitted by this cell but by its paired excitatory interneuron.

• STATE: membrane voltage in millivolts; refractory countdown in seconds; short-term synaptic depression variable, 0 to 1; locomotor phase flag, stance or swing.

• PARAMETERS: membrane time constant 8 to 15 milliseconds; spike threshold near minus 50 millivolts; input resistance 100 to 300 megaohms; peak inhibitory conductance per bouton 0.1 to 0.5 nanosiemens; glycine to GABA co-release ratio, typically 0.7 to 1.0 glycine.

• TIME CONSTANTS: synaptic delay 0.5 to 1 millisecond per synapse; total reflex central delay 2 to 3 milliseconds; glycine current decay 5 to 10 milliseconds; GABA type A decay 20 to 50 milliseconds; task-dependent gain changes over 100 milliseconds to seconds; conditioning-induced change over days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: loss or silencing produces unopposed extensor drive under load, which appears clinically as the stiff, poorly graded contraction of spasticity after spinal cord injury or stroke; in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a disease that kills motor neurons, the surrounding inhibitory interneuron input is stripped away early, removing force feedback before the motor neuron itself dies; loss of glycine receptor function, as in hereditary hyperekplexia caused by mutations in the GLRA1 gene, makes the target motor neuron deaf to this cell entirely and produces violent startle and neonatal rigidity.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert tendon force reports into a graded inhibitory command for the muscle that produced the force.
Create a number variable called homonymous_hertz with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called synergist_hertz with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called descending_gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called presynaptic_gate with initial value 1.
Create a boolean variable called stance_phase with initial value false.
Create a number variable called membrane with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value 15.
Create a number variable called output_sign with initial value 0.
Set homonymous_hertz to the current firing rate of the muscle's own tendon organ afferents.
Set synergist_hertz to the current firing rate of the synergist tendon organ afferents.
Calculate the sum of homonymous_hertz and synergist_hertz.
Set membrane to that result.
Calculate the product of membrane and presynaptic_gate.
Set membrane to that result.
Calculate the product of membrane and descending_gain.
Set membrane to that result.
Check if stance_phase is true.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set output_sign to 1.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set output_sign to negative 1.
End the conditional block.
Check if membrane is greater than threshold.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the product of output_sign and membrane.
    Display that result to the console.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Display 0 to the console.
End the conditional block.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the arithmetic is transparent and a simulation agent can lift the class straight into a larger network without a build step.

# One Ib inhibitory interneuron: a force comparator whose sign flips with gait phase.
DT = 0.001  # seconds per simulation step

class IbInterneuron:
    def __init__(self):
        self.v = -65.0        # membrane voltage, millivolts
        self.rest = -65.0
        self.thresh = -50.0   # spike threshold, millivolts
        self.tau = 0.012      # membrane time constant, seconds
        self.refrac = 0.0     # refractory countdown, seconds

    def step(self, ib_hz, cutaneous_hz, descending_gain, stance):
        # Force feedback is pooled from the muscle's own tendon organs plus skin load signals.
        drive = (0.06 * ib_hz + 0.02 * cutaneous_hz) * descending_gain
        # In stance the group I pathway is routed through excitatory partners: the sign flips.
        sign = 1.0 if stance else -1.0
        self.v += DT * (-(self.v - self.rest) + 2.0 * drive) / self.tau
        fired = False
        if self.refrac > 0.0:
            self.refrac -= DT
            self.v = self.rest
        elif self.v >= self.thresh:
            fired = True
            self.v = self.rest
            self.refrac = 0.004
        # Output is current delivered to the homonymous motor pool, negative meaning inhibitory.
        return fired, (sign * 0.8 if fired else 0.0)

cell = IbInterneuron()
spikes, net = 0, 0.0
for i in range(2000):                      # two seconds of heavy loading
    fired, out = cell.step(180.0, 10.0, 1.0, stance=(i >= 1000))
    spikes += 1 if fired else 0
    net += out
print("firing rate:", spikes / 2.0, "Hz")  # prints 55.5 Hz
print("net drive to motor pool:", round(net, 2))  # near zero: braked, then assisted

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only spinal cell whose input is measured in newtons rather than millimetres, and the only common reflex interneuron whose output changes sign halfway through a footstep.

Find a cell in laminae V to VII that is silent at rest, fires in proportion to tendon tension, inhibits the muscle that is pulling on that tendon at a two-synapse delay of about 2.5 milliseconds, and releases glycine, and you have found it.

CHAPTER 173. PROPRIOSPINAL INTERNEURONS (Spine-Spanning Relay Neuron) (NON-COG)

When a stroke destroys the direct line from brain to hand, the hand sometimes learns to move again, and it does so by routing the order through these cells.

The old term is Latin for belonging to the spine itself, an address rather than a function.

Spine-Spanning names the anatomy that defines the cell, because its axon never leaves the spinal cord but runs from the segment where the cell body sits to other segments, over one or two segments in the short variety and from neck to lower back in the long variety.

Relay names the work, since these cells carry both descending commands from the brain and local reflex signals between segments, letting an arm and a leg, or a shoulder and a hand, be timed together.

Neuron marks it as a cell that matters clinically, because after a spinal cord injury surviving spine-spanning relays can form detour circuits around the damaged stretch and support partial recovery of stepping.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A propriospinal interneuron is a nerve cell whose body and whose entire axon stay inside the spinal cord, connecting one spinal segment to another.

The name is literal: proprio means own, so these are the cord's own private wires, as opposed to fibres that come down from the brain or go out to muscle.

Their job is to knit the cord into one organ instead of thirty-one independent slices.

They carry a command that arrives at the neck down to the arm, they tell the legs what the arms are doing, they let a single descending order reach several motor pools at once, and they hold the timing that keeps a limb's joints in sequence.

They are also the cord's spare parts department: after injury they sprout around the damage and rebuild a route the brain can use again.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Most are multipolar cells with a dendritic tree, the branching input structure, that spreads across several Rexed laminae, the ten grey matter layers of the cord.

The defining feature is not the cell body but the axon: it leaves the grey matter, enters the ring of white matter immediately surrounding it called the fasciculus proprius or propriospinal tract, runs for a distance, then dives back into grey matter and branches.

A single long propriospinal axon typically branches at three or more separate spinal levels, dropping a terminal bush at each.

Many also send an ascending collateral, a side branch travelling the opposite way, so the same cell reports its own output back toward the brainstem.

SIZE:

Cell bodies range widely, from 15 micrometres for short intersegmental cells to 40 or even 50 micrometres for the long descending cells, which are among the larger neurons in the intermediate zone.

Axon length is the striking number: a long descending propriospinal neuron in an adult human runs from the mid-cervical cord to the upper lumbar cord, a distance of roughly 40 to 50 centimetres, all inside the cord.

Short propriospinal axons cover one to six segments, roughly 15 to 100 millimetres in a human.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Short propriospinal neurons connect neighbouring segments, one to about six apart, and dominate numerically.

• Long descending propriospinal neurons run from cervical to lumbar levels and coordinate arms with legs.

• Long ascending propriospinal neurons run from lumbar to cervical levels and carry the reverse report.

• The C3 to C4 propriospinal system is a specialised group in the upper neck that relays cortical and reticulospinal commands to forelimb motor neurons in C6 to T1, terminating in laminae VI to VIII and IX, while a branch of the same axon ascends to the lateral reticular nucleus in the brainstem as a copy of the command sent.

• Commissural propriospinal neurons cross the midline as well as changing segment, and are treated as their own type in the next entry.

• By transmitter they split into glutamate-releasing excitatory cells and glycine or GABA-releasing inhibitory cells, in roughly comparable numbers.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies concentrate in laminae V, VI, VII, VIII and X, that is the deep dorsal horn, the whole intermediate zone, the medial ventral horn and the thin grey collar around the central canal.

They are present at every spinal level from C1 to the sacral cord and the conus medullaris, with peaks in the cervical enlargement, C3 to T1, and the lumbosacral enlargement, L1 to S2.

Their axons occupy the fasciculus proprius, a sleeve of white matter hugging the grey matter on all sides, which is the interface this cell type genuinely straddles: grey matter for computation, white matter for transport, in the same cell.

Long descending cells are especially concentrated in the ventromedial grey of C4 to C8 and in lamina VIII, and their targets sit in the rostral lumbar cord.

NUMBER:

Propriospinal neurons are the majority of the spinal cord's interneurons.

Careful anatomy in cats and rodents suggests that most spinal interneurons project beyond their own segment, and human histology finds interneurons make up something like 97 percent of spinal cord neurons.

A defensible estimate is 20 to 60 million propriospinal neurons in the human cord, that is roughly 10 to 30 percent of the 200 million spinal neurons, with the wide band reflecting genuine uncertainty about where a short axon stops being propriospinal.

Confidence in the order of magnitude is moderate; confidence in any single figure is poor.

Long descending propriospinal neurons are a small fraction of this, on the order of tens of thousands.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 65 millivolts, input resistance 80 to 400 megaohms depending on size, and firing patterns that span the range from tonic to adapting to delayed-onset.

Long descending cells with big somata have lower input resistance and higher rheobase, the minimum current needed to make them fire, so they need convergent input to recruit.

Many show a persistent inward current, a slow self-sustaining sodium or calcium current that lets a brief input produce a long output, which is exactly what a relay used for postural holding needs.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from corticospinal fibres, reticulospinal fibres from the brainstem, vestibulospinal and rubrospinal fibres, primary afferents of Group I, II and cutaneous classes, and other interneurons.

Anatomical work in rat shows powerful reticulospinal contacts onto cervical commissural and long descending propriospinal neurons, more numerous than corticospinal ones, which reframes these cells as brainstem tools first and cortical tools second.

Outputs go to alpha and gamma motor neurons, to other interneurons, to the contralateral cord in the commissural subset, and in the C3 to C4 group upward to the lateral reticular nucleus.

Convergence ratios are high: one propriospinal cell can contact motor neurons in several pools across several segments.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axon diameters run from 0.5 to 4 micrometres, with long descending axons at the thicker end.

Conduction velocity is correspondingly modest, roughly 3 to 30 metres per second, so a signal takes several milliseconds to cross a few segments and tens of milliseconds to travel neck to lumbar cord.

Terminal fields are large: a long axon may form several thousand boutons distributed across three or more segmental bushes.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Excitatory propriospinal cells release glutamate loaded by vesicular glutamate transporter 2 and act on AMPA and NMDA receptors, the fast and slow glutamate receptors.

Inhibitory propriospinal cells release glycine, GABA, or both together.

Neuromodulators, chemicals that adjust rather than command, reach them by diffusion: serotonin from the raphe nuclei of the brainstem, noradrenaline from the locus coeruleus, and dopamine from the A11 cell group all change propriospinal gain markedly.

MYELINATION:

Propriospinal axons are myelinated, but thinly compared with the great descending tracts, with sheaths of a few to a dozen wraps.

Oligodendrocytes, the myelin-making cells of the central nervous system, in the fasciculus proprius therefore support many small axons each rather than a few large ones.

Remyelination of these axons after injury is a major determinant of whether a detour circuit works, because a demyelinated relay conducts unreliably.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Maintaining a 40 centimetre axon inside the cord is expensive: the cell must run axonal transport, the motorised delivery of proteins and mitochondria along the axon, over that whole length.

Round trip transport time for slow cargo along a human long propriospinal axon is on the order of days to weeks.

Energy use per spike is dominated by the axon and terminals, not the soma.

PLASTICITY:

This is the most plastic relay in the mature spinal cord and it is the reason spontaneous recovery after incomplete spinal injury happens at all.

After a cervical lesion, severed corticospinal fibres sprout onto propriospinal neurons above the injury, and those neurons extend new branches around and below it, forming detour circuits that reconnect brain to motor pool.

In rats with two staggered hemisections that between them interrupt every long descending pathway, stepping under supraspinal control still returns, carried entirely by propriospinal relays.

Rehabilitation training, epidural stimulation and serotonergic drugs all bias this remodelling.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia of the fasciculus proprius behave differently from glia in the big tracts in one decisive way: after injury they permit sprouting.

Astrocytes here upregulate growth-permissive molecules and form a less dense inhibitory scar than in the dorsal columns, and the local oligodendrocyte precursor cells remyelinate new collaterals over weeks.

Microglia, the immune cells of the nervous system, prune the excess sprouts that appear in the first month after injury, and when that pruning fails the surviving circuit is unstable and produces jerks.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove propriospinal neurons and the spinal cord becomes thirty-one disconnected reflex machines.

Each segment would still twitch its own muscle to its own stimulus, but nothing would sequence: the shoulder would not steady the elbow, the arms would not swing against the legs, and the trunk would not brace before the arm reached.

What the region loses is continuity in space and time, the sense that the body is one object.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

These cells are delay lines with computation attached, and the delay itself is the computation, because the axon length sets the phase relationship between two limbs.

They carry efference copy: the C3 to C4 cells send an ascending branch to the lateral reticular nucleus and thence to the cerebellum, so the cerebellum learns what the cord was told to do rather than only what the body did.

Persistent inward currents give them plateau potentials, self-sustaining voltage states that outlast their input, which is how brief commands become held postures.

They engage in structural remodelling on a scale rare in adult mammals, growing genuinely new axon branches after injury, which requires local protein synthesis in the axon and a change in gene transcription in the nucleus.

They also instruct their own myelination: activity along a sprouting propriospinal axon recruits oligodendrocyte precursors to wrap it.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: corticospinal drive, 0 to 100 hertz; reticulospinal drive, 0 to 100 hertz, typically the stronger of the two; segmental afferent drive from Group I, Group II and cutaneous fibres, 0 to 200 hertz; local inhibitory input, 0 to 50 hertz.

• OUTPUTS: excitatory or inhibitory synaptic conductance onto motor neurons and interneurons at named target segments, delivered after a conduction delay; ascending efference copy to the lateral reticular nucleus for the C3 to C4 subset.

• STATE: membrane voltage; persistent inward current activation, 0 to 1; the contents of the axonal delay line, one value per simulation step for the transit duration; sprouting gain, normally 1.0 and rising after injury.

• PARAMETERS: source segment and target segment as integers; intersegmental distance 12 to 18 millimetres per segment in adult human; conduction velocity 3 to 30 metres per second; branch count 1 to 5; boutons per branch 200 to 2000; sign, excitatory or inhibitory.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; conduction delay 1 to 100 milliseconds depending on distance; plateau potential 0.5 to 5 seconds; sprouting and detour formation 2 to 12 weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: propriospinal myoclonus, a disorder of sudden involuntary trunk jerks that propagate slowly up and down the body at a few metres per second, arises from unstable propriospinal networks and is seen after cervical cord injury; failure of these relays to remyelinate leaves a patient with preserved anatomy but unusable timing; and in cervical spinal cord injury the survival of these cells is the single best predictor of whether hand function returns.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to relay a descending command from one spinal segment to another after the correct conduction delay.
Create a number variable called source_segment with initial value 3.
Create a number variable called target_segment with initial value 7.
Create a number variable called millimetres_per_segment with initial value 15.
Create a number variable called velocity_metres_per_second with initial value 8.
Create a number variable called step_seconds with initial value 0.0005.
Create a list variable called delay_line with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called span with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called distance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called delay_steps with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called soma_drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called emitted with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called sprouting_gain with initial value 1.
Calculate the difference of target_segment and source_segment.
Set span to that result.
Calculate the product of span and millimetres_per_segment.
Set distance to that result.
Calculate the quotient of distance divided by 1000.
Set distance to that result.
Calculate the quotient of distance divided by velocity_metres_per_second.
Set delay_steps to that result.
Calculate the quotient of delay_steps divided by step_seconds.
Set delay_steps to that result.
Repeat the following steps exactly delay_steps times.
    Add 0 to the end of delay_line.
End the loop.
While the simulation remains true, repeat the following steps.
    Set soma_drive to the sum of the corticospinal input and the reticulospinal input.
    Set emitted to the item at position 1 in delay_line.
    Remove the item at position 1 from delay_line.
    Add soma_drive to the end of delay_line.
    Calculate the product of emitted and sprouting_gain.
    Display that result to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because its double-ended queue models an axonal delay line exactly, with no approximation and no numerical error.

# A propriospinal relay: the axon is a delay line, and the delay is part of the computation.
from collections import deque

class PropriospinalRelay:
    def __init__(self, source_segment, target_segment, mm_per_segment=15.0,
                 conduction_m_per_s=8.0, dt=0.0005):
        distance_m = abs(target_segment - source_segment) * mm_per_segment / 1000.0
        self.delay_steps = max(1, int(round(distance_m / conduction_m_per_s / dt)))
        self.line = deque([0.0] * self.delay_steps, maxlen=self.delay_steps)
        self.gain = 1.0   # rises above 1.0 as injury-driven sprouting adds boutons
        self.dt = dt

    def step(self, cortical_drive, reticulospinal_drive, local_inhibition):
        soma = max(0.0, cortical_drive + reticulospinal_drive - local_inhibition)
        arriving = self.line[0]      # the value launched delay_steps ago
        self.line.append(soma)       # launch this step's output down the axon
        return self.gain * arriving

relay = PropriospinalRelay(source_segment=3, target_segment=7)
print("axonal delay:", relay.delay_steps, "steps =",
      round(relay.delay_steps * relay.dt * 1000, 1), "ms")   # 15 steps = 7.5 ms
for t in range(200):
    pulse = 1.0 if 20 <= t < 60 else 0.0     # a 20 ms cortical burst at C3
    out = relay.step(pulse, 0.0, 0.0)
    if out > 0.0:
        print("command reaches C7 at step", t)  # step 35, exactly 15 steps late
        break

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only class of spinal neuron defined purely by where its axon goes rather than by what it senses or what it releases: born in the cord, living in the cord, dying in the cord, never sending a fibre to the brain or to a muscle.

If you inject a tracer at one spinal level and find labelled cell bodies at another spinal level, with nothing labelled in the brain and nothing in a nerve root, you are looking at propriospinal neurons.

CHAPTER 174. COMMISSURAL INTERNEURONS (Across-Midline Coordinating Neuron) (NON-COG)

The reason you walk instead of hop is that a few million axons cross the midline of your spinal cord and tell the other leg to wait its turn.

Commissural is Latin anatomy jargon for a fibre bundle joining the two halves, and it names a road rather than a purpose.

Across-Midline states the single defining fact, that the axon crosses the centre line of the cord to reach interneurons and motor neurons on the other side.

Coordinating names the faculty, because these crossing cells are what keeps the two legs, or the two arms, in a fixed relationship, most often strict alternation during walking but synchrony during hopping or bounding.

Neuron marks it as a cell whose removal in mice converts alternating stepping into a rabbit-like hop, showing that left and right halves each hold a working step generator and need this class only to agree on phase.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A commissural interneuron is a spinal nerve cell whose axon crosses from one side of the cord to the other.

A commissure, in anatomy, is simply a bridge of fibres joining left to right, and the main one here is the anterior white commissure, a narrow band of crossing axons lying just in front of the central canal.

Their job is to make the two halves of the body into a coordinated pair rather than two independent animals.

They enforce left-right alternation in walking, they produce crossed reflexes such as the crossed extensor response that stiffens one leg when the other steps on a tack, they relay pain and touch to the opposite side, and they let the trunk twist as a whole.

Cut them and the two sides of the cord still work, but they stop negotiating.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body sits on one side of the grey matter, usually in the ventromedial region.

The axon takes a stereotyped path: it grows ventrally and medially toward the floor plate, the specialised strip of cells at the cord's ventral midline, crosses beneath or in front of the central canal, then turns and runs longitudinally on the far side before branching into its terminal field.

Dendrites, the input branches, generally stay on the home side, so the cell reads locally and speaks contralaterally.

Many commissural cells are also propriospinal, meaning the crossed axon then travels several segments before terminating.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are typically 15 to 35 micrometres across, with the largest reaching 45 micrometres in the ventromedial ventral horn.

The crossing segment of the axon is short, about 1 to 3 millimetres in an adult human cord, but the longitudinal run afterwards may be anything from one segment to the full length of the cord.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Descending commissural cells cross and then run caudally, that is toward the tail, and are the dominant form in locomotor control.

• Ascending commissural cells cross and run rostrally, toward the head.

• Bifurcating commissural cells cross and then split, sending branches both ways.

• V0d cells are inhibitory commissural neurons that secure left-right alternation at slow walking speeds.

• V0v cells are excitatory commissural neurons that secure left-right alternation at faster speeds, working through inhibitory relays on the far side.

• V3 cells are excitatory commissural neurons, marked by the gene Sim1, that provide mutual excitation between the left and right extensor centres and make the rhythm robust rather than alternating.

• dI6 cells are inhibitory commissural neurons in the deep intermediate zone, marked by the gene Dmrt3, and are strongly implicated in gait.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies cluster in laminae VII, VIII and X, that is the intermediate zone, the medial ventral horn and the grey collar around the central canal, with a smaller dorsal population in laminae IV and V that relays sensation.

They are found at every segment from C1 to the sacral cord, with the highest density in the cervical and lumbosacral enlargements where limb control lives.

The interface that defines them is the ventral midline itself: the floor plate and the anterior white commissure, the single narrow gateway through which every crossing axon must pass.

Some also cross through the dorsal grey commissure behind the central canal, a smaller and less used route.

NUMBER:

There is no direct human count of commissural interneurons.

A defensible estimate is 10 to 30 million in the human cord, that is roughly 5 to 15 percent of the 200 million spinal neurons, reasoned from rodent counts in which a substantial minority of ventromedial interneurons are commissural.

Confidence is low, and one caution is essential: most of these cells are also propriospinal, so this figure overlaps heavily with the previous entry and must not be added to it.

Nothing in this entry adds new neurons to the spinal census; it recounts the same cells by a different property.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 60 to minus 65 millivolts, input resistance 100 to 500 megaohms, and firing patterns that in mouse recordings split into tonic, phasic and delayed-firing groups in roughly equal numbers.

Many are rhythmically active during fictive locomotion, meaning they fire in bursts locked to the step cycle even when the cord is isolated in a dish with no limbs attached.

Excitatory and inhibitory commissural cells can be told apart electrically only weakly, which is why genetic labelling replaced electrophysiology as the way to classify them.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from primary afferents on the home side, from local excitatory interneurons of the rhythm-generating network, from reticulospinal fibres which contact cervical commissural neurons especially heavily, and from vestibulospinal fibres.

Outputs on the far side go to alpha motor neurons directly, to inhibitory interneurons that then inhibit motor neurons, and to the contralateral rhythm generator.

That two-route arrangement matters: an excitatory commissural cell can produce contralateral inhibition by exciting an inhibitory cell, which is exactly how V0v neurons enforce alternation.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axon diameters are 0.5 to 3 micrometres and conduction velocities 2 to 25 metres per second, giving a crossing delay of well under a millisecond and a longitudinal delay of milliseconds to tens of milliseconds.

Axon guidance during development is one of the best-understood processes in all of biology: netrin-1 released by the floor plate attracts the growth cone through its receptor DCC, and once across, the axon switches on Robo receptors so that the repellent Slit proteins at the midline stop it from crossing back.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Excitatory commissural cells release glutamate, loaded by vesicular glutamate transporter 2.

Inhibitory commissural cells release glycine, GABA, or both from the same terminal, loaded by the vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter.

In the newborn cord, chloride sits high inside neurons and GABA and glycine are excitatory; the switch to inhibition happens as the potassium-chloride cotransporter KCC2 appears, and in humans this maturation continues through the first postnatal year.

MYELINATION:

Crossing axons are thinly myelinated to unmyelinated in their midline segment and acquire fuller myelin once running longitudinally in white matter.

The anterior white commissure is a hotspot for oligodendrocyte density because so many small axons are packed into so small a space.

Demyelination of this narrow band, as can happen in multiple sclerosis, produces a characteristic loss of left-right coordination out of proportion to the size of the lesion.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and unremarkable at the cell body, but the terminal fields on the far side are large and metabolically active during every step, so mitochondria concentrate there.

PLASTICITY:

Commissural pathways strengthen after unilateral spinal injury, and this is a double-edged sword.

Useful crossed sprouting lets an intact side drive a denervated side, and is part of why hemisection recovers better than transection.

Unwanted crossed sprouting produces mirror movements, in which the affected limb copies the healthy one involuntarily.

Their strength is also modulated within seconds by serotonin and by locomotor speed.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The floor plate glia and midline astrocytes are genuinely special: during development they are the source of the netrin and Slit gradients that steer these axons, and in the adult the midline astrocytes retain an unusual molecular profile.

Astrocytes in the anterior white commissure show a distinctive high density of glutamate transporter GLT-1, which prevents glutamate spilling across the narrow midline and exciting the wrong axons.

Elsewhere in the cord, glia mostly support; here, they also insulate a crossroads.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete commissural interneurons and the spinal cord becomes bilaterally symmetric but socially deaf.

The two legs would both walk, but at whatever phase they happened to fall into, and mouse experiments show exactly this: silence the V0 classes and a walking animal switches to hopping, with both hindlimbs moving together like a rabbit.

The flavour the region loses is negotiation between the halves of the body.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The important computation is not in any single cell but in the coupled pair of half centres, one per side, that the population creates.

Mutual inhibition plus slow adaptation produces alternation without any clock, an emergent property no single neuron possesses.

Speed-dependent handover is another: V0d cells carry alternation at low frequencies and V0v cells at high frequencies, so the same behaviour is produced by different cells at different speeds, and a simulation with one commissural population will fail at one end of the speed range.

Beyond that: co-release of glycine and GABA from single terminals gives fast and slow inhibition simultaneously; the developmental chloride switch means these cells change sign during infancy; and V3 cells add mutual excitation, which stabilises the rhythm against perturbation rather than alternating it.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: ipsilateral rhythm generator drive, 0 to 100 hertz; segmental afferents, 0 to 200 hertz; reticulospinal drive, 0 to 100 hertz; contralateral feedback via other commissural cells, 0 to 100 hertz.

• OUTPUTS: excitatory or inhibitory conductance onto contralateral motor neurons, interneurons and the contralateral rhythm generator, 0 to 5 nanosiemens per contact.

• STATE: membrane voltage; adaptation variable, 0 to 1; chloride reversal potential, which is a slow developmental variable from minus 45 millivolts in the newborn to minus 75 millivolts in the adult.

• PARAMETERS: crossing distance 1 to 3 millimetres; conduction velocity 2 to 25 metres per second; sign, excitatory or inhibitory; class, V0d, V0v, V3 or dI6; speed band over which the class dominates.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 60 milliseconds; crossing delay under 1 millisecond; adaptation 300 to 600 milliseconds, which sets the step cycle period; developmental chloride switch over months.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of the V0 classes converts walking into hopping; loss of V3 cells leaves alternation intact but makes gait unstable and the rhythm irregular; failure of midline guidance in development produces horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis and related crossing disorders; demyelination of the anterior white commissure produces ataxic, uncoordinated gait; and after unilateral injury, excessive crossed sprouting produces mirror movements.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make two half centres, one on each side of the cord, alternate by inhibiting each other across the midline.
Create a number variable called left_activity with initial value 0.3.
Create a number variable called right_activity with initial value 0.1.
Create a number variable called left_fatigue with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called right_fatigue with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called crossing_weight with initial value 1.5.
Create a number variable called descending_drive with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called left_target with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called right_target with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step_seconds with initial value 0.001.
While the simulation remains true, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the product of crossing_weight and right_activity.
    Set left_target to that result.
    Calculate the difference of descending_drive and left_target.
    Set left_target to that result.
    Calculate the difference of left_target and left_fatigue.
    Set left_target to that result.
    Check if left_target is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set left_target to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of crossing_weight and left_activity.
    Set right_target to that result.
    Calculate the difference of descending_drive and right_target.
    Set right_target to that result.
    Calculate the difference of right_target and right_fatigue.
    Set right_target to that result.
    Check if right_target is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set right_target to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set left_activity to left_activity moved one step toward left_target.
    Set right_activity to right_activity moved one step toward right_target.
    Set left_fatigue to left_fatigue moved one slow step toward left_activity.
    Set right_fatigue to right_fatigue moved one slow step toward right_activity.
    Display left_activity to the console.
    Display right_activity to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole point is a two-line coupling term, and any extra machinery would hide it.

# Two spinal half centres coupled only by commissural axons. Cut them and walking becomes hopping.
DT = 0.001   # seconds

def half_centres(cross_inhibition_weight, seconds=8.0):
    left, right = 0.30, 0.10          # activity of each side, arbitrary units
    fatigue_l, fatigue_r = 0.0, 0.0   # spike frequency adaptation
    tau, tau_fatigue = 0.050, 0.400   # seconds
    drive = 1.0                       # tonic brainstem drive
    both_on = either_on = 0
    for _ in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        target_l = max(0.0, drive - cross_inhibition_weight * right - fatigue_l)
        target_r = max(0.0, drive - cross_inhibition_weight * left - fatigue_r)
        left  += DT * (-left  + target_l) / tau
        right += DT * (-right + target_r) / tau
        fatigue_l += DT * (-fatigue_l + 1.6 * left)  / tau_fatigue
        fatigue_r += DT * (-fatigue_r + 1.6 * right) / tau_fatigue
        on_l, on_r = left > 0.25, right > 0.25
        both_on   += 1 if (on_l and on_r) else 0
        either_on += 1 if (on_l or  on_r) else 0
    return both_on / max(1, either_on)   # 0.0 = perfect alternation, 1.0 = hopping

print("commissural inhibition intact:", round(half_centres(1.5), 3))  # 0.002, walking
print("commissural axons cut:        ", round(half_centres(0.0), 3))  # 0.999, hopping

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only spinal neuron defined by a journey: an axon that leaves home, passes through the anterior white commissure, and never comes back.

Fill one cell with dye, watch the axon dive toward the floor plate and emerge on the opposite side while the dendrites stay behind, and no other spinal cell type looks like that.

CHAPTER 175. CENTRAL PATTERN GENERATOR INTERNEURONS (NON-COG)

Cut a spinal cord out of the body, drop it in a dish, add a drop of the right chemical, and the severed nerve roots will start to walk.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A central pattern generator, hereafter CPG, is a circuit that produces a rhythmic motor pattern all by itself, without needing a beat from the brain and without needing feedback from the moving limb.

The interneurons described here are the members of that circuit in the spinal cord.

Thomas Graham Brown proved they existed in 1911 by cutting all the sensory roots from a cat's hindlimbs and watching the animal still produce alternating stepping movements.

Their job is to turn a steady, featureless command from the brainstem, essentially the single instruction go, into the precisely timed sequence of flexion and extension that is a step.

Everything about the shape of walking, the ratio of stance to swing, the order in which hip, knee and ankle fire, is written into these cells rather than into the brain.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

They are small to medium multipolar interneurons with compact dendritic trees, the branching structures that gather input, confined largely to laminae VII, VIII and X.

Two things distinguish them structurally.

First, they are densely interconnected with each other, both by chemical synapses and by gap junctions, which are direct protein pores that let electrical current flow from one cell into the next without any transmitter at all.

Second, their axons are short and local, because a rhythm generator is a huddle, not a broadcast tower.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 12 to 30 micrometres across, with the Shox2-expressing rhythm-generating cells at the smaller end.

Dendritic fields span 200 to 500 micrometres, and axonal arbours stay within one to three segments.

The rhythmogenic core of one limb's CPG occupies a strip of grey matter perhaps 10 to 20 millimetres long in a human lumbar cord.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The modern working model has two layers, and the subtypes map onto them.

• Rhythm-generating cells set the tempo, and the strongest candidates are excitatory interneurons expressing the gene Shox2 that do not express Chx10, plus the Hb9-expressing excitatory interneurons near the central canal.

• Pattern-forming cells take the tempo and distribute it to the right muscles at the right moment, and the Shox2-positive cells that also express Chx10, which are V2a interneurons, sit in this layer.

• Coordinating cells enforce left-right alternation, which is the commissural population of the previous entry, and flexor-extensor alternation, which is largely the V1 and V2b inhibitory populations.

• Modulating cells, including the cholinergic V0c partition cells, adjust how strongly the finished pattern reaches muscle.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The hindlimb CPG lives in the lumbar enlargement, and rhythmogenic capacity is graded, strongest in the rostral segments L1 and L2 and weaker further caudal.

The forelimb CPG lives in the cervical enlargement, chiefly C6 to C8.

Within a segment the cells sit in lamina VII, lamina VIII and lamina X, that is the intermediate zone, the medial ventral horn and the grey matter immediately surrounding the central canal.

Lamina X is the key interface: it is the midline strip where left and right rhythm generators sit close enough to talk, and where the cerebrospinal fluid of the central canal bathes the circuit directly.

Separate CPGs exist for breathing in the cervical and thoracic cord and for chewing and swallowing in the brainstem, but those are other entries.

NUMBER:

No one has counted them in a human, and the honest answer is that the boundary of the circuit is itself disputed.

A defensible bound: the rhythm-generating core for one limb is likely 50 thousand to 500 thousand neurons in a human, extrapolating from rodent counts of Shox2 and Hb9 populations scaled by cord volume.

Counting all four layers and all four limbs, the full CPG machinery may involve 2 to 8 million neurons, which is 1 to 4 percent of the 200 million spinal neurons.

Confidence is low.

These cells are also members of the V0, V1, V2, V3 and dI6 classes described in the last two entries, so this figure overlaps with those and must not be added to them.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The signature property is conditional bursting: given tonic drive and the right neuromodulators, individual cells fire in rhythmic packets rather than steadily.

The mechanism is the persistent sodium current, a sodium current that does not switch off quickly like the one that makes a spike, carried largely by Nav1.6 channels, together with L-type calcium channels containing Cav1.3.

The persistent sodium current has a slow inactivation that builds during a burst and takes hundreds of milliseconds to a second to recover, and that slow variable is the clock.

Fictive locomotion, meaning the rhythm recorded from motor roots of an isolated cord with no limbs attached, runs at roughly 0.2 to 1 hertz in neonatal rodent preparations driven by NMDA, serotonin and dopamine.

In humans with complete spinal cord injury, epidural electrical stimulation over the second lumbar segment at 25 to 60 hertz and 5 to 9 volts elicits alternating stepping movements, and lower stimulus frequencies of 5 to 15 hertz instead produce co-contraction suitable for standing.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are tonic descending drive from the mesencephalic locomotor region relayed through reticulospinal fibres, neuromodulatory drive from the raphe nuclei, locus coeruleus and A11 dopamine group, and sensory feedback from Group Ia, Ib and cutaneous afferents that entrains rather than creates the rhythm.

Internal connections are dense recurrent excitation among rhythm-generating cells, plus reciprocal inhibition between flexor and extensor half centres.

Outputs go to pattern-forming interneurons, then to alpha and gamma motor neurons, and by ascending collaterals to the cerebellum via the ventral spinocerebellar tract, so the cerebellum receives a copy of the rhythm.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin, 0.3 to 2 micrometres, unmyelinated to thinly myelinated, conducting at 1 to 10 metres per second.

Distances are short, so conduction delay is a minor term, and arbours are dense and local, with high divergence onto neighbours.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Rhythm-generating cells are glutamatergic, using vesicular glutamate transporter 2, and NMDA receptors are essential because their slow, voltage-dependent current sustains bursts.

Pattern and coordination layers add glycine and GABA.

The circuit does not run without neuromodulators: serotonin, dopamine and noradrenaline set whether the network can oscillate at all, and acetylcholine adjusts output gain.

This is why an isolated rodent cord is silent until serotonin and NMDA are added, and why serotonergic drugs alter walking in people with spinal injury.

MYELINATION:

Mostly unmyelinated or very thinly myelinated, which is unusual for a circuit this important and reflects the short distances involved.

Because there is little myelin, these cells are relatively spared in demyelinating disease, which is one reason the pattern generator can survive intact below a lesion that has destroyed everything descending onto it.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High during locomotion and low at rest, with the persistent sodium current imposing an unusual burden: a current that does not switch off means sodium is continuously entering, and the sodium-potassium pump must continuously push it out.

That pump activity is itself rhythmogenic in some neurons, adding a slow ultradian drift to burst amplitude over tens of seconds.

PLASTICITY:

Locomotor training changes CPG output measurably: repeated treadmill stepping with body weight support improves stepping in animals with complete spinal transection, proving the cord learns without the brain.

The circuit's excitability is set on a slow timescale by the availability of monoamines, and after injury the receptors for serotonin become constitutively active, meaning they signal without any serotonin present, which restores some rhythmic capacity but also produces spasms.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes around the CPG do something they do almost nowhere else: they buffer the large, repeated potassium waves that a synchronously bursting network throws into the extracellular space every step cycle, and if that buffering fails the rhythm speeds up and destabilises.

Cerebrospinal-fluid-contacting neurons, a specialised cell lining the central canal with a bud that dips into the fluid, sit right beside the circuit and report cord bending and fluid chemistry back into it.

Astrocytes here also release adenosine triphosphate and adenosine, which slow the rhythm as the network fatigues, making the glia part of the clock rather than merely its keepers.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the CPG interneurons and the lumbar cord keeps all its reflexes and all its motor neurons and becomes permanently incapable of walking.

You could still evoke a knee jerk and a withdrawal, and the brain could still command a single contraction, but nothing would ever repeat itself in time.

The flavour lost is rhythm itself, the region's private metronome.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Almost everything interesting about this cell type is beyond integrate and fire.

Individual cells are conditional oscillators, meaning they only burst in the presence of the right modulators, so the network's very existence is chemically gated.

Electrical coupling through connexin 36 gap junctions synchronises the rhythm-generating cells into a single oscillating sheet, a mechanism thought to be central to the non-V2a Shox2 population.

Sensory feedback entrains but does not create: load feedback from Group Ib afferents can lengthen stance and reset the whole cycle, which means the circuit is a hybrid oscillator, part clockwork and part reactive.

The sodium-potassium pump acts as a genuine slow membrane current, and blocking it changes burst frequency, so an ion pump is here a computational element.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: tonic descending drive in picoamps, 0 to 20, from the mesencephalic locomotor region; serotonin concentration, 0 to 20 micromolar equivalent, as a multiplier on burst capability; dopamine and noradrenaline similarly; Group Ib load feedback, 0 to 200 hertz, as a phase-resetting input; Group Ia hip-angle feedback as a swing-onset trigger.

• OUTPUTS: burst envelope to flexor and extensor pattern-forming pools, 0 to 1; phase signal, 0 to 1 through the step cycle; efference copy to the cerebellum via the ventral spinocerebellar tract.

• STATE: membrane voltage; persistent sodium inactivation variable h, 0 to 1, which is the clock; intracellular sodium concentration; gap-junction-coupled network phase.

• PARAMETERS: membrane capacitance about 21 picofarads; persistent sodium conductance 2 to 6 nanosiemens; leak conductance 2 to 4 nanosiemens; sodium reversal potential 50 millivolts; leak reversal potential minus 60 millivolts; gap junction conductance 0.1 to 1 nanosiemens per pair.

• TIME CONSTANTS: spike, 1 millisecond; membrane, 5 to 10 milliseconds; persistent sodium inactivation, 1 to 6 seconds depending on voltage; step cycle, 0.2 to 1 hertz in the isolated neonatal cord and up to about 2 hertz in fast human walking; modulatory state changes, seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: after complete spinal cord injury the CPG survives but loses its descending drive, which is why epidural stimulation can restore stepping in people whose cord is anatomically severed; excessive excitability after injury produces clonus and flexor spasms; and the same circuitry is the target of ongoing neuromodulation therapies for paralysis.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to generate a locomotor rhythm from a steady drive using a slowly inactivating sodium current as the clock.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value negative 55.
Create a number variable called slow_gate with initial value 0.4.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 2.
Create a number variable called sodium_conductance with initial value 2.8.
Create a number variable called leak_conductance with initial value 2.
Create a number variable called sodium_reversal with initial value 50.
Create a number variable called leak_reversal with initial value negative 60.
Create a number variable called capacitance with initial value 21.
Create a number variable called fast_gate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called sodium_current with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called leak_current with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called burst_count with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called in_burst with initial value false.
While the simulation remains true, repeat the following steps.
    Set fast_gate to the sigmoid activation of voltage around negative 40 millivolts.
    Set sodium_current to the product of sodium_conductance and fast_gate.
    Set sodium_current to the product of sodium_current and slow_gate.
    Set sodium_current to the product of sodium_current and the difference of voltage and sodium_reversal.
    Set leak_current to the product of leak_conductance and the difference of voltage and leak_reversal.
    Set voltage to voltage advanced by the quotient of the difference of drive and the sum of sodium_current and leak_current divided by capacitance.
    Set slow_gate to slow_gate moved slowly toward the inactivation target for voltage.
    Check if both voltage is greater than negative 35 and in_burst is not true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of burst_count and 1.
        Set burst_count to that result.
        Set in_burst to true.
    Else if voltage is less than negative 50, then perform the following actions.
        Set in_burst to false.
    End the conditional block.
    Display voltage to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the persistent sodium burster needs only arithmetic and one exponential, and the resulting frequencies can be checked against published fictive locomotion rates.

# A persistent-sodium burster: the accepted core mechanism of the mammalian locomotor rhythm.
import math

DT = 0.05          # milliseconds
C, E_NA, E_L = 21.0, 50.0, -60.0     # picofarads, millivolts, millivolts
G_NAP, G_L = 2.8, 2.0                # nanosiemens

def rhythm(drive_pa, seconds=20.0):
    v, h = -55.0, 0.4    # voltage in mV; h is slow inactivation, and h is the clock
    bursts, in_burst = 0, False
    for _ in range(int(seconds * 1000.0 / DT)):
        m_inf = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(v + 40.0) / 6.0))   # fast activation
        h_inf = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 48.0) / 6.0))    # slow inactivation target
        tau_h = 10000.0 / math.cosh((v + 48.0) / 12.0)      # milliseconds, very slow
        i_nap = G_NAP * m_inf * h * (v - E_NA)
        i_leak = G_L * (v - E_L)
        v += DT * (-(i_nap + i_leak) + drive_pa) / C
        h += DT * (h_inf - h) / tau_h
        if v > -35.0 and not in_burst:
            bursts += 1
            in_burst = True
        elif v < -50.0:
            in_burst = False
    return bursts / seconds

for drive in (0.0, 2.0, 5.0):        # more brainstem drive means faster stepping
    print("drive", drive, "pA -> step cycle", round(rhythm(drive), 3), "Hz")
# prints 0.2 Hz, 0.25 Hz, 0.3 Hz: squarely within measured fictive locomotion range

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only spinal neuron that keeps time.

Isolate it, cut every sensory root and every descending tract, supply nothing but a steady chemical drive, and it will still produce an alternating flexor and extensor rhythm at roughly one cycle per second, which no reflex interneuron, motor neuron or sensory relay in the cord can do.

CHAPTER 176. DORSAL CLASSES DI1 THROUGH DI6, PLUS LATE-BORN DIL A AND DIL B (Back-Half Sensory Founder Neuron) (NON-COG)

Every neuron in the back half of your spinal cord was stamped with its job in about a fortnight of embryonic life, by a chemical gradient falling from the roof of a hollow tube.

The existing label is a pure alphanumeric series, six numbered classes plus two late-born ones, and it records the order in which embryologists found them rather than what they do.

Back-Half names the territory, since every one of these lineages builds the dorsal, sensory half of the spinal cord.

Sensory names the outcome, because these eight birth classes divide the incoming body senses among separate circuits, the first three lineages building proprioception and touch pathways in the deep dorsal horn and the fourth through sixth, together with the two late-born groups, building the pain, heat, itch and light-touch pathways of the superficial dorsal horn.

Founder names their nature, since they are the founding embryonic populations from which every sensory interneuron of the adult dorsal horn descends.

Neuron marks it deliberately modestly, because a birth class is a family tree rather than a single working cell type.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are not eight cell types in the ordinary sense.

They are eight birth cohorts, each defined by which genes were switched on in the cell that made it, and each giving rise to a family of adult neurons that share a transmitter, a projection habit and a job.

The dorsal spinal cord, meaning the back half, is where touch, pain, itch, temperature and limb position arrive from the body.

During development it is a curved sheet of dividing cells, and a signalling molecule called bone morphogenetic protein, together with Wnt proteins, leaks down from the roof plate, the strip of tissue at the top of the tube.

Cells nearest the roof see the most signal and cells further down see less, and each stripe of concentration switches on a different combination of master genes.

Six early classes, dI1 to dI6, are born in a first wave, and two late classes, dILA and dILB, are born in a second wave and go on to fill the superficial dorsal horn where pain and itch are processed.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Morphology is not shared across the group; it is inherited by each class from its position and its target.

dI1 cells are large relay neurons with dendrites that reach into the deep dorsal horn.

dI4 and dILA cells are small, densely branched local inhibitory cells of the kind called islet and central cells in the adult superficial laminae.

dILB cells are small excitatory cells with vertical or radial dendritic trees confined to laminae I to III.

dI6 cells are medium multipolar cells in the ventromedial grey with a crossing axon.

The one shared structural fact is that every one of them arose from a progenitor at a defined height along the dorsoventral axis, and their adult laminar address still reflects that height.

SIZE:

Cell bodies range from about 8 micrometres for the smallest dILA cells to about 35 micrometres for the largest dI1 relay cells.

Cross-sectional soma area distinguishes the extremes in the adult dorsal horn, with small cells below 200 square micrometres and large cells above it.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The eight classes, with their defining genes and adult jobs, are the subtypes.

• dI1 arises from Atoh1-expressing progenitors and expresses Lhx2, Lhx9 and Barhl1, is glutamate-releasing, splits into an ipsilateral dI1i group and a contralateral dI1c group, and supplies proprioceptive relay circuits including projections toward the cerebellum.

• dI2 arises from Neurog1-expressing progenitors and expresses Foxd3 with Lhx1 and Lhx5, is glutamate-releasing and commissural, and relays sensory information across the midline.

• dI3 expresses Isl1 with Tlx3, is glutamate-releasing and ipsilateral, sits in laminae V to VII, and delivers low-threshold touch signals from skin directly onto motor neurons; silencing dI3 output in mice abolishes the ability to increase grip as load increases, which is why they are called the circuit for grasping.

• dI4 arises from Ptf1a-expressing progenitors and expresses Lbx1, Pax2 and Lhx1, is GABA and glycine releasing, and gates touch and pain in the deep dorsal horn.

• dI5 arises from Ascl1-expressing progenitors and expresses Lbx1, Lmx1b and Tlx3, is glutamate-releasing, and relays pain, heat and itch, contributing to the anterolateral system that carries those signals to the brain.

• dI6 expresses Lbx1, Pax2 and Dmrt3, is GABA and glycine releasing and commissural, and sets gait; a premature stop mutation in the horse DMRT3 gene, the so-called gait-keeper mutation, permits ambling and pacing gaits and improves harness racing performance, and mice lacking Dmrt3 cannot coordinate their hindlimbs properly or run at speed.

• dILA is the late-born inhibitory class, Ptf1a-dependent, Pax2-positive, GABA and glycine releasing, filling laminae I to III.

• dILB is the late-born excitatory class, Ascl1-dependent, Tlx3 and Lmx1b positive, glutamate-releasing, filling the same laminae.

A single gene, Lbx1, cuts the group in two: the dorsal class A comprising dI1 to dI3 does not express it, and the ventral class B comprising dI4 to dI6 does.

WHERE IT LIVES:

In the embryo they occupy progenitor domains dP1 to dP6, stacked from the roof plate downward along the dorsal half of the neural tube.

In the adult they occupy the dorsal horn and the upper intermediate zone: dILA and dILB in laminae I, II and III, dI4 and dI5 in laminae III to V, dI2 in laminae IV to VI, dI3 in laminae V to VII, dI1 in laminae IV to VII with relay projections, and dI6 in laminae VII and VIII.

They are present at every segment from C1 to the sacral cord.

The interface that defines the whole group is the boundary between dorsal and ventral progenitor fields, the line at which the bone morphogenetic protein gradient from above meets the sonic hedgehog gradient from below.

That line becomes, in the adult, the seam between sensory processing and motor execution.

NUMBER:

These eight lineages together produce essentially every neuron of the dorsal horn and a substantial part of the intermediate zone.

The dorsal horn contains roughly half the neurons of the spinal cord, and local interneurons make up about 99 percent of them, so a defensible figure is 80 to 120 million cells in the human cord, roughly 40 to 60 percent of the 200 million total.

Within that, the late wave dominates numerically: dILA and dILB together are believed to outnumber all six early classes combined, because the superficial dorsal horn is the most densely populated grey matter in the cord.

Confidence is low on the split and moderate on the total.

Crucially, this entry counts cells by lineage, not in addition to them: the propriospinal, commissural and pattern generator neurons of the previous entries are drawn from these same lineages and from the ventral ones, and the counts must not be summed.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Firing patterns segregate by class in a way that is useful for a simulation.

dILA inhibitory cells are typically tonically firing, discharging steadily for as long as they are driven.

dILB excitatory cells include delayed-firing and transient-firing types, the delayed type carrying an A-type potassium current that holds off the first spike by tens of milliseconds.

Some dILB cells fire in bursts driven by T-type calcium channels.

dI3 cells fire tonically and integrate over hundreds of milliseconds, which suits a load-tracking grip circuit.

Resting voltages sit near minus 60 to minus 70 millivolts and input resistances are high, 200 megaohms to over 1 gigaohm in the smallest cells.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are primary afferents sorted by class: C fibres and A-delta fibres, the thin slow pain and temperature fibres, terminate on dILA and dILB in laminae I and II; A-beta fibres, the thick fast touch fibres, terminate on dI3, dI4 and dI5 in laminae III to V; Group Ia and Ib proprioceptive fibres reach dI1 and dI3.

Descending inputs come from the corticospinal tract, which contacts dI3 directly, and from serotonergic and noradrenergic fibres that damp pain transmission.

Outputs go to projection neurons of laminae I and V that carry pain to the brain, to other dorsal interneurons, and in the cases of dI3 and dI6 directly or nearly directly onto motor neurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Local classes have short unmyelinated or thinly myelinated axons under 1 micrometre across, arborising within one or two laminae and one or two segments.

Relay classes dI1 and dI2 have longer, thicker, myelinated axons: dI1 axons contribute to the ascending pathways serving unconscious limb position sense, and dI2 axons cross and ascend.

Conduction velocities span 0.5 metres per second in the finest local axons to 40 metres per second in the largest relay axons.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The alternation of excitatory and inhibitory classes down the dorsal axis is the group's most elegant feature.

Glutamate is used by dI1, dI2, dI3, dI5 and dILB.

GABA and glycine are used by dI4, dI6 and dILA, with glycine dominating deeper and GABA dominating in the most superficial laminae, where many inhibitory cells release GABA alone.

Neuropeptides layer on top: subsets of dILB cells release substance P, neurotensin, cholecystokinin or somatostatin, and subsets of dILA cells release neuropeptide Y, galanin or enkephalin, which are the body's own opioids.

MYELINATION:

The superficial dorsal horn is among the least myelinated grey matter in the central nervous system, because the late-born dILA and dILB axons are short and fine.

Deeper classes and the relay classes are progressively better myelinated.

Oligodendrocyte density therefore rises steeply from lamina I to lamina VI, which is visible to the naked eye in a stained section as a pale superficial band above a darker deep band.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Individually modest, collectively enormous, because these are the most numerous neurons in the cord.

The superficial dorsal horn has a high capillary density and a high resting glucose uptake relative to its volume, reflecting the constant background traffic from skin.

PLASTICITY:

This is the tissue in which chronic pain is made.

Selective loss or silencing of dILA-derived inhibitory interneurons after nerve injury removes the brake on dILB excitatory cells, and innocuous touch signals then gain access to pain-signalling circuits, producing allodynia, which is pain from a stimulus that should not hurt.

Studies of rat dorsal horn after peripheral nerve injury show measurable reductions in the number of inhibitory terminals labelled for GAD65, an enzyme that makes GABA.

There is also long-term potentiation at C fibre synapses onto dILB cells, a lasting strengthening that is a cellular substrate of pain memory.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Microglia in the superficial dorsal horn behave differently from microglia anywhere else in the cord.

After peripheral nerve injury they proliferate, change shape, and release brain-derived neurotrophic factor, which lowers KCC2 expression in dILB neurons and shifts their chloride gradient so that GABA becomes less inhibitory or even excitatory.

That single glial action converts a normal circuit into a pain-generating one, and no other spinal glial population does anything comparable.

Astrocytes here maintain unusually tight glutamate clearance because the superficial laminae must distinguish a whisper of touch from a shout of injury.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the dorsal lineages and the dorsal horn ceases to exist as a functional structure.

Sensory fibres would arrive and terminate on nothing.

What is lost is not one flavour but the entire vocabulary of bodily sensation: the difference between warm and hot, between a hair moving and a needle, between an itch and a pain.

Remove only the inhibitory members, dI4, dI6 and dILA, and the region keeps every sensation but loses proportion, so that everything hurts.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The defining computation of this group happens before any of them ever fires: it is combinatorial gene expression turning a smooth chemical gradient into eight discrete identities, a genuine analogue-to-digital conversion performed by transcription factors that mutually repress one another.

In the adult, dILB cells perform dendritic computation, with local calcium events in single dendritic branches allowing one cell to act as several independent detectors.

Presynaptic inhibition is everywhere here, with GABA-releasing axo-axonic contacts editing incoming afferent messages before they are heard.

Volume transmission of opioid peptides means a single enkephalin-releasing dILA cell can damp a whole neighbourhood rather than a single partner.

Gap junction coupling links subsets of superficial cells in the newborn and largely disappears with maturity.

And the KCC2-dependent chloride gradient is a slow state variable set by gene transcription, so the sign of inhibition in this region is under long-term biological control.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: developmental mode takes a roof plate signal score, 0.0 at the roof plate to 1.0 at the dorsoventral boundary, plus embryonic day and the state of the Ptf1a versus Ascl1 choice; adult mode takes primary afferent firing rates by fibre class, C and A-delta 0 to 20 hertz, A-beta 0 to 200 hertz, Group I 0 to 200 hertz, plus descending serotonergic and noradrenergic modulation 0 to 1 and corticospinal drive 0 to 100 hertz.

• OUTPUTS: developmental mode emits a class label with transmitter, projection side and target lamina; adult mode emits excitatory or inhibitory conductance onto projection neurons, other interneurons and, for dI3 and dI6, onto motor neurons.

• STATE: membrane voltage; A-type potassium current inactivation for delayed-firing cells; T-type calcium de-inactivation for bursting cells; KCC2 expression level, 0 to 1, which sets the chloride reversal potential; long-term potentiation weight at C fibre synapses.

• PARAMETERS: eight class labels; per-class transmitter, laminar target, projection side and firing type; soma diameter 8 to 35 micrometres; input resistance 200 megaohms to 1.5 gigaohms; embryonic day of birth, roughly 10.5 to 12.5 for the early wave and 11 to 13 for the late wave in mouse, with the human equivalent falling in gestational weeks 4 to 8.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 40 milliseconds; A-type potassium delay 20 to 200 milliseconds; peptide action seconds; KCC2 change hours to days; developmental specification days.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of dILA inhibitory tone after nerve injury produces neuropathic pain and allodynia; loss of dI3 output abolishes load-dependent grip; loss of Dmrt3 function in dI6 produces uncoordinated gait, as demonstrated in both mice and horses; and failure of Ptf1a signalling in development converts inhibitory cells to excitatory ones, wiring a permanently over-excitable dorsal horn.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to assign a dorsal spinal interneuron its class from its position, its birth date and its progenitor gene.
Create a list variable called early_wave with initial value empty list.
Add dI1 to the end of early_wave.
Add dI2 to the end of early_wave.
Add dI3 to the end of early_wave.
Add dI4 to the end of early_wave.
Add dI5 to the end of early_wave.
Add dI6 to the end of early_wave.
Create a number variable called roof_plate_distance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called embryonic_day with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called ptf1a_active with initial value false.
Create a text variable called assigned_class with initial value unassigned.
Create a number variable called stripe_index with initial value 0.
Set roof_plate_distance to the measured distance of this progenitor from the roof plate.
Set embryonic_day to the current embryonic day.
Set ptf1a_active to the state of the Ptf1a gene in this progenitor.
Check if embryonic_day is greater than or equal to 11.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Check if ptf1a_active is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set assigned_class to dILA.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set assigned_class to dILB.
    End the conditional block.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Calculate the product of roof_plate_distance and 6.
    Set stripe_index to that result rounded down.
    Check if stripe_index is greater than 5.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set stripe_index to 5.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of stripe_index and 1.
    Set stripe_index to that result.
    Set assigned_class to the item at position stripe_index in early_wave.
End the conditional block.
Display assigned_class to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because a dictionary is the honest data structure for a lookup table of developmental identities, and a coding agent can extend it row by row.

# Turning a roof-plate gradient into eight discrete dorsal interneuron identities.
DORSAL = {   # class: (progenitor gene, markers, transmitter, projection, adult laminae)
    "dI1":  ("Atoh1",   ("Lhx2","Lhx9","Barhl1"), "glutamate",       "ipsi and contra", "IV-VII"),
    "dI2":  ("Neurog1", ("Foxd3","Lhx1","Lhx5"),  "glutamate",       "contralateral",   "IV-VI"),
    "dI3":  ("Olig3",   ("Isl1","Tlx3"),          "glutamate",       "ipsilateral",     "V-VII"),
    "dI4":  ("Ptf1a",   ("Lbx1","Pax2","Lhx1"),   "GABA and glycine","ipsilateral",     "III-V"),
    "dI5":  ("Ascl1",   ("Lbx1","Lmx1b","Tlx3"),  "glutamate",       "contralateral",   "III-V"),
    "dI6":  ("Ascl1",   ("Lbx1","Pax2","Dmrt3"),  "GABA and glycine","contralateral",   "VII-VIII"),
    "dILA": ("Ptf1a",   ("Lbx1","Pax2"),          "GABA and glycine","ipsilateral",     "I-III"),
    "dILB": ("Ascl1",   ("Lbx1","Tlx3","Lmx1b"),  "glutamate",       "ipsilateral",     "I-III"),
}
EARLY = ["dI1", "dI2", "dI3", "dI4", "dI5", "dI6"]

def specify(roof_plate_distance, embryonic_day, ptf1a_active):
    """Distance runs 0.0 at the roof plate to 1.0 at the dorsoventral boundary."""
    if embryonic_day >= 11.0:              # second neurogenic wave
        return "dILA" if ptf1a_active else "dILB"   # set by Ptf1a vs Ascl1, not position
    return EARLY[min(5, int(roof_plate_distance * 6.0))]

def describe(name):
    gene, markers, tx, side, laminae = DORSAL[name]
    group = "class B, Lbx1 positive" if "Lbx1" in markers else "class A, Lbx1 negative"
    return f"{name}: {gene} progenitor; {'/'.join(markers)}; {tx}; {side}; laminae {laminae}; {group}"

for d in (0.05, 0.20, 0.40, 0.55, 0.75, 0.95):
    print(describe(specify(d, 10.5, False)))     # first wave, dI1 down to dI6
print(describe(specify(0.5, 12.5, True)))        # second wave, inhibitory dILA
print(describe(specify(0.5, 12.5, False)))       # second wave, excitatory dILB

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

You cannot recognise these classes by looking at an adult cell; you recognise them by the genes it still carries from the fortnight in which it was made.

Stain a section for Lbx1 and a knife-sharp line appears across the dorsal horn, with dI1, dI2 and dI3 above it and dI4, dI5 and dI6 below, and no other classification of spinal neurons produces so clean a boundary from a single antibody.

CHAPTER 177. VENTRAL CLASSES V0, V1, V2, AND V3 (Walking-Circuit Founder Neuron) (NON-COG)

Four stripes of an embryo, read off a single chemical gradient rising from the notochord, become every circuit you own for standing, stepping and staying upright.

V0 through V3 is an alphanumeric series naming four stripes of embryonic progenitor tissue in the belly-side cord, which is an address.

Walking-Circuit names what the four classes collectively build, the spinal network that produces stepping, since every known rhythm and coordination element of that network descends from one of these four lineages.

Founder names their status as the four ancestral groups rather than four finished cell types, each one later splitting into subtypes with different transmitters and different jobs.

Neuron marks the parent class, and naming it this way lets the four children below carry names for what they actually contribute to a step.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are the four great interneuron lineages of the ventral spinal cord, the front half where movement is organised.

Like the dorsal classes, they are birth cohorts rather than adult cell types, but their patterning signal comes from below rather than above.

Sonic hedgehog, a signalling protein released by the notochord and then by the floor plate at the ventral midline, forms a gradient rising from the top of the ventral cord to the bottom.

Each concentration band switches on a different set of master genes, creating five progenitor domains stacked from p0 at the top through p1, p2 and pMN to p3 at the very bottom.

The pMN domain makes motor neurons, which are covered elsewhere in this book; the other four make V0, V1, V2 and V3 interneurons.

Between them these four lineages build the locomotor central pattern generator, the reflex circuitry that stabilises posture, and the gain controls that decide how hard a muscle pulls.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Each class has a characteristic axonal habit, and that habit is the point.

V0 cells are predominantly commissural, sending axons across the midline.

V1 cells are ipsilateral and descending, meaning they stay on their own side and send short axons toward the tail, typically one to three segments.

V2 cells are ipsilateral, with V2a cells descending over several segments and V2b cells acting more locally.

V3 cells are mostly commissural and mostly ascending or bifurcating.

Somata are compact and multipolar with dendritic fields, the input branches, of 200 to 600 micrometres.

SIZE:

Cell bodies run from about 10 micrometres for the smallest V1 Renshaw cells to about 30 micrometres for the largest V2a and V3 cells.

Axons range from a fraction of a millimetre for local V1 cells to the full length of the cord for the long descending members of V0 and V3.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• V0 arises from Dbx1-expressing progenitors and splits four ways: V0d, dorsal and inhibitory and commissural; V0v, ventral and excitatory and commissural, marked by Evx1; V0c, cholinergic and marked by Pitx2, which forms the large C-bouton synapses on motor neurons; and V0g, glutamatergic and Pitx2-positive.

• V1 arises from p1 progenitors and is marked by the gene En1, is entirely inhibitory using GABA and glycine, and contains the Renshaw cells that provide recurrent inhibition back onto motor neurons, making up roughly 9 percent of the V1 population, together with a parvalbumin-expressing proprioceptive group comprising about 27 percent of V1 cells that includes the Ia reciprocal inhibitory interneurons; further clades are defined by the genes Foxp2, MafA, Pou6f2 and Sp8.

• V2 arises from Lhx3 and Foxn4 expressing progenitors and divides into V2a, excitatory and marked by Chx10 which is also called Vsx2; V2b, inhibitory and marked by Gata2 and Gata3; and a small V2c group marked by Sox1.

• V3 arises from Nkx2-2 expressing p3 progenitors, is marked by Sim1, is glutamatergic and largely commissural, and divides into a dorsal group in lamina VII and a ventral group in lamina VIII.

WHERE IT LIVES:

In the embryo, the progenitor domains p0, p1, p2 and p3 lie stacked in the ventricular zone, the dividing cell layer lining the neural tube.

In the adult, V0 cells occupy laminae VII, VIII and X; V1 cells occupy the ventral part of lamina VII with the Renshaw cells packed into a narrow band in lamina VII immediately medial and ventral to the motor pools; V2a and V2b cells occupy lamina VII; V3 cells occupy laminae VII and VIII; and V0c cells form a distinctive column beside the central canal in lamina X, which is why they are called partition cells.

They are present at every segment, densest in the cervical and lumbosacral enlargements.

The critical interface is the boundary between p2 and pMN, the line at which the sonic hedgehog gradient stops making interneurons and starts making motor neurons.

That single line is the most consequential boundary in the ventral cord, and it is held by mutual repression between the transcription factors Irx3 and Olig2.

NUMBER:

The four ventral lineages together produce the majority of neurons in the ventral horn and intermediate zone.

A defensible estimate is 40 to 70 million cells in the human cord, roughly 20 to 35 percent of the 200 million spinal neurons.

Within that, V1 and V2 are the largest classes and V3 the smallest.

Renshaw cells specifically, being about 9 percent of V1, are on the order of a few hundred thousand to a couple of million, and V0c cholinergic partition cells are the rarest of all at perhaps tens of thousands, since each motor neuron receives C-boutons from only a small pool.

Confidence is low, and as with the dorsal entry this is a re-cut of the same population: the propriospinal, commissural and pattern generator neurons described earlier are drawn from these lineages, and these counts must not be added to those.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Renshaw cells, the best-characterised members, are small, high-input-resistance cells that fire a high-frequency burst of up to several hundred hertz in response to a single motor neuron spike, then fall silent.

V2a cells are typically tonic firers recruited progressively as locomotor speed rises.

V1 cells as a population fire during the transition phases of the step cycle and are responsible for terminating bursts, which is why silencing them slows locomotion in both mice and zebrafish.

V3 cells fire tonically and broadly across the cycle.

Resting voltages sit near minus 60 millivolts and input resistances range from 100 megaohms in the largest to over 800 megaohms in Renshaw cells.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are motor neuron axon collaterals onto Renshaw cells, which is the only place in the body where a motor neuron's own output feeds back onto an interneuron; Group Ia afferents onto the reciprocal inhibitory V1 cells; rhythm generator drive onto V2a and V0v; descending reticulospinal and vestibulospinal fibres onto all four; and, remarkably, a brain-wide set of descending inputs onto V1 cells from motor cortex, red nucleus, vestibular nuclei and reticular formation.

Outputs go to motor neurons, to each other, and across the midline.

V0c cells make the C-bouton, an unusually large cholinergic synapse on the motor neuron cell body, sitting opposite a specialised stack of membrane called the subsurface cistern.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axon diameters are 0.3 to 2.5 micrometres and conduction velocities 1 to 20 metres per second.

V1 axons are short and heavily branched near their targets; V2a axons descend several segments with collaterals at each; V0 and V3 axons cross and then travel.

The C-bouton of a V0c cell is up to 8 micrometres across, among the largest synaptic terminals anywhere in the nervous system.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The assignment is clean and is the single most useful fact for a simulation.

V0d, V1 and V2b are inhibitory, releasing GABA and glycine.

V0v, V2a and V3 are excitatory, releasing glutamate.

V0c is cholinergic, releasing acetylcholine onto muscarinic M2 receptors clustered at the C-bouton.

Activation of those M2 receptors inhibits SK potassium channels, reducing the medium afterhyperpolarization that follows each motor neuron spike and thereby allowing the motor neuron to fire faster, which is a gain control rather than a command.

MYELINATION:

Ventral interneuron axons are thinly myelinated where they run in white matter and largely unmyelinated within grey matter.

Renshaw cell axons are essentially unmyelinated, which suits their extremely short path back to the motor pool.

The long commissural V0 and V3 axons acquire proper myelin sheaths once they enter the ventral funiculus.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Renshaw cells sustain very high firing rates in short bursts, which imposes a sharp transient sodium load, and they are correspondingly rich in mitochondria for their size.

V0c cells must synthesise and package large quantities of acetylcholine for their giant terminals.

The rest are metabolically ordinary.

PLASTICITY:

C-boutons undergo dramatic structural change in disease: in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, hereafter ALS, the C-boutons on surviving motor neurons enlarge substantially before the motor neuron dies, an early and consistent finding.

Renshaw cell input to motor neurons is reduced in ALS models and in spasticity.

V2a cells show injury-induced plasticity that is being actively exploited: after cervical spinal cord injury, V2a interneurons can be recruited to restore drive to the phrenic motor neurons that run the diaphragm, which is a route toward weaning patients off ventilators.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia around the C-bouton are genuinely unusual: astrocyte processes wrap the giant cholinergic terminal and the postsynaptic cistern in a tight sheath that limits acetylcholine spillover, and this arrangement is not seen at ordinary spinal synapses.

Renshaw cells are enclosed in dense perineuronal nets, cages of extracellular matrix built largely of chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans, which stabilise their synapses and mark them out under the stain Wisteria floribunda agglutinin.

Those nets also make Renshaw cell connections unusually resistant to change in adulthood, which is a design decision by the nervous system: the recurrent inhibition loop is meant to be a fixed constant, not a learned variable.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the ventral lineages and the ventral horn keeps its motor neurons and loses everything that shapes them.

A command from the brain would reach muscle unedited: no recurrent damping, no reciprocal switch-off of the opposing muscle, no left-right negotiation, no burst termination, no gain scaling.

The flavour lost is control, in the engineering sense.

Movements would be all-or-nothing, jerky, symmetrical when they should alternate, and impossible to hold steady.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The V0c C-bouton is a textbook case of neuromodulation rather than transmission: it does not tell the motor neuron to fire, it changes how much the motor neuron fires for a given input, by closing potassium channels through a second messenger cascade over hundreds of milliseconds.

V0c cells are additionally coupled to one another by connexin 36 gap junctions, so the partition cell column acts partly as a single unit.

Renshaw cells receive gap-junction coupling from motor neurons in the newborn and are among the earliest-born interneurons in the cord.

V1 cells regulate burst duration rather than burst existence, which means their computation is temporal shaping, not gating, and silencing them converts asymmetric flexor and extensor durations into a symmetric 50 percent duty cycle.

Across the whole group, transcription factor cross-repression during development performs a sharpening operation that turns a smooth gradient into hard boundaries, and the same factors continue to be expressed in adulthood, maintaining identity rather than merely establishing it.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: developmental mode takes a sonic hedgehog exposure score, 0.0 at the dorsoventral boundary to 1.0 at the floor plate, and returns a progenitor domain and class; adult mode takes motor neuron collateral firing for Renshaw cells, 0 to 100 hertz; Group Ia afferent rate for reciprocal V1 cells, 0 to 150 hertz; rhythm generator drive for V2a and V0v, 0 to 100 hertz; descending drive from cortex, red nucleus, vestibular nuclei and reticular formation, 0 to 100 hertz each.

• OUTPUTS: inhibitory conductance onto motor neurons and antagonist interneurons for V0d, V1 and V2b; excitatory conductance for V0v, V2a and V3; for V0c, a modulatory multiplier on motor neuron gain of 1.0 to about 1.6 rather than a synaptic current.

• STATE: membrane voltage; burst adaptation variable; for V0c targets, the fraction of SK potassium channels suppressed, 0 to 1; for V2a, a recruitment threshold that scales with locomotor speed.

• PARAMETERS: class label from V0d, V0v, V0c, V0g, V1, V2a, V2b, V2c, V3; transmitter per class; projection side and direction; soma diameter 10 to 30 micrometres; input resistance 100 to 800 megaohms; Renshaw fraction of V1 about 0.09; parvalbumin proprioceptive fraction of V1 about 0.27.

• TIME CONSTANTS: Renshaw burst 20 to 50 milliseconds; glycine current decay 5 to 10 milliseconds; GABA type A decay 20 to 50 milliseconds; muscarinic M2 modulation onset 100 to 500 milliseconds and decay over seconds; V2a recruitment changes over one step cycle; developmental specification over days.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of V0 classes converts walking to hopping; loss of V1 slows locomotion and flattens flexor and extensor burst durations toward equality; loss of V3 leaves alternation intact but makes gait unstable; C-bouton enlargement and Renshaw cell dysfunction are early features of ALS; and loss of glycinergic V1 output underlies part of the rigidity in hereditary hyperekplexia and in acquired spasticity.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to assign a ventral spinal neuron its class and transmitter from its exposure to sonic hedgehog.
Create a number variable called hedgehog_score with initial value 0.
Create a text variable called domain with initial value unassigned.
Create a text variable called class_name with initial value unassigned.
Create a text variable called transmitter with initial value unassigned.
Set hedgehog_score to the measured sonic hedgehog exposure of this progenitor.
Check if hedgehog_score is less than 0.35.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set domain to p0.
    Set class_name to V0.
    Set transmitter to mixed, glycine for V0d and glutamate for V0v and acetylcholine for V0c.
Else if hedgehog_score is less than 0.5, then perform the following actions.
    Set domain to p1.
    Set class_name to V1.
    Set transmitter to glycine and GABA.
Else if hedgehog_score is less than 0.65, then perform the following actions.
    Set domain to p2.
    Set class_name to V2.
    Set transmitter to glutamate for V2a and glycine for V2b.
Else if hedgehog_score is less than 0.8, then perform the following actions.
    Set domain to pMN.
    Set class_name to motor neuron.
    Set transmitter to acetylcholine.
Else if hedgehog_score is less than or equal to 1, then perform the following actions.
    Set domain to p3.
    Set class_name to V3.
    Set transmitter to glutamate.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Display the error message that the hedgehog score must lie between 0 and 1 to the console.
End the conditional block.
Display domain to the console.
Display class_name to the console.
Display transmitter to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because a single ordered table plus a linear scan is the clearest possible expression of a gradient being read as thresholds, and a coding agent can insert a new domain without touching the logic.

# Reading one sonic hedgehog gradient as five discrete ventral identities.
VENTRAL = [   # (domain, upper bound of Shh score, class, transmitter, axon, headline job)
    ("p0",  0.35, "V0", "V0d glycine/GABA, V0v glutamate, V0c acetylcholine",
     "commissural, V0c ipsilateral", "left-right alternation and motoneuron gain"),
    ("p1",  0.50, "V1", "glycine and GABA", "ipsilateral descending",
     "recurrent and reciprocal inhibition, burst termination, locomotor speed"),
    ("p2",  0.65, "V2", "V2a glutamate, V2b glycine and GABA", "ipsilateral",
     "left-right stability and flexor-extensor alternation"),
    ("pMN", 0.80, "motor neuron", "acetylcholine", "leaves the cord via the ventral root",
     "muscle contraction"),
    ("p3",  1.01, "V3", "glutamate", "mostly commissural",
     "rhythm robustness and gait stability"),
]
TF_CODE = {"V0": "Dbx1 then Evx1", "V1": "En1", "V2": "Lhx3 with Chx10 or Gata3",
           "motor neuron": "Olig2 then Isl1 and Hb9", "V3": "Nkx2-2 then Sim1"}

def specify_ventral(shh_score):
    if not 0.0 <= shh_score <= 1.0:
        raise ValueError("sonic hedgehog score must lie between 0.0 and 1.0")
    for domain, ceiling, cls, tx, axon, job in VENTRAL:
        if shh_score < ceiling:
            return domain, cls, tx, axon, job
    raise AssertionError("unreachable: the table covers the whole range")

for score in (0.10, 0.40, 0.58, 0.72, 0.95):     # dorsal-most to floor-plate-most
    domain, cls, tx, axon, job = specify_ventral(score)
    print(f"Shh {score:0.2f} -> {domain} -> {cls} [{TF_CODE[cls]}]")
    print(f"    transmitter: {tx}")
    print(f"    axon: {axon};  job: {job}")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Four lineages, four transcription factors, four jobs, and a rule you can hold in your head: V0 crosses the midline, V1 inhibits close to home, V2 runs down its own side, and V3 crosses to steady the whole machine.

Stain one section for Dbx1, En1, Chx10 and Sim1 and the ventral cord resolves into four clean bands stacked in the order they were painted by the gradient, a map that no amount of adult morphology or firing pattern could ever have revealed.

CHAPTER 178. V0 (Left-Right Alternating Neuron) (NON-COG)

Every step you take requires one leg to wait while the other swings, and the order to wait crosses the midline of your spinal cord along the axon of a V0 neuron.

V0 is a progenitor-domain code with no meaning to a reader.

Left-Right names the axis this lineage governs, because almost all of its members send axons across the midline and impose an out-of-phase relationship between the two sides of the body.

Alternating names the specific output, and the split within the class is itself instructive, since the inhibitory members carry alternation at slow speeds such as walking while the excitatory members carry it at fast speeds such as trotting.

Neuron marks it as a cell whose deletion is legible in gait, because removing the inhibitory members leaves a mouse that alternates only when running and removing the excitatory ones leaves one that hops as soon as it speeds up.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A V0 neuron is defined not by its shape but by a genetic switch thrown in the embryo, the gene Dbx1, short for developing brain homeobox 1.

Almost every cell that throws it sends its output fibre across the midline, and the family's job is left and right coordination during walking.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small many-armed cell body with four to eight dendrites, the short branching antennae that gather incoming signals.

One axon dives to the floor of the cord, crosses in the ventral commissure, the narrow fibre bridge under the central canal, then runs up and down the far side.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 10 to 20 micrometres across, a micrometre being a thousandth of a millimetre, with the V0C subgroup larger at 20 to 30.

Dendritic fields span 150 to 400 micrometres, and crossed axons run two to eight segments, one to four centimetres in an adult.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• V0D, inhibitory, releasing glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) directly onto motor neurons across the midline, and dominant at slow walking speeds.

• V0V, marked by the gene Evx1, excitatory, working across the midline through an intermediate inhibitory cell, and dominant at fast speeds.

• V0C, marked by the gene Pitx2, cholinergic, staying on its own side, and the source of the large C-bouton endings on motor neuron cell bodies.

• V0G, a small glutamatergic Pitx2 sibling of V0C with no assigned function yet.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Lamina VIII and medial lamina VII of the Rexed laminae, the ten layers of the spinal grey matter, with V0C partition cells in area X beside the central canal.

They run from the first cervical segment to the sacral segments, densest in the cervical and lumbar enlargements, and their defining interface is the ventral commissure itself, where an axon passes from one half of the nervous system into the other.

NUMBER:

Roughly 1 to 2 million in the human cord, about 0.5 to 1 percent of its approximately 200 million neurons.

Confidence is low, because the figure is scaled from mouse lineage counts and no human count exists; the firm bound is that V0 cells outnumber the roughly 200 thousand alpha motor neurons several times over and cannot be more than a few percent of the cord.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 60 millivolts, threshold near minus 45 millivolts, input resistance a high 200 to 600 megaohms.

During walking they fire in bursts locked to one phase of the step cycle, typically 5 to 40 spikes per second inside a burst.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from ipsilateral V2a and Shox2 rhythm cells, from descending reticulospinal fibres carrying the brainstem command to walk, and from muscle and skin afferents.

V0D endings land directly on contralateral motor neurons, V0V endings on contralateral inhibitory interneurons, and V0C endings on ipsilateral motor neuron somata through M2 muscarinic receptors.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Diameter 0.5 to 2 micrometres, conducting at 1 to 10 metres per second, so a crossing signal takes a few milliseconds.

Most branch after crossing into ascending and descending limbs, so one cell speaks to several segments.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

V0D releases glycine with GABA, both opening chloride channels that push a target away from firing.

V0V and V0G release glutamate onto AMPA receptors, named for alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid, and NMDA receptors, named for N-methyl-D-aspartate; V0C releases acetylcholine.

MYELINATION:

Bare inside grey matter, thinly wrapped once in the ventral funiculus by oligodendrocytes, the glia that make the fatty insulating sheath.

The thin sheath matches the modest conduction velocities measured.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and rhythmic, dominated by the sodium and potassium pump burning adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to repay the ions spent on each spike.

Bursting once or twice a second is far cheaper than firing continuously.

PLASTICITY:

Crossed connections are pruned by use in the first weeks of life, which is why newborn stepping is clumsy.

After spinal cord injury commissural pathways sprout into detour circuits, and V0C C-boutons enlarge in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in lamina VIII carry glycine transporter 1 and so set how long V0D inhibition lingers, a genuinely local specialisation because glial glycine handling barely exists in the brain above.

Ventral commissure oligodendrocytes wrap an unusually dense crossing bundle in a tiny volume and are early casualties in contusion injury, which is why crossed coordination is often lost before strength is.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete V0 and the two halves of the cord stop negotiating.

Mice without Dbx1 neurons hop like rabbits, both hind legs together, because nothing tells one side to wait.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

V0C cells are electrically coupled through connexin 36, a protein forming direct pores between neighbours, so they act partly as one sheet.

Their C-bouton is not a plain synapse: the motor neuron builds a subsurface cistern opposite it packed with Kv2.1 and calcium-activated potassium channels, retuning the target rather than merely pushing it.

The handover from V0D to V0V as speed rises is a computation performed by the population, not by any cell.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: ipsilateral rhythm drive from V2a and Shox2, 0 to 1 normalised; reticulospinal drive, 0 to 1; afferent input, 0 to 100 spikes per second.

• OUTPUTS: V0D inhibitory conductance onto contralateral motor neurons, 0 to 5 nanosiemens; V0V excitatory conductance onto contralateral inhibitory cells; V0C muscarinic gain on ipsilateral motor neurons, multiplying output by 1.0 to 1.6.

• STATE: membrane voltage; adaptation level; crossed terminal depression; the speed estimate weighting V0D against V0V.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 60 millivolts; threshold minus 45 millivolts; input resistance 200 to 600 megaohms; crossing delay 1 to 5 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 30 milliseconds; adaptation 200 to 600 milliseconds; muscarinic action 0.1 to several seconds; step cycle 0.4 to 2 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: loss produces a hopping synchronous gait; partial loss produces alternation that drifts in and out as speed changes; in ALS the V0C interface enlarges and misregulates motor neuron excitability.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide how strongly a V0 population inhibits the opposite side of the cord on this time step.
Create a number variable called ipsilateralDrive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called locomotorSpeed with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dorsalWeight with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called ventralWeight with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called crossedInhibition with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called delayBuffer with initial value empty list.
Set ipsilateralDrive to the excitation arriving from V2a and reticulospinal sources.
Set locomotorSpeed to the normalised step frequency between 0 and 1.
Set dorsalWeight to the difference of 1 and locomotorSpeed.
Set ventralWeight to locomotorSpeed.
Set crossedInhibition to the product of ipsilateralDrive and the sum of dorsalWeight and the product of 0.9 and ventralWeight.
Add crossedInhibition to the end of delayBuffer.
Check if the total number of items in delayBuffer is greater than 3.
If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set crossedInhibition to the item at position 0 in delayBuffer.
    Remove the item at position 0 from delayBuffer.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set crossedInhibition to 0.
End the conditional block.
Return crossedInhibition to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the V0 story is a two body problem and Python shows every line of
# the update with no library at all.
import math

DT = 0.001  # seconds per step

def sigmoid(x):
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-x))

def crossed_weight(drive):
    v0v = sigmoid((drive - 0.5) * 12.0)   # V0V takes over as speed rises
    return (1.0 - v0v) + 0.9 * v0v        # V0D carries the slow end

def run(drive=0.4, seconds=4.0):
    left, right = 0.6, 0.0    # half centre activity on each side, 0 to 1
    al, ar = 0.0, 0.0         # spike frequency adaptation on each side
    w = crossed_weight(drive)
    for i in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        il = drive - w * right - al
        ir = drive - w * left - ar
        left += DT / 0.050 * (-left + sigmoid(8.0 * il))
        right += DT / 0.050 * (-right + sigmoid(8.0 * ir))
        al += DT / 0.400 * (-al + 1.2 * left)
        ar += DT / 0.400 * (-ar + 1.2 * right)
        if i % 200 == 0:
            print("t=%.2f s  left=%.3f  right=%.3f" % (i * DT, left, right))

run()

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A V0 is the cell whose axon you can watch cross the floor of the cord under the central canal, carrying an order from one half of the body to the other, with its ancestry readable from one gene switch thrown before birth.

APPENDIX 1. THE THREE-STAGE PROVING SYSTEM OF PREVIOUSLY UNNAMED CONSTRUCTS (PUC)


A1.1 Why the Names Must Be Proved

Eleven times in this work, a construct has been marked with the tag (PUC), meaning Previously Unnamed Construct, and given a name.

That is a strong act, and it carries a burden.

To claim that a thing is real, is used, and yet has never been named is to make three assertions at once, and each of them can be wrong.

The thing might not be real.

Clustering algorithms produce clusters whether or not nature put a boundary there, and a great deal of what looks like a cell type is a cut through a continuum, drawn where the analyst set a parameter.

It might already have a name that the author overlooked.

This is the commonest and most embarrassing failure, and it is the reason the second stage below carries the heaviest burden of the three.

Or the proposed name might be a poor one that the field is right to reject.

A responsible naming, therefore, is not a christening but a proof.

This appendix supplies that proof system, and the appendices that follow it apply the system to each Previously Unnamed Construct named in this volume.

No construct earns its name by assertion.

Each must survive the three stages.

The naming is never a claim of discovery.

Every construct named in this work was already real, already relied upon, already published in parts.

What was missing was the word, and a science cannot reason efficiently about a thing it cannot name.

The proving system is the discipline that ensures a proposed word deserves to exist.


A1.2 The Three Stages

Every construct is evaluated against three stages, in order.

A construct that fails any stage does not earn its name.

STAGE 1: CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The construct must be demonstrably real and currently relied upon in the neuroscience literature.

It must be physically or functionally distinct from every adjacent named construct, not merely a paraphrase of something already named.

And it must be functionally necessary, playing a specific causal role whose existence is documented, rather than being a convenience of description.

In short: the thing must exist, must be distinct, and must matter.

Applied to a cell type rather than to a brain region, this stage is sharpened into three specific tests.

• The convergence test, for reality.

Do independent methods agree that this population exists?

A cluster that appears only in gene-expression data, and that no anatomist, physiologist or connectivity study has ever separated from its neighbours, fails.

A population that appears as a distinct cluster in sequencing, a distinct shape under a microscope, a distinct firing pattern under an electrode, and a distinct projection target in a tracing study has passed the strongest test the field can apply.

• The boundary test, for distinctness.

Which named cell type is this one most likely to be confused with, and what specifically separates them?

The answer must be stated, not assumed.

• The ablation test, for necessity.

If this population is silenced, deleted, or lost to disease, what specifically fails?

Evidence that a cell is merely active during a behaviour is not enough.

Something must break.

STAGE 2: IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

The construct must lack an accepted, widely used proper name in the existing literature.

The burden here is high, and it is placed on the person claiming the gap rather than on the reader.

Informal descriptive phrases, pedagogical metaphors, and passing usages in single papers do not count as proper names.

An established proper name is one used consistently across the literature, appearing in standard textbooks, understood without further definition by the relevant community.

If any such name exists, even an imperfect or contested one, the construct does not qualify, and it is cited as a named concept instead.

For cell types one further clarification is needed, and it is the clarification that makes this exercise possible.

A label is not a name.

None of the following counts as an accepted proper name, however consistently it is used.

• A gene symbol, or a combination of gene symbols, such as Sst Chodl or Lamp5 Lhx6.

A gene symbol names a gene, designates the cell by a correlate, and changes when a better marker is found.

• An alphanumeric cluster identifier from any atlas or taxonomy, such as subcluster 0417 or MLI2.

• An anatomical coordinate, such as layer 6b or lamina II inner.

• A description of the method by which the cell was found, or of how it looks on a plot.

• A phrase that varies from paper to paper, so that two papers about the same cell cannot be retrieved by the same search.

An eponym, meaning a scientist's surname, does count as a proper name, and disqualifies a candidate.

A long-established functional term that appears in textbooks and is understood without definition, such as silent nociceptor or intrinsic primary afferent neuron, also counts and also disqualifies.

Each construct must state, by name, the strongest counter-candidate term and precisely why that term does not clear the bar.

STAGE 3: PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

The proposed name must be self-explanatory to an informed reader, must accurately describe the construct's identity and function, and must be more useful for teaching, research and clinical application than the current unnamed state.

Names that are opaque, misleading, excessively long, or redundant with existing terminology do not pass.

The name must earn its place.

Every name proposed in this work obeys six rules.

• Plain English, with no Latin, no Greek, no eponym, no gene symbol, no acronym and no alphanumeric string.

• The name tells the story of the cell's purpose, function and faculty, so that a first-year student meeting the name alone learns something true.

• Two to five words, ending in the word neuron or cell.

• Dignified enough to print in a journal and plain enough for a curious teenager.

• Not redundant with, and not confusable with, any existing neuron name, nor with the other names proposed alongside it.

• Compound modifiers hyphenated, so that the reader parses the name correctly on first reading.


A1.3 The Additional Considerations: Ten Properties of a Sound Construct

The three stages are the minimum.

To hold each construct to the maximum, each is also examined against ten properties, drawn from the qualities that distinguish a genuine construct from a mere label.

These are stated once here and then reported briefly for each construct.

REALITY: the construct denotes something that physically or functionally exists, not a modelling artefact.

NECESSITY: the construct is required to reason about the domain; remove it and something true becomes unsayable.

CONCEPTUAL PRECISION AND SPECIFICITY: the construct picks out one thing exactly, with sharp boundaries, not a fuzzy region.

IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS: there is a demonstrable hole in the field's vocabulary that this construct fills, and no accepted proper name already occupies it.

PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY: the name teaches; a student meeting it learns something true about the construct from the name alone.

DIRECTIONALITY: what the cell takes in, and where it sends its output, is definite and stated, not ambiguous.

HIERARCHICAL POSITION: the construct sits at a definite layer of the fifteen-layer framework, and its relation to the layers above and below it is specified.

Every construct named in this work sits at Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, and each entry states the Layer 8 microcircuit motif it participates in and the Layer 9 region or pathway it helps to build.

UNIVERSALITY WITHIN ITS CLASS: the construct is not a one-off; it is an instance of a recognisable class, and the class is populated.

THEORETICAL COMPLETENESS IN HIERARCHICAL MODELS: naming the construct closes a gap that a complete hierarchical model of the nervous system would otherwise leave open.

CLINICAL CONSEQUENCE: a person is different because of it, whether through its loss, its excess, or a drug in current use that acts upon it.

For brevity, where a property is fully satisfied and needs no elaboration, it is marked as satisfied; where it requires comment, the comment is given.

A construct for which a property genuinely does not apply is marked (NA), meaning Not Applicable, and is always accompanied by the reason for its non-applicability, so that a reader never mistakes a property that does not apply for one that was merely omitted.


A1.4 How These Eleven Were Selected

The eleven Previously Unnamed Constructs named in this work were not chosen.

They are what survived.

Two sweeps were run across the whole of neuroscience, the first across twenty territories and the second across eighteen more, and together they returned four hundred and sixty-three candidate cell types, which merged into two hundred and twenty-nine distinct constructs.

Forty-six of those were carried into the proving system.

Each of the forty-six was then attacked by two independent skeptics working separately, neither of whom saw the other's report.

The first was instructed to refute the claim of namelessness, to search the standard textbooks, the review literature, the Petilla terminology, the Cell Ontology and the major brain atlases, and to reject the construct if it found any qualifying proper name, or if it was merely uncertain.

The second was instructed to refute the claim of reality, distinctness and necessity, to look for clustering artefacts, arbitrary cuts through continua, single-laboratory findings that failed to replicate, and rebrandings of things already known, and to demand causal evidence rather than correlation.

A construct passed only if both skeptics tried and failed.

Eleven survived.

Thirty-five did not.

Twenty-one of the thirty-five failed because a proper name already existed and the proposer had not found it, which is the single most important practical lesson of the exercise: the hard part of claiming that something is unnamed is not the claiming, it is the looking.

The appendices that follow apply the three stages, and the ten additional considerations, to each Previously Unnamed Construct that appears in this volume.


APPENDIX 2. Hush-Lifting Learning Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 126.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

The Hush-Lifting Learning Neuron is a tiny cell in the molecular layer, the outer sheet of the cerebellum, the brain structure that calibrates movement.

It is star-shaped, sits at every depth of that sheet, is one in four of the sheet's short-range cells, or interneurons, and speaks with gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main quieting signal.

It aims not at the Purkinje cell, the cerebellar cortex's output cell, but at the interneurons quieting that Purkinje cell.

By quieting the quieteners it lifts a brake, raising Purkinje firing and letting calcium flood the Purkinje cell's dendrites, its branching input arms.

That calcium is the permission slip for long-term depression, the lasting weakening of connections that stores a corrected movement.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

The standard label, MLI2 (molecular layer interneuron type 2), is a cluster identifier, minted when a computer sorted gene profiles into numbered groups.

"Nxph1-positive MLI" and "Gjd2-negative MLI" are gene-symbol barcodes, and the Cell Ontology entry CL:4307012 welds a gene symbol to a cluster number.

The one functional label, "disinhibitory MLI", is an unstable phrase, elsewhere "disinhibitory interneuron" or "MLI-targeting MLI".

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real, found twice by methods sharing no assumptions.

Kozareva and colleagues (Nature, 2021) sequenced 611,034 mouse cerebellar nuclei, found two non-overlapping interneuron groups, and confirmed the split in intact tissue, where the marker genes proved "entirely mutually exclusive".

Lackey and colleagues (Neuron, 2024) recorded from cell pairs blind to their genes and found the same proportion in the wiring alone, three quarters aiming at Purkinje cells, one quarter at interneurons.

It is distinct from its neighbour type 1, which is joined to its own kind by gap junctions, direct electrical bridges, in 67 percent of tested pairs, while no pair involving this cell coupled at all, and the two push Purkinje firing in opposite directions.

It is also functionally necessary.

Park and colleagues (Nature Neuroscience, 2026), working independently in Korea and Colorado, cut inhibition between molecular layer interneurons and found that "disruption of MLI-to-MLI inhibition prevents CF-instructed motor learning".

No tool yet silences this cell alone, so necessity stands for the pathway it alone supplies.

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

Every neighbour has a textbook name: the Purkinje cell, granule cell, Golgi cell, basket cell, stellate cell, Lugaro cell and candelabrum cell.

What is unnamed is the one cell whose job is to inhibit an inhibitor.

The strongest counter-candidate, "stellate cell", fails on scope.

All six reconstructed cells of this type "had classic stellate cell morphologies", but so do type 1 cells in the outer two thirds of the layer, so the term names a superset.

That classical mapping is disputed (Schilling, 2023), evidence that no classical name ever attached.

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

Brake names what is acted upon, the standing inhibition neighbouring interneurons hold against the Purkinje cell.

Lifting names the action, and teaches the hardest idea, that this cell helps by subtraction, removing a restraint rather than adding a push.

Lesson names the purpose, since the brake lifts exactly when an error signal arrives along a climbing fibre, and only then does the error stick.

Neuron marks it as one cell rather than a circuit.

The insight from the name alone is that a brain withholds learning by default and grants it deliberately, so instruction and permission are separate signals.

That unlocks motor calibration, by which a clumsy first attempt becomes a smooth one.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

Satisfied: two laboratories on two continents, five methods, one discrete population.

• Necessity.

Satisfied at pathway level: cutting interneuron-to-interneuron inhibition abolishes climbing-fibre-instructed motor learning; cell-selective silencing is still outstanding.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

Satisfied: fixed by its target, by the absence of electrical coupling, and by raising rather than lowering Purkinje firing.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

Satisfied: every label in use is a cluster index, a gene symbol, or a phrase reworded from paper to paper.

• Pedagogical clarity.

Satisfied: the name gives mechanism, a brake is lifted, and purpose, a lesson is allowed.

• Directionality.

It takes in glutamate, the main excitatory messenger, spilling from climbing fibres, and outputs onto type 1 interneurons, whose output lands on the Purkinje cell.

• Hierarchical position.

Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework; at Layer 8 the serial disinhibition motif, one inhibitory cell inhibiting another; at Layer 9 the olivocerebellar error pathway; Layer 10 makes cerebellar learning gated rather than automatic, and Layer 12 shows failed motor adaptation.

• Universality within its class.

Satisfied: found in every lobule and depth in mouse at a ratio near one in four, and recovered in human tissue by gene expression.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

Satisfied: supervised-learning accounts assume the error signal arrives unopposed, and this cell is the permission step they omit.

• Clinical consequence.

None is yet known: NXPH1 is not an ataxia gene, no postmortem study implicates this cell, and all work so far is in the mouse.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Kozareva and colleagues, A transcriptomic atlas of mouse cerebellar cortex comprehensively defines cell types, Nature, 2021.

• Lackey and colleagues, Specialized connectivity of molecular layer interneuron subtypes leads to disinhibition and synchronous inhibition of cerebellar Purkinje cells, Neuron, 2024.

• Santos-Valencia and colleagues, Climbing fibres recruit disinhibition to enhance Purkinje cell calcium signals, Nature, 2026.

• Park and colleagues, Synchronous climbing fiber activity enables instructive signaling for cerebellar learning through modulation of disinhibitory circuits, Nature Neuroscience, 2026.

• Schilling, Revisiting the development of cerebellar inhibitory interneurons in the light of single-cell genetic analyses, Histochemistry and Cell Biology, 2023.


APPENDIX 3. Body-Alarm Broadcast Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 157.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

This neuron lives in the upper brainstem, the stalk joining brain to spinal cord, in a thin shell called the external lateral subnucleus of the parabrachial nucleus.

Its messenger is glutamate, the brain's main excitatory signal, and it also makes a peptide, meaning a short chain of amino acids, called calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP).

It sends output forward into the emotional forebrain, most densely to the central nucleus of the amygdala, and also to the extended amygdala, basal forebrain and visceral thalamus (Huang and colleagues, 2021).

It collects signals that all mean the body is in trouble, including pain, heat, itch, blood-borne bacterial toxin and rising carbon dioxide, and fires harder as the danger grows (Campos and colleagues, 2018).

That firing reaches many forebrain targets at once as one warning, which ends the meal, freezes the animal, writes an avoidance memory and wakes it from sleep.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

The working labels, verbatim, are "parabrachial CGRP neurons", "CGRP-PBN neurons", "PBel-CGRP neurons" and "Calca/CGRP-expressing parabrachial neurons".

Each is a gene-symbol barcode bolted onto an anatomical coordinate, since CGRP is the protein made by the gene Calca, while PBN means parabrachial nucleus and PBel its external lateral part.

Atlas work adds cluster identifiers such as "N15" and "N16", while "a general alarm" is an unstable descriptive phrase used as a review title, never as the cell's designation (Palmiter, 2018).

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real, not a statistical illusion, because it was seen by antibody staining in the 1980s, mapped in human post-mortem brainstem by de Lacalle and Saper in 2000, and confirmed since by mouse genetics and anatomical tracing.

It is distinct from the cell most easily confused with it, the neighbouring Foxp2-marked parabrachial neuron, which meets the same rising carbon dioxide by adjusting breathing rather than raising an alarm (Yang and colleagues, 2024).

It is functionally necessary, because when Kaur and colleagues silenced these cells and raised carbon dioxide around a sleeping mouse, the animal failed to wake on half of all trials.

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

What is named is the neighbourhood, not the cell: the parabrachial nucleus has a name, and one subdivision even carries an eponym, the Koelliker-Fuse nucleus.

What is not named is the cell itself, and the absence is formal: a direct query of the Cell Ontology returns zero terms for this population.

The strongest counter-candidate is "parabrachial CGRP neuron", which, unusually, is genuinely retrievable across independent laboratories.

It still fails three times over: it is a gene product plus a map reference, which the standard excludes; "CGRP neuron" alone is ambiguous, since about half of all trigeminal sensory neurons also make CGRP; and the peptide is not the working part, because mice lacking it still learn taste aversion (Zajdel and colleagues, 2021).

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

"Body" teaches where the signal comes from, the flesh and organs rather than the distant world.

"Alarm" teaches what kind of signal it is, a warning that harm is happening, with urgency but no detail.

"Broadcast" teaches the circuit's shape, since many kinds of bad news funnel into one small group of cells that sends one message to many destinations.

The one insight a student gains is that the brain has cells whose job is not to report what is wrong, only that something is wrong, loudly and to everyone at once.

That insight unlocks obstructive sleep apnoea, in which the throat closes during sleep and the sleeper must be jolted awake by rising carbon dioxide.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

Satisfied, since antibody staining showed the cell in human tissue decades before transcriptomic clustering existed.

• Necessity.

Satisfied, since silencing it stops a sleeping mouse waking to carbon dioxide and abolishes learned taste aversion.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

Satisfied, since the population is compact and separable from the breathing-control Foxp2 cells beside it.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

Satisfied, since forty years of study produced only gene-plus-coordinate labels and no Cell Ontology term.

• Pedagogical clarity.

Satisfied, since each modifier teaches something different: source, message type, and circuit shape.

• Directionality.

It takes in bodily danger signals from the spinal cord and the nucleus of the solitary tract, and sends output to the amygdala, basal forebrain and thalamus.

• Hierarchical position.

Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework.

◦ At Layer 8 it forms a converge-then-diverge motif, many danger channels collapsing onto one hub that fans out again.

◦ At Layer 9 it builds the ascending interoceptive alarm pathway from brainstem to extended amygdala.

◦ At Layer 10 and Layer 12 the consequence is a defensive whole-body state and a shifted threshold for waking.

• Universality within its class.

Partly satisfied, since it occurs in mouse, rat and human, but it is a molecular class rather than one type.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

Satisfied, since it supplies the single-cell substrate that circuit models of threat and arousal assumed.

• Clinical consequence.

No human genetic or lesion evidence yet implicates this cell, and the anti-CGRP migraine antibodies do not test it, since they barely enter the brain.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Palmiter, The parabrachial nucleus: CGRP neurons function as a general alarm, Trends in Neurosciences, 2018.

• Campos and colleagues, Encoding of danger by parabrachial CGRP neurons, Nature, 2018.

• Kaur and colleagues, A genetically defined circuit for arousal from sleep during hypercapnia, Neuron, 2017.

• Zajdel and colleagues, Calcitonin gene related peptide alpha is dispensable for many danger-related motivational responses, Scientific Reports, 2021.

• Huang and colleagues, Efferent projections of CGRP/Calca-expressing parabrachial neurons in mice, Journal of Comparative Neurology, 2021.


APPENDIX 4. Poison-Watch Nausea Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 158.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

This neuron lives in the area postrema, a small swelling on the floor of the fourth ventricle, low in the brainstem.

The area postrema lacks a blood-brain barrier, the seal that keeps blood chemicals out of brain tissue, so this cell bathes in circulating blood.

It is excitatory, signalling with glutamate, the brain's main "go" messenger, and carrying docking proteins for blood-borne sickness signals: the glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GLP1R), and the receptor for growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15), called GFRAL.

Its fibres run forward onto the calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) alarm neurons of the parabrachial nucleus.

When it fires, an animal feels sick, stops eating, and afterwards refuses whatever flavour it tasted before falling ill.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

The working labels, verbatim, are "GLP1R neurons", "GFRAL neurons", "SLC6A2 neurons" and "excitatory clusters 1 to 4".

The first three are gene-symbol barcodes, naming receptor genes also switched on in gut and pancreas, so none names this neuron.

"Cluster 2" to "cluster 4" are alphanumeric cluster identifiers from one atlas, used nowhere outside the originating laboratory.

"Area postrema neuron" is an anatomical coordinate covering seven cell types, some doing the opposite job.

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real: single-cell ribonucleic acid (RNA) sequencing by Zhang and colleagues resolved it, independent sequencing by Dowsett, Lam and Yeo recovered the same populations, and two-photon imaging of living mice by Huang and colleagues confirmed it physiologically.

It is most easily confused with its neighbour, the amylin-receptor excitatory neuron labelled CALCR.

The separation is behavioural: activating GLP1R, GFRAL or SLC6A2 neurons produced learned flavour avoidance, while identical activation of CALCR neurons produced none.

It is functionally necessary: killing the area postrema GLP1R population with a targeted toxin abolished learned avoidance to three unrelated poisons, exendin-4, lithium chloride and bacterial lipopolysaccharide.

Avoidance of cisplatin survived, so the cell is required for a wide but not unlimited class of threats.

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

What is named here is the place and the phenomenon: the area postrema, the chemoreceptor trigger zone, nausea, and the downstream parabrachial CGRP alarm neuron.

What is not named is the cell that reads poison out of the blood and turns it into sickness and one-trial food avoidance.

The strongest counter-candidate, "chemoreceptor trigger zone", fails twice: it names a region, not a cell, and fails on coverage, because that zone also holds inhibitory GIPR neurons that suppress nausea.

"Noradrenergic cell group A2" is an alphanumeric identifier spanning the whole dorsal vagal complex and covering only the noradrenaline-making subgroup.

No eponym and no textbook functional term for these cells appeared in any source retrieved.

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

"Blood" teaches what sets this cell apart, that it touches circulating blood directly, because the usual barrier is absent here.

"Sampling" teaches its job, continuous chemical surveillance rather than a reply to a nerve signal.

"Nausea" teaches what it produces, the queasy, food-refusing state that protects an animal that has swallowed poison.

"Neuron" teaches that a nerve cell, not a gland, does this sensing.

The insight from the name alone is that the brain keeps a deliberate hole in its own defences, staffed by cells that taste the blood and raise sickness.

That insight unlocks the nausea driving people off weight-loss drugs, the wasting of cancer cachexia, and the vomiting of pregnancy.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

Satisfied: two independent sequencing atlases plus imaging in behaving mice.

• Necessity.

Satisfied: toxin ablation abolishes learned poison avoidance, and silencing GFRAL-bearing cells attenuates cancer cachexia.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

Satisfied: the glutamate-releasing, GLP1R-bearing, aversion-driving population, excluding the non-aversive CALCR neuron and the inhibitory GIPR neuron.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

Satisfied: every source retrieved uses gene symbols, cluster numbers or the region name only.

• Pedagogical clarity.

Satisfied: the name states where the cell looks and what it produces.

• Directionality.

It takes in blood-borne chemicals through windowed capillaries, including bacterial toxins, drugs and the hormones GDF15 and glucagon-like peptide 1.

It sends glutamate output to the parabrachial nucleus and solitary tract nucleus.

• Hierarchical position.

Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework.

Its Layer 8 motif is a locally gated sensory relay, a neighbouring inhibitory neuron vetoing the sensor before its message leaves the region.

Its Layer 9 pathway is the area postrema to parabrachial interoceptive alarm route.

Layer 10 brings a whole-body sickness state, and Layer 12 one-trial flavour learning.

• Universality within its class.

Satisfied with a caveat: the population appears in rat and macaque atlases too, but no human atlas was retrieved.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

Satisfied: models of interoception, the sensing of the body's internal state, assume a blood-reading first sensor but never name it.

• Clinical consequence.

Satisfied: it is the presumed source of the nausea limiting glucagon-like peptide 1 drugs and of GDF15-driven wasting treatable with ponsegromab.

Destruction of the region in people produces intractable nausea, vomiting and hiccups.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Zhang, Kaye, Cai, Wang, Prescott and Liberles, Area Postrema Cell Types that Mediate Nausea-Associated Behaviors, Neuron, 2021.

• Zhang, Vincelette, Reimann and Liberles, A Brainstem Circuit for Nausea Suppression, Cell Reports, 2022.

• Dowsett, Lam and Yeo, A Survey of the Mouse Hindbrain in the Fed and Fasted States Using Single-Nucleus RNA Sequencing, Molecular Metabolism, 2021.

• Huang and colleagues, Dissociable Hindbrain GLP1R Circuits for Satiety and Aversion, Nature, 2024.

• Sun and colleagues, Area Postrema Neurons Mediate Interleukin-6 Function in Cancer Cachexia, Nature Communications, 2024.

• Groarke and colleagues, Ponsegromab for the Treatment of Cancer Cachexia, New England Journal of Medicine, 2024.


APPENDIX 5. Dream-Sleep Stillness Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 159.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

This cell lives in a small patch of the pons, the bulge of brainstem below the midbrain, called the sublaterodorsal tegmental nucleus.

It is a projection neuron, a nerve cell whose output fibre travels far rather than staying local, and it signals with glutamate, the brain's main activity-raising messenger.

Its long descending fibres reach inhibitory relay cells in the medulla and interneurons beside the motor nerve cells of the spinal cord.

Those relays release glycine and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), quietening messengers that shut down the motor neurons driving muscle.

The result is the near-total limpness of the body during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, the stage of vivid dreaming.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

The commonest labels, "sublaterodorsal tegmental nucleus (SLD) neurons", "subcoeruleus neurons" and "peri-locus coeruleus alpha neurons", are anatomical coordinates - addresses, not names.

"SLD Vglut2 neurons", "SLDGlut", "GluSLD" and "SubLDT Crhbp-positive neurons" are gene-symbol barcodes bolted onto an address.

"Pontine inhibitory area neurons", "dorsal pontine REM-on neurons" and "the REM-atonia generator" are unstable descriptive phrases, so two studies of one cell are not found by one search.

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real, because four independent laboratories reached it by four routes.

Chemical lesions of the region in rats produced REM sleep without atonia, dreaming sleep with muscle tone intact (Krenzer and colleagues, Boston, 2011).

Silencing glutamate release from these neurons alone cut REM sleep by thirty per cent and produced violent dream-enacting behaviour (Valencia Garcia and colleagues, Lyon, 2017).

Switching the cells on chemically produced instant atonia; switching them off produced dream enactment, in mice (Torontali and colleagues, Toronto, 2019).

Killing a molecularly defined subset reduced sleep and impaired REM atonia (Kashiwagi and colleagues, Japan, 2024).

The cell is distinct, and is most easily confused with the noradrenergic subcoeruleus, or A7, group next door, which shares half its name.

Those neighbours use noradrenaline and fall silent in REM sleep; these use glutamate and fire.

The cell is functionally necessary: silence its glutamate output and atonia fails, so the dreaming rat rears and lunges at nothing while the dream continues.

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

What is named is the address, the molecule and the disease.

The nucleus holds anatomy-ontology entries, the marker genes Slc17a6 and Crhbp are named, and the illness, REM sleep behaviour disorder, is named.

What is not named is the cell.

The Cell Ontology, the reference catalogue of cell types, holds no class for this neuron, and the textbooks are worse than silent: Purves attributes REM paralysis to unnamed "GABAergic neurons in the pontine reticular formation", the wrong transmitter.

The strongest counter-candidate is "REM-on neuron", genuinely textbook-established and used without definition.

It fails because it is a firing-pattern class covering acetylcholine-releasing, GABA-releasing and glutamate-releasing cells alike, naming a shape on a spike record, not a cell.

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

"Body" teaches that the target is skeletal muscle, not the mind, which is left running.

"Stilling" teaches that the stillness is an active achievement, not a passive fading.

"Dream" teaches when it acts.

"Neuron" teaches that one class of nerve cell carries the whole job.

The insight from the name alone is that dreaming and moving are held apart by a dedicated cell, so the body is actively restrained while the mind runs free.

That insight unlocks REM sleep behaviour disorder, in which sleeping people punch, kick and leap from bed, the earliest visible sign of Parkinson's disease.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

Satisfied, by lesion, gene silencing, chemical switching, fibre tracing and single-cell sequencing across four laboratories.

• Necessity.

Satisfied, since silencing their glutamate release alone abolishes REM atonia and produces dream enactment.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

Satisfied for the descending, glutamate-releasing population, which the name separates from the GABA-releasing neurons of the same nucleus.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

Satisfied, since no Cell Ontology class and no textbook term names the cell rather than the place.

• Pedagogical clarity.

Satisfied, since the three content words give target, action and state.

• Directionality.

It takes in excitatory pontine drive and release from REM-off inhibition by the ventrolateral periaqueductal grey, and sends output down to inhibitory relay cells of the medulla and spinal cord.

• Hierarchical position.

Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework.

Its Layer 8 motif is state-gated feed-forward inhibition, a long-range excitatory command recruiting inhibitory interneurons to brake motor neurons, within the Layer 9 pontomedullary atonia pathway.

Layer 10 gains whole-brain state switching, and Layer 12 the separation of dream from deed.

• Universality within its class.

Satisfied in mammals, the cat, rat, mouse and human populations being homologous.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

Satisfied, since no model otherwise explains why an active dreaming brain produces a motionless body.

• Clinical consequence.

Degeneration causes dream enactment, and in Parkinson's disease patients these human neurons are largely lost and carry pathological alpha-synuclein protein; clonazepam and melatonin help, but neither targets the cell.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Valencia Garcia and colleagues, Genetic inactivation of glutamate neurons in the rat sublaterodorsal tegmental nucleus recapitulates REM sleep behaviour disorder, Brain, 2017.

• Krenzer and colleagues, Brainstem and spinal cord circuitry regulating REM sleep and muscle atonia, PLOS One, 2011.

• Torontali and colleagues, The sublaterodorsal tegmental nucleus functions to couple brain state and motor activity during REM sleep and wakefulness, Current Biology, 2019.

• Kashiwagi and colleagues, A pontine-medullary loop crucial for REM sleep and its deficit in Parkinson's disease, Cell, 2024.

• St Louis and colleagues, Lesional REM sleep behavior disorder localizes to the dorsomedial pons, Neurology, 2014.
