COGNITION: A SYSTEMS APPROACH

Human Cognition, Human Cognitive Processes, and Human Cognitive Architectures, Rewritten Computer Systems First.

Compiled for the konnectome repository of D. R. Dison, Founder, Artificial Intelligence University (AIU).

Date of compilation: August 12, 2026.


WHY THIS REVISION EXISTS

The first edition of this work was criticised fairly, and this edition is the answer to that criticism.

The criticism was that the book was prose only: hundreds of thousands of words about the mind, with no interface blocks, no code samples, no time constants, and no modes - in short, nothing a machine, or an engineer, could take hold of.

A book meant to inform the building of a thinking machine should itself be machine-readable, and this edition makes it so.

Every chapter now treats its cognitive process the way an engineer treats a system: with named inputs, named outputs, held state, tunable parameters, honest time constants, distinct operating modes, and known failure modes, followed by the process's core algorithm written twice, once in structured English and once in running code.

The prose explanation for the beginner is kept, because the systems view is meant to sharpen the teaching, not replace it.


WHAT THIS BOOK IS

This is a plain-language guide to how the human mind works, written as if the mind were a machine we were trying to build.

It is written for two readers at once.

The layperson, learner, student, or beginner gets the same ground-up explanation as before: every idea explained from scratch, every technical term defined at first use, every abbreviation spelled out the first time it appears.

The scientist and the engineer get, in every chapter, a precise systems treatment they can check, criticise, and implement.

Cognition means the set of processes by which a mind takes in information, holds it, changes it, stores it, brings it back, and acts on it.

The systems approach means describing each of those processes by its contract with the rest of the mind: what it consumes, what it produces, what it remembers between moments, how fast it runs, what settings it exposes, what regimes it operates in, and how it breaks.


THE FOUR RECURRING BLOCKS, AND HOW TO READ THEM

Every chapter ends with the same four-part systems treatment, and the block names are chosen to match the machine-readable convention used across the konnectome library.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE is the contract.

Its SUBSCRIBES list names the inputs the process consumes, its PUBLISHES list names the outputs it produces, and its STATE, PARAMETERS, TIME CONSTANTS, MODES, and FAILURE MODE entries complete the engineering picture.

A rule governs every TIME CONSTANTS entry in this book: a value is stated only where the scientific literature actually supports one, and where no honest value exists the entry says REFUSED and gives the reason.

A refused value is information, not a gap: it tells the builder exactly where the science has not yet measured what an implementation would need.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE is the algorithm in structured English.

English Readable Code (ERC) is a formal notation, specified in the companion document ENGLISH_READABLE_CODE_MANUSCRIPT in this same directory, that expresses algorithmic logic as plain English sentences which can be mechanically translated into any programming language.

A reader who has never programmed can read an ERC block as ordinary careful English, and a programmer can translate it line by line into code.

CODE SAMPLE is the same algorithm as real, runnable code.

The language chosen for the whole book is Python, for two reasons: it is the most readable major programming language for a newcomer, and it is the everyday working language of computational cognitive science, so the examples connect directly to real research practice.

Every line of Python carries its ERC explanation as a comment on the line directly above it, so the structured English and the executable code stay locked together.

Each sample uses only Python's standard library, runs on its own, and was executed and verified during the compilation of this book.

One note on symbols: the book's plain-text style avoids typesetting characters in prose, but inside a CODE SAMPLE block the number sign and the asterisk are Python syntax, the comment marker and the multiplication sign, and they appear there for that reason only.

Beneath the chapter level, the systems reading is woven into the prose itself: mechanism sub-sections state their inputs, outputs, and characteristic timescales in plain sentences, and debate sub-sections state what the rival views would predict differently in systems terms.


HOW THE BOOK IS ORGANISED

The book keeps the structure of the first edition, so the two editions can be read side by side.

There are fifteen parts, numbered in words from ONE to FIFTEEN.

Inside the parts are seventy chapters, numbered straight through from 1 to 70.

Inside the chapters are sections, such as 12.3, and sub-sections, such as 12.3.4.

Part One frames cognition itself as a system and sets out the methods, the levels of analysis, and the taxonomies.

Parts Two through Twelve walk through the cognitive processes one by one, each now specified as a component: perception, attention, memory, knowledge, language, learning, thinking, problem solving and control, metacognition and consciousness, the emotional and social mind, and the varieties and origins of cognition.

Parts Thirteen and Fourteen present the computational frameworks and the cognitive architectures, which is where the systems approach is most at home, since those chapters describe actual algorithms and actual running software.

Part Fifteen reaches the frontier where this science meets modern machine intelligence, and the book closes with a working sketch that wires its own modules together into one running cognitive cycle.


A NOTE ON HONESTY

Where the science is genuinely unsettled, this book says so plainly, in the prose and in the blocks alike.

No number in any TIME CONSTANTS entry was invented to fill a slot.

Where experts disagree, both sides are stated in their strongest form, together with what each would predict differently.

The systems treatment is a reading of the science, offered by this build and marked as such; where this book and the primary literature disagree, the literature is right and this book owes the correction.


HOW TO READ IT

You may read straight through, or open any chapter on its own.

A beginner may read only the prose and skip the blocks, and will still get the whole story.

An engineer may read only the blocks and the code, and will still get a buildable specification.

The book is best when both are read together, because the discipline of the second keeps the first honest, and the warmth of the first keeps the second understandable.

Take your time.

The ideas reward slow reading, and the code samples reward actually being run.

================================================================================

PART ONE. FOUNDATIONS: WHAT COGNITION IS AND HOW IT IS STUDIED

================================================================================

CHAPTER 1. THE OBJECT OF STUDY: DEFINING COGNITION (PROCESS)

This chapter is about a single, deceptively simple question: what exactly are we studying when we study the mind?

The word for that object of study is cognition, and this chapter is devoted to pinning it down.

Cognition, in the plainest terms, means all the mental work your brain does to make sense of the world and to act in it: noticing, remembering, understanding, deciding, and planning.

Because this book takes a systems approach, we will also pin cognition down the way an engineer pins down any system: by naming its inputs, its outputs, the state it must hold between moments, the parameters that tune it, the timescales on which it runs, its operating modes, and the ways it characteristically fails.

Seen that way, cognition is the mind's overall system specification: everything it subscribes to from the senses and the body, and everything it publishes to memory and to muscle.

We care about defining it carefully because a science can only make progress once it agrees on what it is looking at.

As you will see, the boundaries of cognition are blurry, and drawing them is more of a judgment call than most people expect.

By the end of this chapter you should understand what cognition is, why its edges are contested, and how researchers choose to slice it into pieces they can study.


1.1 The working definition and its boundaries

Before we can study something, we need a working definition, which simply means a practical description we agree to use for now, knowing we may refine it later.

This section offers such a definition of cognition and then walks around its edges to see where it stops and something else begins.


1.1.1 Cognition as the acquisition, representation, transformation, storage, retrieval, and use of information

Here is a compact definition many researchers accept: cognition is the acquisition, representation, transformation, storage, retrieval, and use of information.

That sentence is dense, so let us unpack each word with everyday examples.

Information here just means any pattern that reduces uncertainty, such as the sight of a friend's face or the sound of your name.

Acquisition means taking information in, the way your eyes take in these words right now.

Representation means holding that information inside your head in some usable form, a bit like a mental picture, a sound, or a meaning standing in for the thing itself.

Transformation means changing that information, for example turning the letters c, a, and t into the idea of a small furry animal.

Storage means keeping information over time, which is what we casually call memory.

Retrieval means pulling stored information back out when you need it, like recalling where you parked your car.

Use means putting information to work to guide behavior, such as deciding to brake when you see a red light.

Notice that this definition treats the mind as an information processor, a system that takes in signals, works on them, keeps some, and acts.

Read as a system, the definition is literally a pipeline specification: acquisition names the input stage, representation names the internal data format, transformation names the processing stage, storage and retrieval name the read and write operations on state, and use names the output stage that drives behavior.

The characteristic timescale of one full pass through this pipeline, from a stimulus arriving to a simple decision leaving, is on the order of a few hundred milliseconds, which is why a simple reaction time sits around a quarter of a second.

This information-processing view became the backbone of the field in the middle of the twentieth century, drawing inspiration from the newly invented digital computer.

The psychologist Ulric Neisser helped cement this framing in his 1967 book titled Cognitive Psychology, where he described cognition as all the processes by which sensory input is transformed, reduced, elaborated, stored, recovered, and used.

The definition is powerful because it is general: it applies whether you are reading, listening to music, or finding your way home.

It is also humble, because it does not claim to explain how any of these steps actually happen in the brain, only to name the kinds of work involved.


1.1.2 The contested borders with sensation, with reflex, with emotion, and with motivation

A definition is only as useful as its edges, so now we ask where cognition ends and its neighbors begin.

The honest answer is that these borders are contested, meaning experts genuinely disagree about where to draw them.

In systems language, the border questions are interface questions: which upstream signals count as inputs to the cognitive system, and which fast pathways bypass it entirely.

Consider sensation first, which means the raw registering of a stimulus by a sense organ, such as light striking the back of your eye.

Some researchers treat bare sensation as the pre-cognitive input that cognition then works on, so sensation sits just outside the boundary as a transducer, a device that converts one kind of signal into another.

Others argue that even the earliest processing already shapes and interprets the signal, so there is no clean line where sensation stops and cognition starts.

Now consider a reflex, which is an automatic, built-in response to a stimulus, like your knee jerking when a doctor taps it.

A reflex looks like the opposite of thinking, because it happens without deliberation, and in systems terms it is a hard-wired bypass: a fixed input-to-output mapping that skips the flexible processing stages and therefore runs faster, in tens of milliseconds rather than hundreds.

Yet some automatic responses are learned and flexible, which makes them harder to exile from the cognitive club.

Emotion is a third contested neighbor, and by emotion we mean states like fear, joy, or anger that come with feelings and bodily changes.

For decades many treated emotion as a separate system that merely disturbs cold, rational cognition.

Modern research, associated with scientists such as Antonio Damasio, argues instead that emotion is woven into reasoning and decision making, so in systems terms emotion is less a separate module and more a set of gain signals that retune the whole pipeline, changing what gets attended, stored, and chosen.

Motivation is the fourth neighbor, meaning the drives and goals that push us to act, such as hunger or curiosity.

Motivation clearly steers what we attend to and remember, so it behaves like a priority controller that reweights the system's goals, even if we label it separately.

The lesson is that cognition does not sit alone: it shades into sensing, into reflex, into feeling, and into wanting, with no fence that everyone agrees on.


1.1.3 The contested border with consciousness: cognition without awareness

One border deserves its own discussion because it surprises people the most: the border with consciousness.

Consciousness here means subjective awareness, the felt sense that there is something it is like to be you experiencing this moment.

A natural assumption is that thinking and being aware are the same thing, but a large body of research says otherwise.

Much of cognition happens without any awareness at all, silently and beneath the surface.

Consider that your brain parses the grammar of this sentence without you consciously working through the rules.

Consider blindsight, a striking condition in which people with certain brain damage report seeing nothing in part of their visual field, yet can still guess the location of objects there far better than chance.

That shows visual information being acquired, transformed, and used, which is cognition by our definition, with no conscious experience accompanying it.

Everyday examples exist too, such as suddenly recalling a name hours after you stopped trying, the work having continued out of view.

In systems terms, awareness looks like a limited-capacity monitoring channel bolted onto a much larger processing plant: most of the plant's throughput never reaches the monitor, and blindsight shows the plant still shipping output when the monitor's feed is cut.

Because so much mental processing is unconscious, most researchers now treat cognition as broader than consciousness, with awareness being just one part of the larger machinery.

Where exactly awareness fits, and why some processing feels like something while most does not, remains one of the deepest unsolved puzzles in science.


1.1.4 Why every boundary drawn here is a research decision rather than a fact of nature

Having walked the borders, we can now state a key idea that will recur throughout this book.

Every boundary we have drawn is a research decision rather than a fact of nature.

That phrase means the lines are chosen by scientists for practical reasons, not discovered lying ready-made in the world.

Nature did not label some processes cognitive and others not; researchers did, to make their work manageable.

An engineer will recognize this immediately: drawing a box around a subsystem and declaring its interface is a design act, and the same physical machinery can be partitioned into different block diagrams depending on what you are trying to build or debug.

A useful comparison is dividing the ocean into named seas: the water flows continuously, but the maps help sailors talk and plan.

Drawing a boundary is a bit like deciding where a hill becomes a mountain, a choice that is useful even though no true dividing height exists in the rock.

Different boundaries suit different questions, so a memory researcher and an emotion researcher may draw the line in different places and both be reasonable.

Recognizing this keeps us honest and flexible, so we do not mistake a convenient label for a law of nature.

It also explains why textbooks disagree: they are making different, defensible choices about where to cut.


1.2 The classical faculty list and its fate

Long before modern laboratories, thinkers tried to organize the mind into a list of separate abilities, often called faculties.

This section presents that classical list, explains why it is convenient, and then examines the trouble it runs into under close scientific scrutiny.


1.2.1 Perception, attention, memory, language, thought, action, emotion, and self

The traditional way to carve up the mind is into a handful of big faculties, where a faculty simply means a distinct mental ability.

The usual list includes perception, attention, memory, language, thought, action, emotion, and self.

Perception means organizing raw sensory signals into a meaningful picture of the world, such as seeing a table rather than a patchwork of light and shadow.

Attention means the selecting of some information for deeper processing while ignoring the rest, like hearing one voice in a noisy room.

Memory means storing and later retrieving information, from a phone number to the smell of your childhood home.

Language means the human capacity to produce and understand words and sentences that carry meaning.

Thought means the manipulating of ideas to reason, solve problems, and imagine possibilities.

Action means turning intentions into coordinated movement, like reaching for a cup.

Emotion, already met above, means feeling states such as fear or joy that color experience and guide choices.

The self means your sense of being a continuous person who owns these experiences.

In systems terms the faculty list reads like a parts catalogue for the mind: perception as the input decoder, attention as the bandwidth allocator, memory as the storage subsystem, language as the communications codec, thought as the general processor, action as the output driver, emotion as the gain controller, and the self as the system's own persistent identity record.

This list is the standard table of contents for many textbooks, and it maps loosely onto the chapters of this very book.

It is a helpful starting point precisely because these categories match how we already talk about our minds in ordinary life.


1.2.2 Faculties as convenient labels rather than natural kinds

The comfortable list has a catch, and understanding it is essential.

A natural kind means a category that exists in the world independently of us, carved at a real joint, the way gold is a genuine kind of stuff distinct from silver.

The worry is that faculties may not be natural kinds at all, but merely convenient labels we place over messy, overlapping processes.

Take memory, which sounds like one thing but on examination splits into many different systems that behave differently and rely on different brain regions.

Remembering how to ride a bike, recalling last summer's holiday, and holding a phone number in mind for a few seconds are so distinct that treating them as one faculty can mislead us.

Similarly, attention turns out to name a whole family of processes rather than a single switch.

Brain evidence rarely shows one tidy region doing one whole faculty; instead, wide networks light up and the same region takes part in many faculties.

An engineer would say the mind's block diagram does not match its wiring diagram: the labeled boxes are a documentation convenience, while the underlying hardware is shared, reused, and multiplexed across many of the boxes at once.

So the faculties are best seen as rough headings, useful for organizing study and conversation, not as the true underlying parts of the mind.

Keeping this in mind prevents a common error: assuming that because we have a word for something, there must be one unified thing it names.


1.2.3 The reverse-inference problem: reading a faculty off an observation

A specific trap follows from the previous point, and it has a name: the reverse-inference problem.

Reverse inference means reasoning backward from an observation to a hidden cause, in a way that can easily go wrong.

Here is the classic version from brain imaging: a scientist sees a certain brain area become active and concludes that a particular faculty must be at work.

The logic looks like this: this region lights up during emotion, this region is now lighting up, therefore the person must be feeling emotion.

The problem is that the same region usually participates in many functions, so its activity does not point cleanly to just one.

In systems language, the observation is a shared status light on a multiplexed component, and a many-to-one mapping from functions to signals cannot be inverted: the input to the inference is a blob of activity, the desired output is a unique function, and no such unique output exists.

The neuroscientist Russell Poldrack described this difficulty influentially in a 2006 paper, warning that reading a mental function off a blob of brain activity is unreliable unless that region is fairly specific to that function.

An everyday analogy helps: seeing the kitchen light on does not tell you someone is cooking, because the light is also on when they fetch a glass of water.

The same caution applies to behavior, not just brain scans, whenever we jump from a single observation to a confident claim about which faculty caused it.

Good research guards against this by gathering converging evidence from many angles rather than trusting one clue.

The reverse-inference problem is one big reason the faculty list must be handled with care rather than taken literally.


1.2.4 The three ways to carve the field: by faculty, by processing stage, by architecture

Given the trouble with faculties, it helps to know that researchers actually use three different strategies for organizing the study of cognition.

The first is to carve the field by faculty, the familiar list of perception, attention, memory, and so on, grouping research by the ability being studied.

The second is to carve it by processing stage, which means following information along its journey from input to output.

A stage-based view might track a signal as it is sensed, then encoded, then stored, then retrieved, then used to act, asking what happens at each step regardless of which faculty is involved.

The third is to carve it by architecture, where architecture means the overall design of the system and how its parts connect and pass information.

An architectural view asks about the blueprint: what components exist, how they are wired, and what rules govern the flow between them, much like studying a building's floor plan rather than the activities inside each room.

For an engineer these three cuts are familiar friends: carving by faculty is documenting the system by feature, carving by stage is documenting it by data flow, and carving by architecture is documenting it by component diagram, and any serious system needs all three documents.

These three cuts are not rivals so much as complementary lenses, each answering different questions.

Faculty cuts suit questions about specific abilities, stage cuts suit questions about the flow of processing, and architecture cuts suit questions about the mind's overall design.

Knowing that all three exist keeps you from thinking the faculty list is the only way, and it prepares you for chapters that quietly switch between these viewpoints.


1.3 Cognition as model-building

We now turn to a big, unifying idea that has become central to how many scientists think about the mind.

This section introduces the notion that cognition is fundamentally about building internal models of the world, and it explains what that means and why it is attractive.


1.3.1 The internal model as the field's central theoretical object

The central idea is this: the brain is constantly building an internal model of the world, and much of cognition is the making and using of that model.

An internal model means a working representation inside your head that mirrors how the world is and how it behaves, so you can predict and plan rather than merely react.

Think of it as a private simulation, a mental version of your surroundings that you can consult and run forward in imagination.

Because of this model you can catch a ball, since your brain predicts where it will land instead of waiting to see.

Because of this model a dark room does not confuse you, since you already expect where the furniture is.

The idea has deep roots, and one memorable early statement came from the psychologist Kenneth Craik, who suggested in 1943 that the mind carries a small-scale model of reality that it uses to try out alternatives before acting.

In systems terms the internal model is the system's world-state cache plus its simulator: its inputs are sensory evidence, its output is a best current estimate of the world that every other process can query, and its update cycle runs continuously as new evidence arrives.

Calling the internal model the field's central theoretical object means many researchers treat it as the main thing their theories are ultimately about.

Rather than studying isolated tricks, they see the mind as one big model-maker, and the various faculties as different services that model provides.

This gives the field a shared target and a common language, which is exactly what a maturing science needs.


1.3.2 Generative, forward, and inverse models

Once we accept that the brain builds models, we can distinguish three especially important kinds, each with a plain job.

A generative model is one that captures how the world produces the data you receive, so you can imagine or generate what experiences a given situation would create.

For example, a generative model of faces knows how faces are structured well enough to conjure up a face in your mind's eye.

A forward model predicts the consequences of an action before you take it, answering the question what will happen if I do this.

When you reach for a cup, a forward model predicts how your arm will feel and where your hand will end up, which lets you correct your movement smoothly.

An inverse model works in the other direction, answering the question what action would achieve this goal, so it computes the steps needed to reach a desired outcome.

If you want your hand at the cup, an inverse model figures out which muscle commands will get it there.

A simple way to remember the pair is that a forward model goes from action to result, while an inverse model goes from desired result back to action.

Stated as interfaces: the generative model maps hidden world states to expected sensations, the forward model maps a motor command to a predicted sensory outcome, and the inverse model maps a desired outcome to a motor command, and in motor control these predictions run fast enough to correct a reach within roughly a tenth of a second, well before slower sensory feedback arrives.

These ideas come largely from research on motor control and from a branch of engineering and statistics concerned with control and prediction, and they have spread across the study of cognition.

You do not need the mathematics to grasp the point: the brain seems to run several kinds of model at once, some to explain what it senses, some to foresee outcomes, and some to plan moves.


1.3.3 Prediction as a proposed common currency of cognition

Building on models, a bold proposal has gained ground in recent decades: that prediction is a common currency running through all of cognition.

A common currency means a single kind of operation that shows up everywhere, so that seemingly different mental activities are really variations on one theme.

The claim is that the brain is fundamentally a prediction machine, always guessing what comes next and then checking its guess against what actually arrives.

The gap between the guess and reality is called prediction error, meaning the mismatch that tells the brain its model was wrong and needs updating.

On this view perception is not passive reception but active guessing, where the brain predicts the incoming signal and only pays special attention to the surprises.

As a system design this is elegant bandwidth engineering: instead of transmitting the whole input upward, the system transmits only the difference between input and prediction, so a well-predicted world costs almost nothing to process and every unit of traffic carries news.

This family of ideas is often called predictive processing or predictive coding, and it has been championed by researchers such as Karl Friston and the philosopher Andy Clark.

Its appeal is unity: the same predict-then-correct loop could underlie seeing, moving, remembering, and even feeling.

It is important to be candid that this is a proposal, not a settled fact, and thoughtful scientists debate how far it really reaches.

Some find it a profound organizing principle, while others worry it is so flexible that it risks explaining everything and therefore predicting nothing in particular.

Still, prediction as a common currency is one of the most influential big ideas in the current science of mind, and it is worth understanding on its own terms.


1.3.4 Why model-building aims to unify perception, memory, and planning under one description

We can now see why the model-building view is so attractive: it promises to unify things that once looked separate.

To unify here means to describe several different phenomena with a single underlying account, rather than a separate story for each.

Perception, on this view, is building and updating a model of what is out there right now.

Memory is the model's record of what has been, the stored parts you can bring back and reuse.

Planning is running the model forward in imagination to try out possible futures before committing to one.

Under one description, all three become facets of the same activity: maintaining a model and using it across the past, present, and future.

An engineer would say the three faculties are three access patterns on one data structure: perception is the write path from the senses, memory is the persisted state and its read path, and planning is offline simulation against a copy of the state.

This is powerful because a science prizes theories that explain much with little, the way a few laws of physics cover falling apples and orbiting planets.

If perception, memory, and planning really are one model used in three directions, we gain a simpler and deeper understanding than a long list of unrelated faculties could give.

Whether the unification fully succeeds is still being worked out, but the ambition itself has reshaped how the field frames its questions.

Keep this aspiration in mind, because later chapters return again and again to the idea of a single model serving many roles.


1.4 The mind and its realisation

Finally, we step back to a question that sits underneath everything: how does the mind relate to the physical stuff that produces it?

This section introduces that classic problem, a popular way of thinking about it, and the different scientific fields that approach the mind from their own angles.


1.4.1 The mind-body problem in the form the science inherits it

The oldest question here is called the mind-body problem, and it asks how mental things relate to physical things.

Put plainly, your thoughts and feelings seem quite unlike lumps of matter, yet they somehow arise from the physical brain, and explaining that link is hard.

The philosopher Rene Descartes, writing in the seventeenth century, famously proposed that mind and body are two different substances, a view now called dualism.

Dualism means the belief that the mind is made of something non-physical, separate from the body, though it interacts with it.

Most modern scientists reject strong dualism and instead assume that mental processes are produced by physical processes in the brain, a stance often called physicalism.

But the science does not inherit the problem as a debate about ghostly substances; it inherits a more workable version.

In the form the science inherits it, the question becomes: how do physical processes give rise to mental functions, and how can we describe the mind in a way that connects to the brain without dissolving into it?

For a systems thinker this is exactly the software and hardware question: how do you describe what a system does at the level of function while staying consistent with the circuits underneath, without pretending the two descriptions are the same description?

This reframing lets researchers get to work, studying how patterns of brain activity correspond to acts of perceiving, remembering, and deciding.

The hardest residue of the old problem, why any physical process should feel like anything at all, remains genuinely unsolved and is openly acknowledged as such.


1.4.2 Functionalism and multiple realizability

To make progress, many in the field adopt a philosophical stance called functionalism, which offers a clever way to talk about the mind.

Functionalism means the idea that a mental state is defined by what it does, by its role in the system, rather than by what it is physically made of.

Consider a clock: what makes something a clock is that it keeps and displays time, not whether it runs on gears, quartz, or falling water.

In the same spirit, functionalism says a belief or a memory is defined by the job it performs in taking in information and guiding behavior, not by the particular tissue carrying it.

This leads to a striking companion idea called multiple realizability.

Multiple realizability means the same mental function could be realized, or carried out, by different physical systems.

If the function is what matters, then in principle a brain of neurons, a silicon computer, or perhaps an alien biology could all realize the same kind of thought, provided they perform the same role.

Engineers live by this principle daily: an interface specification says what a component must do, and any implementation that satisfies the specification is interchangeable, whether it is written in one language or another or burned into custom hardware.

This is the philosophical permission slip behind artificial intelligence, since it suggests minds are not tied to one specific material.

Functionalism is influential but not unchallenged, and critics ask whether leaving out the physical details also leaves out something essential, such as why experiences feel the way they do.

For our purposes, functionalism matters because it lets cognitive science describe mental processes at their own level, as information processing, while remaining consistent with the brain underneath.


1.4.3 Cognitive psychology, cognitive science, cognitive neuroscience, and artificial intelligence as four viewpoints on one object

Several different fields study the mind, and it helps to see them as four viewpoints on one shared object rather than as rivals.

Cognitive psychology is the study of mental processes chiefly through careful behavioral experiments, for example measuring how quickly and accurately people respond to tasks.

It infers the hidden steps of the mind from the patterns of behavior, much as one might deduce the rules of a game by watching many rounds.

In systems terms, cognitive psychology is black-box testing: probing the system through its public interface and inferring the internals from input-output patterns.

Cognitive science is the broad, interdisciplinary umbrella that combines psychology, philosophy, linguistics, computer science, anthropology, and neuroscience to understand the mind as a whole.

It emerged as a self-conscious field in the 1970s, on the conviction that no single discipline could explain the mind alone.

Cognitive neuroscience is the study of how the physical brain gives rise to mental processes, using tools that observe the brain in action, such as brain scanning and recordings of neural activity.

It ties the abstract processes to the wet, physical organ, asking not just what the mind does but where and how the brain does it, which makes it the hardware-level inspection of the same system.

Artificial intelligence, or A I, is the effort to build machines that perform tasks requiring intelligence, and in this context it doubles as a way to test theories of mind by trying to construct working versions of them.

If you think you understand how memory or vision works, building a system that does it is a demanding test of that understanding, the equivalent of proving a design by shipping a working reference implementation.

These four are best pictured as observers standing around one statue, each describing the side they can see, so that only their combined reports capture the whole.

None owns the truth by itself, and the modern science of cognition advances fastest when their findings are made to fit together.


1.4.4 What a completed science of cognition would have to deliver

It is worth closing the chapter by imagining the finish line, even though we are far from it.

A completed science of cognition would have to deliver an account that satisfies several demands at once, and an engineer will recognize the list as the deliverables of a complete system handover.

First, it would explain behavior, telling us why people and animals act as they do across the full range of situations.

Second, it would specify the processes, laying out the actual steps by which information is acquired, transformed, stored, retrieved, and used.

Third, it would connect those processes to the brain, showing how physical activity implements each step, so the psychological and the biological stories line up.

Fourth, it would ideally be precise enough to build, meaning one could construct a working system that reproduces the behavior, which is the demanding test artificial intelligence provides.

Fifth, and most humblingly, it would have to say something honest about consciousness, about why some of this processing is accompanied by felt experience while most is not.

Experts disagree about whether that last demand can ever be fully met, and some suspect it may require ideas we do not yet have.

Laying out these targets is useful because it turns a vague hope into a checklist, letting us judge how far any theory has actually come.

Keep this finish line in view as you read on, and treat each later chapter as one more attempt to deliver a piece of it.


We close the chapter by writing down cognition itself as a system, using the interface convention that every chapter of this book will follow.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Sensory signals: patterns of light, sound, touch, taste, and smell delivered as neural activity from the sense organs.

◦ Bodily state signals: hunger, fatigue, pain, and arousal delivered from the body's internal sensors, which set motivational priorities.

◦ Feedback signals: the sensed consequences of the system's own actions, returned from the world through the same sensory channels.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Motor commands: signals sent to muscles that produce movement and speech, consumed by the body's action apparatus.

◦ Memory writes: encoded traces of experience, consumed by the storage subsystems described in later chapters.

◦ Predictions and appraisals: expectations about what comes next and evaluations of good and bad, consumed internally by attention, emotion, and decision processes.

• STATE.

◦ The internal model of the world: the current best estimate of what is out there, continuously updated.

◦ The contents of memory: stored knowledge, skills, and personal history that persist between moments.

◦ Current goals and the momentary focus of attention, which determine what the pipeline is working on right now.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Processing capacity: how much can be handled at once, famously limited to a few chunks in immediate memory.

◦ Learning rate: how strongly a single experience updates the internal model.

◦ Gain settings from emotion and motivation: how strongly bodily priorities reweight processing.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ A single neural signaling event: on the order of 1 millisecond.

◦ One elementary cognitive step, such as recognizing or comparing: on the order of 100 milliseconds.

◦ A simple stimulus-to-response pass through the whole pipeline: roughly 200 to 500 milliseconds.

◦ Deliberate reasoning and planning: seconds to minutes.

◦ Lasting model change through learning: hours to years, with consolidation continuing during sleep.

• MODES.

◦ Automatic mode: fast, effortless, parallel processing of familiar input, engaged by well-practiced situations.

◦ Deliberate mode: slow, effortful, serial processing, engaged when novelty, conflict, or error signals indicate the automatic mode cannot cope.

◦ Offline mode: imagination, planning, and sleep-time consolidation, engaged when the system is decoupled from immediate action demands.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Capacity overload: performance collapses when too many streams demand processing at once, as in divided attention errors.

◦ Model error: illusions and biases arise when the internal model's predictions systematically diverge from the world.

◦ Boundary breakdowns: clinical conditions such as blindsight show processing continuing while awareness fails, and amnesia shows the pipeline running while storage fails.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called stimuli containing the incoming sensory signals.
Create a dictionary variable called memory_store with no entries.
Create a number variable called model_estimate with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called learning_rate with initial value zero point three.
For each stimulus in the stimuli list, do the following.
    Set a number variable called acquired to the stimulus value.
    Set a number variable called represented to the acquired value rounded to two decimal places.
    Set a number variable called prediction_error to the represented value minus the model_estimate value.
    Add the product of the learning_rate and the prediction_error to the model_estimate.
    Store the represented value in the memory_store dictionary under a key made from the stimulus index.
    If the absolute value of the prediction_error is greater than zero point five, then print a message that the system acts on a surprise.
    Otherwise, print a message that the system treats the input as expected.
Retrieve the first stored value from the memory_store dictionary.
Print the final model_estimate and the retrieved value.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Define a function that runs one pass of the cognitive pipeline over a list of stimuli
def cognitive_pipeline(stimuli):
    # Create a dictionary variable called memory_store with no entries
    memory_store = {}
    # Create a number variable called model_estimate with initial value zero
    model_estimate = 0.0
    # Create a number variable called learning_rate with initial value zero point three
    learning_rate = 0.3
    # For each stimulus index and stimulus value in the stimuli list, do the following
    for index, stimulus in enumerate(stimuli):
        # Set acquired to the stimulus value, representing acquisition from the senses
        acquired = stimulus
        # Set represented to the acquired value rounded to two decimal places, representing encoding
        represented = round(acquired, 2)
        # Set prediction_error to the represented value minus the model_estimate value
        prediction_error = represented - model_estimate
        # Add the product of the learning_rate and the prediction_error to the model_estimate
        model_estimate = model_estimate + learning_rate * prediction_error
        # Store the represented value in the memory_store dictionary under the stimulus index
        memory_store[index] = represented
        # If the absolute value of the prediction_error is greater than zero point five, act on the surprise
        if abs(prediction_error) > 0.5:
            # Print a message that the system acts on a surprise
            print("step", index, ": surprise", round(prediction_error, 2), "- act and update")
        # Otherwise, treat the input as expected
        else:
            # Print a message that the system treats the input as expected
            print("step", index, ": expected input, small update", round(prediction_error, 2))
    # Retrieve the first stored value from the memory_store dictionary
    first_memory = memory_store[0]
    # Return the final model_estimate and the retrieved first memory
    return model_estimate, first_memory

# Create a list variable called world containing a stream of sensory signal values
world = [1.0, 1.1, 0.9, 1.0, 2.5, 2.4, 2.6, 2.5]
# Call the cognitive_pipeline function on the world list and unpack its two results
final_model, recalled = cognitive_pipeline(world)
# Print the final internal model estimate and the recalled first memory
print("final model estimate:", round(final_model, 2), "recalled first memory:", recalled)


CHAPTER 2. A HISTORY OF THE SCIENCE OF MIND (CONTEXT)

This chapter tells the story of how people learned to study the mind.

For most of human history, thinking about thinking belonged to philosophy, to religion, and to quiet personal reflection.

Only in the last century and a half did the mind become something people tried to measure in a laboratory.

That shift is worth understanding, because the ideas you will meet in later chapters did not fall from the sky.

They were argued over, tested, abandoned, and rediscovered by real people across many generations.

Read with a systems eye, this history is a sequence of proposals about what kind of system the mind is: a blank recording device, a bundle of separate faculties, a stimulus-response machine with no interior, an information processor with stages and stores, a network of simple units, and most recently a prediction engine.

Knowing where the ideas came from makes them far easier to understand, and it protects you from thinking any one view is simply obvious.


2.1 Philosophical roots

Long before there were psychology experiments, philosophers asked how the mind works.

They could not run tests, so they reasoned carefully from everyday experience and from argument.

Many of their questions are still alive today, which is why we start here.


2.1.1 Empiricism and rationalism: Locke, Hume, Kant

The first big question is simple to state: where does our knowledge come from?

Two broad answers grew up in Europe in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

The first answer is called empiricism, which is the view that knowledge comes mainly from experience, from what our senses take in.

The word empiricism comes from a Greek word for experience, and it means, roughly, that the mind learns by observing the world.

John Locke, an English thinker who lived from 1632 to 1704, gave this view its most famous image.

He suggested that the mind at birth is like a blank sheet of paper, with nothing written on it yet, and that experience does all the writing.

This idea is often summarized by the Latin phrase tabula rasa, which simply means a scraped or blank tablet.

David Hume, a Scottish thinker who lived from 1711 to 1776, pushed the empiricist view further and with great honesty.

Hume argued that even our sense of cause and effect is not something we directly see in the world.

When one billiard ball strikes another and the second moves, he said, we never actually observe a force called causation.

We only observe one event, then another, again and again, and our mind forms a habit of expecting the second to follow the first.

This was a startling claim, because it suggested that some of our deepest certainties are built by the mind rather than read straight off the world.

The second answer to the question is called rationalism, which is the view that some knowledge comes from reason itself, not only from the senses.

Rationalists pointed out that truths of mathematics, such as the fact that a straight line is the shortest path between two points, do not seem to depend on any particular experiment.

Immanuel Kant, a German thinker who lived from 1724 to 1804, offered a famous middle path between these two camps.

Kant agreed with the empiricists that all our knowledge begins with experience, but he denied that it all arises from experience.

He argued that the mind comes equipped with built in ways of organizing whatever the senses deliver, such as a sense of space, a sense of time, and a sense of cause.

In his picture, experience is the raw material, but the mind is an active shaper that stamps its own structure onto that material.

In systems terms this debate is about the system's initial state and priors: empiricism predicts a mind shipped nearly empty that learns everything from input data, rationalism predicts a mind shipped with substantial built-in structure, and Kant predicts a mind shipped with a fixed processing framework that formats all incoming data, so the three views would build visibly different machines.

This idea, that the mind actively contributes structure rather than passively receiving impressions, echoes through everything that follows in this book.

Experts still divide over how much of the mind is built in and how much is learned, and you should treat anyone who claims the matter is settled with caution.


2.1.2 Associationism and faculty psychology

Once thinkers accepted that experience writes on the mind, they needed an account of how ideas link together.

The account they offered is called associationism, which is the view that the mind works by connecting ideas that occur together.

The basic notion is easy to feel from your own life.

The smell of a particular meal can suddenly bring back a childhood kitchen, because the smell and the memory were once experienced together and became linked.

Associationist thinkers, including Locke and Hume, proposed simple rules for these links, such as similarity, nearness in time, and repetition.

Ideas that are alike tend to call up one another, ideas that happened close together in time tend to become joined, and links grow stronger the more often they are repeated.

As a system design, associationism proposes a mind that is one big weighted graph: ideas are nodes, co-occurrence writes edges, repetition increases edge weights, and retrieval is activation spreading along the strongest edges, an architecture that returns in modern form in a later chapter on connectionism.

This was a powerful idea, because it tried to explain the whole rich flow of thought using a few plain principles, much as physics explains motion with a few laws.

A rather different tradition ran alongside associationism, and it is called faculty psychology.

A faculty, in this old usage, means a distinct mental power or ability, such as memory, attention, language, or judgment.

Faculty psychology held that the mind is not one smooth thing but a collection of separate powers, each doing its own job, which in systems terms is a modular architecture rather than a single uniform network.

This tradition took an unfortunate turn in the early nineteenth century with a fad called phrenology.

Phrenology was the belief that mental faculties sit in specific spots on the brain, and that a strong faculty makes a bump on the skull you could feel with your fingers.

Its founder, the German physician Franz Joseph Gall, who lived from 1758 to 1828, made real anatomical observations, but the bump reading part was false and was later firmly discredited.

Still, one seed inside faculty psychology proved lasting and important, namely the idea that different mental jobs might be handled by different parts of the brain.

That seed, cleaned of its errors, grew into the modern science of brain regions that we meet later in this book.


2.1.3 The introspective method and its limits

If you want to study the mind, an obvious first move is simply to look inward and report what you find.

That method has a name: introspection, which means the careful inward observation of your own thoughts, feelings, and sensations.

For a long time introspection seemed like the only possible tool, because your own mind is the one mind you can observe from the inside.

Early scientific psychologists tried to make introspection rigorous, training people to describe their inner experience in fine detail under controlled conditions.

A trained observer might be shown a red patch and asked to report the pure sensation of redness, separated from the everyday judgment that the object is, say, an apple.

This method produced some real findings, but it ran into deep problems that eventually limited its usefulness.

The first problem is that the act of watching your own mind can change the very thing you are watching, which an engineer will recognize as the observer effect: attaching a debugger to a running system alters its timing and behavior.

If you stop to notice how you are solving a puzzle, you may solve it differently than you would have unwatched.

The second problem is that much of what the mind does is simply not available to inward view, because the monitoring channel has no read access to most of the machinery.

You can report the answer to a hard question, but you usually cannot report the hidden steps that produced it, because those steps happen out of sight.

The third problem is that different laboratories, using differently trained observers, reported different inner experiences and could not settle their disputes.

When two honest observers disagree about what is inside their own heads, there is no outside umpire to decide who is right.

These limits did not destroy introspection, and gentle forms of it still appear in research today, for example when people rate how confident they feel.

But the limits did teach a hard lesson that shaped the next hundred years: a science of mind needs evidence that others can check, not only private reports.


2.2 The founding of experimental psychology

In the second half of the nineteenth century, a handful of people decided that the mind could be studied with the tools of experiment.

They borrowed the careful measuring habits of physics and biology and pointed them at sensation, memory, and thought.

This section introduces the founders and their first hard won results.


2.2.1 Wundt, the Leipzig laboratory, and structuralism

The person most often called the founder of experimental psychology is Wilhelm Wundt, a German scientist who lived from 1832 to 1920.

In 1879, at the University of Leipzig in Germany, Wundt set up what is widely regarded as the first laboratory devoted to psychology.

That date, 1879, is a useful landmark, because it marks the moment the study of mind formally became a laboratory science rather than a branch of philosophy.

Wundt wanted to break conscious experience into its basic building blocks, much as a chemist breaks water into hydrogen and oxygen.

His approach came to be called structuralism, which means the attempt to describe the structure of the mind in terms of its simplest parts.

In systems terms structuralism was an attempt to reverse engineer the mind's data types: to find the primitive elements of experience out of which all richer states are composed, using introspective reports as the only readout instrument.

In his laboratory, trained observers reported their sensations and feelings in response to carefully controlled stimuli, such as sounds, lights, and the ticking of a metronome.

Wundt was careful, though, and he did not believe every mental thing could be caught this way.

He thought higher matters, such as language and the customs of whole peoples, needed a different, more historical kind of study.

Structuralism itself did not survive long as a movement, because it leaned so heavily on introspection, with all the problems we just saw.

But Wundt's real achievement was the laboratory itself, and the training of students who carried the experimental spirit across Europe and to the United States.


2.2.2 Ebbinghaus, nonsense syllables, and the forgetting curve

At almost the same time, a German researcher named Hermann Ebbinghaus, who lived from 1850 to 1909, showed that even memory could be measured.

Memory had seemed far too personal and slippery to put numbers on, and Ebbinghaus proved that intuition wrong.

His clever trick was to invent material with no meaning, so that old knowledge could not help or hinder the learning.

He used nonsense syllables, which are short made up units such as a consonant, a vowel, and a consonant, like the strings DAX or WUB, that mean nothing at all.

In systems language, he was benchmarking the storage subsystem with synthetic data, deliberately choosing inputs that no cached knowledge could compress, so the measurement would reflect the raw store and decay characteristics of memory itself.

He learned long lists of these syllables, testing himself as the only subject, and he recorded exactly how much time and how many repetitions learning required.

Then he waited, for twenty minutes, for an hour, for a day, for many days, and measured how much he had lost.

From this patient work came one of psychology's first true quantitative laws, now called the forgetting curve.

The forgetting curve is a simple picture of how memory fades over time, showing that we lose a great deal very quickly at first and then lose the rest much more slowly.

In his 1885 measurements, roughly two fifths of the learning effort was already lost within the first hour, and about two thirds within a day, after which the remaining trace decayed only slowly over the following month.

In plain terms, most of what you forget, you forget soon after learning, and whatever survives the first day tends to stick around far longer.

Ebbinghaus also uncovered a related and very practical finding, sometimes called the spacing effect.

He found that spreading your study sessions out over time produces better long term memory than cramming the same amount of study into one block, which in systems terms means each spaced rehearsal increases the stability parameter of the trace, flattening its decay curve.

These results, more than a century old, still hold up in modern research, and they quietly shape good advice about how to study.


2.2.3 William James and the stream of consciousness

While the Germans measured, an American thinker offered a rich and humane description of what the mind actually feels like from the inside.

That thinker was William James, who lived from 1842 to 1910, and whose great book, The Principles of Psychology, appeared in 1890.

James disliked the structuralist habit of chopping experience into separate little pieces, because that is not how experience seems when you live it.

He coined a phrase that has entered ordinary language: the stream of consciousness.

By the stream of consciousness he meant that our inner life flows continuously, like a river, rather than arriving as separate beads on a string.

Thoughts blend into one another, feelings color everything, and the mind is always moving, never frozen into tidy units.

In systems terms James was insisting that the mind is a continuous process, not a sequence of discrete states, an early statement of the dynamical view that returns in the next chapter.

James also drew a distinction between two kinds of memory that researchers still use today.

He spoke of primary memory, which holds what is present in the mind right now, and secondary memory, which holds the great store of the past that we must reach back for.

That distinction is an early ancestor of the modern split between short term and long term memory, a two-tier storage design with a small fast buffer in front of a vast slow archive, that fills later chapters.

James mattered less for laboratory results and more for the questions he framed and the honesty with which he described mental life.

He also championed the view that mind is for doing, that thinking exists to help a creature act and survive, an emphasis that later became known as functionalism.

Functionalism is the view that we should ask what mental processes are for and what they accomplish, not only what they are made of.


2.2.4 Gestalt psychology and Bartlett's schemas

Two further early movements pushed back against the idea that the mind is just a heap of separate parts.

The first arose in Germany in the early twentieth century and is called Gestalt psychology.

Gestalt is a German word that means shape or whole form, and the movement's slogan is often put as the whole is different from the sum of its parts.

The core insight is that we naturally perceive organized wholes, not scattered fragments, and the whole carries meaning the fragments lack.

Consider four dots arranged at the corners of an invisible square; you see a square, a shape that exists in your perception even though no lines are drawn.

A melody makes the same point, since it stays recognizably the same tune even when played in a higher or lower key, where every single note has changed.

Gestalt researchers, among them Max Wertheimer, Kurt Koffka, and Wolfgang Kohler, worked out several rules by which the mind groups things into wholes, such as grouping items that are near each other or that look alike.

In systems terms the Gestalt rules are the perceptual system's default grouping algorithms: fixed heuristics that take scattered features as input and publish organized objects as output, running automatically within the first few hundred milliseconds of seeing.

The second movement came from England, through the work of Frederic Bartlett, who lived from 1886 to 1969.

Bartlett studied memory, but unlike Ebbinghaus he used meaningful material, such as a folk story from another culture, and asked people to recall it after delays.

He found that people did not store the story like a recording and play it back faithfully.

Instead they reshaped it, dropping strange details, adding familiar ones, and bending the tale to fit their own expectations.

To explain this, Bartlett borrowed and popularized the idea of a schema, which is a mental framework of prior knowledge that guides how we understand and remember new things.

In plain words, a schema is the set of expectations you already carry, such as your general idea of what happens at a restaurant, which quietly fills in gaps and shapes what you recall.

In systems terms Bartlett showed that human memory is not a faithful recorder but a lossy, schema-compressed store: encoding keeps a compressed gist plus deviations from expectation, and retrieval reconstructs the record by decompressing that gist through the schema, which is exactly why the errors are systematic rather than random.

Bartlett's lesson was that memory is not a passive recording but an active reconstruction, built partly from the world and partly from what we already believe.

This active, constructive view of the mind connects Kant's old idea directly to the modern chapters ahead.


2.3 The behaviourist interregnum

Early in the twentieth century, many psychologists grew frustrated with talk of inner mental life they could not measure.

They launched a movement that tried to build psychology entirely on things anyone could observe from the outside.

The word interregnum in this heading means an in between period, and it hints that this movement, powerful as it was, eventually gave way to something else.


2.3.1 Watson, Skinner, and the rejection of mentalism

The movement was called behaviourism, which is the view that psychology should study only observable behaviour, not hidden mental states.

Its founding voice was John B. Watson, an American psychologist who lived from 1878 to 1958.

In a fiery article in 1913, Watson argued that a science can only study what it can see, and no one can see a thought, a feeling, or a memory directly.

So he urged psychologists to drop all talk of the mind, which he dismissed as unscientific, and to study instead the link between a stimulus and the response it produces.

A stimulus means anything in the environment that acts on a creature, and a response means what the creature does in return.

The word mentalism, which behaviourists used as an insult, means any explanation that appeals to inner mental states, and it was exactly this that they wished to reject.

In systems terms, behaviourism modeled the mind as a stateless lookup table from stimulus to response, tuned by reward: no internal representations, no stored world model, only the input-output mapping itself.

The most influential behaviourist of all was B. F. Skinner, an American psychologist who lived from 1904 to 1990.

Skinner showed, in careful animal experiments, how behaviour is shaped by its consequences, a process he called operant conditioning.

Operant conditioning means that actions followed by reward tend to be repeated, while actions followed by an unpleasant result tend to fade away.

A rat that happens to press a lever and receives food will press it more often, and in this simple fact Skinner saw the engine of a great deal of learning.

Behaviourism was not foolish, and it brought real gains, including strict experimental methods and a hard insistence on public, checkable evidence.

Its methods still underlie useful therapies today, for example treatments that help people unlearn fears.

But it carried a heavy cost, because by refusing to talk about inner processes it could not easily explain language, planning, imagination, or understanding.

A creature that only reacts to rewards and punishments, with nothing going on inside, turned out to be too thin a picture of a thinking being: a stateless mapping simply lacks the memory and internal structure that flexible behavior demands.


2.3.2 Tolman, cognitive maps, and latent learning as proto-cognitive dissent

Even during behaviourism's reign, a few researchers found results that the strict view could not comfortably explain.

The clearest dissenter was Edward Tolman, an American psychologist who lived from 1886 to 1959.

Tolman worked with rats in mazes, the favourite tool of behaviourists, yet he drew very different conclusions from what he saw.

He proposed that a rat learning a maze builds something inside its head that he called a cognitive map.

A cognitive map means an internal mental representation of a layout or space, a kind of inner model of the world rather than a mere chain of turns.

The word representation here means an internal stand in for something in the world, a piece of information the mind holds and can use.

This was near heresy, because it put an unobservable inner model right back at the centre of the explanation.

Tolman supported his view with a striking finding he called latent learning.

Latent learning means learning that has quietly taken place but does not show up in behaviour until there is a reason to use it.

In his experiments, rats that wandered a maze with no reward seemed to learn nothing, since their performance did not improve.

But once a reward was suddenly placed at the goal, those rats raced through the maze almost at once, revealing that they had been learning the layout all along.

Their earlier learning had been hidden, or latent, because they had no motive to display it, exactly as the idea of an inner map predicts.

In systems terms the two theories make cleanly different predictions: a stateless stimulus-response system cannot improve without reward, because reward is its only write signal, while a system with an internal map keeps writing state during unrewarded exploration and can exploit that state the moment a goal appears, which is exactly what the rats did.

Strict behaviourism struggled to explain this, since learning was supposed to require reward to stamp the behaviour in.

Tolman's work stands as an early, brave hint that psychology would eventually have to talk about inner representations again, and it earns him a place as a forerunner of the revolution to come.


2.4 The cognitive revolution

Around the middle of the twentieth century, the ban on talking about the mind broke down.

A cluster of new ideas and new tools made it respectable, even necessary, to describe the inner steps of thinking.

This turning point is usually called the cognitive revolution, and this section explains what set it off and how it unfolded.


2.4.1 The enabling disciplines: information theory, cybernetics, the digital computer, generative linguistics

The cognitive revolution did not spring from psychology alone; it was fed by several other fields arriving at once.

The word cognitive comes from a Latin root meaning to know, and cognition simply means the mental activities involved in knowing, such as perceiving, remembering, and reasoning.

The first feeder field was information theory, a mathematical account of how messages can be measured and transmitted, developed by the American engineer Claude Shannon in 1948.

Information theory gave scientists a precise way to talk about information as a quantity, something that could be measured, moved, and processed, without having to mention any particular physical thing.

This was liberating, because now the mind could be described as something that takes in, stores, and passes along information, in language as exact as physics.

The second feeder field was cybernetics, the study of control and communication in animals and machines, named by the American mathematician Norbert Wiener in 1948.

Cybernetics introduced the powerful idea of feedback, in which a system checks the results of its own actions and adjusts, the way a thermostat senses room temperature and switches the heat on or off.

Feedback showed how a machine, with no mind of its own, could nonetheless pursue a goal, and that made goal directed behaviour respectable to talk about again.

The third and most important feeder was the digital computer, which appeared in working form in the 1940s.

The computer offered a stunning new comparison, because here was a physical device that plainly stored information, followed rules, and manipulated symbols to solve problems.

If a machine could do such things through orderly inner steps, then perhaps describing the mind in terms of inner steps was not unscientific after all.

This comparison became known as the information processing view, which treats the mind as a system that takes in information, transforms it through a series of stages, and produces an output.

Notice what the four feeder fields jointly supplied, in systems terms: a unit of measurement for the signals, a theory of feedback control, an existence proof of a physical symbol-processing machine, and a demonstration that behavior as rich as language needs internal rules, which together amount to the complete vocabulary for writing a system specification of the mind.

The fourth feeder was a new approach to language now called generative linguistics, chiefly the work of the American linguist Noam Chomsky, born in 1928.

Chomsky argued that human language is generative, meaning that with a finite set of rules a person can produce and understand an endless number of brand new sentences.

The word generative here means capable of producing an unlimited variety of new outputs from a limited set of underlying rules.

This directly contradicted the behaviourist claim that language is just a set of habits built by reward, and it demanded inner rules and structures that behaviourism had forbidden.


2.4.2 The year 1956 and its landmarks: Miller, Chomsky, Bruner, Newell and Simon, the Dartmouth workshop

Historians often point to a single year, 1956, as the symbolic birth of the cognitive revolution.

No single year truly makes a revolution, and you should read this as a convenient marker rather than a magic date, but the cluster of events that year is genuinely remarkable.

In 1956 the American psychologist George Miller published a famous paper with the memorable title about the number seven, plus or minus two.

Miller pointed out that the number of separate items a person can hold in mind at once is strikingly small, roughly seven, give or take a couple, and modern estimates of the underlying capacity are smaller still, about four chunks.

This was a systems measurement of the first importance: it put a hard number on the capacity parameter of the mind's working buffer.

He also introduced the idea of chunking, which means grouping small items into larger meaningful units so that more can be held at once.

A long string of digits is hard to hold, but grouped into a few familiar clusters, as we group the digits of a telephone number, it becomes manageable, and that is chunking at work: recoding the input into a more compact representation so the same buffer holds more content.

Also in 1956, Noam Chomsky presented early versions of his theory of language structure, laying groundwork that would reshape the study of the mind.

The same year, the psychologist Jerome Bruner and his colleagues published important work on how people form concepts and actively develop strategies to sort the world into categories.

Also in 1956, the researchers Allen Newell and Herbert Simon demonstrated a computer program, later known as the Logic Theorist, that could prove logical theorems.

This was a landmark because it was arguably the first working program that performed a task everyone agreed required intelligence, giving real substance to the idea of thinking as information processing.

Finally, in the summer of 1956, a small gathering at Dartmouth College in the United States coined a new term for the effort to make machines behave intelligently: artificial intelligence.

Artificial intelligence, often shortened to AI, means the attempt to build machines that can perform tasks that would ordinarily require human intelligence.

Taken together, these events show many fields converging on one big idea in one short span, and that convergence is what the phrase cognitive revolution really names.


2.4.3 Broadbent's filter model and the flow diagram as a theory

One of the first fully worked out theories in the new style came from the British psychologist Donald Broadbent, who lived from 1926 to 1993.

Broadbent studied attention, which is the mind's ability to focus on some information while setting other information aside.

He had worked with air traffic controllers, people flooded with many voices and signals at once who somehow manage to pick out what matters.

To explain how we cope, Broadbent proposed in 1958 what is called the filter model of attention.

The filter model says that information from the senses first enters a brief holding store, and then passes through a filter that selects one channel to attend to and blocks the rest.

In this picture, we cannot fully process everything arriving at once, so an early filter protects the limited system by letting only the chosen stream through.

In systems terms this is a buffer feeding a single-channel selector in front of a limited-capacity processor: the model's inputs are parallel sensory streams, its output is one selected stream, its state is the brief sensory buffer, and its key parameter is where in the pipeline the selection happens.

A familiar example is a noisy party, where you can follow one conversation and treat the surrounding voices as a blur, until, tellingly, someone across the room says your name.

That last detail, that your own name can break through, later forced researchers to revise exactly where and how strict the filter is, and the debate over early versus late selection continues: early selection predicts unattended content is discarded before meaning is computed, late selection predicts meaning is computed for everything and only the response stage is gated, and the name effect is evidence that at least some meaning leaks through.

For our purposes the deep point is not the model's details but its form, because Broadbent drew his theory as a flow diagram.

A flow diagram is a picture made of labelled boxes joined by arrows, where each box is a processing stage and each arrow shows information moving from one stage to the next.

This was something genuinely new, since the diagram was not a mere illustration but the theory itself, a precise claim about what happens, in what order, to information inside the mind.

The box and arrow diagram became the signature style of the whole field, and you will meet many such diagrams in the chapters to come; this book's SYSTEMS INTERFACE blocks are the same idea written as text instead of drawn.


2.4.4 Neisser's 1967 codification and the naming of the field

A revolution needs someone to gather its scattered ideas into one coherent whole and give it a name.

For cognitive psychology that person was Ulric Neisser, a German born American psychologist who lived from 1928 to 2012.

In 1967 Neisser published a book simply titled Cognitive Psychology, and that book is often credited with giving the field its name and its identity.

Neisser pulled together the many threads we have followed, perception, attention, memory, and thinking, and presented them as a single unified subject.

He defined cognition broadly, as all the processes by which sensory information is transformed, reduced, stored, recovered, and used.

That definition is worth pausing on, because it treats the mind as an active handler of information from the moment a sensation arrives to the moment we act on it, which is the same pipeline specification we wrote down in chapter 1.

Neisser stressed that perception itself is constructive, that we actively build our experience of the world rather than passively receive it, echoing Kant and Bartlett once more.

With this book the loose movement became a named discipline with textbooks, courses, and a shared vocabulary, and cognitive psychology took its place as a mature science.

It is worth noting that Neisser himself later became a thoughtful critic of his own field, worrying that laboratory studies had drifted too far from real everyday life.

His willingness to question the movement he helped found is a healthy reminder that science advances by criticism, not by loyalty.


2.5 From revolution to synthesis

The cognitive revolution set the stage, but the science did not stop in 1967.

Over the following decades it absorbed new ideas from biology, from mathematics, and from computing, and grew richer and less tidy.

This final section carries the story up to the present and shows how several strands began to weave together.


2.5.1 The rise of connectionism in the 1980s

The early cognitive revolution leaned heavily on the computer as its model of the mind, and that computer worked by following step by step rules on symbols.

In the 1980s a different model of the mind gathered force, and it is called connectionism.

Connectionism is the view that mental activity arises from the combined action of many simple units connected together, loosely inspired by the brain's networks of nerve cells.

Instead of one central processor following rules one step at a time, a connectionist system is a web of many simple units that pass signals to one another all at once.

Each connection between units has a strength, called a weight, and the system learns not by being programmed but by gradually adjusting these weights through experience.

A weight, in this setting, means a number that says how strongly one unit influences another, and learning is the slow tuning of many such numbers.

These systems came to be known as neural networks, meaning networks of simple units modelled very loosely on the neurons, or nerve cells, of the brain.

A landmark was a two volume work published in 1986 by David Rumelhart, James McClelland, and a group of collaborators who called their approach parallel distributed processing.

Parallel distributed processing means that many computations happen at the same time, in parallel, and that knowledge is spread across the whole network rather than stored in one tidy place.

In systems terms this was a rival architecture, not just a rival theory: it replaced the serial central processor with massively parallel hardware, replaced explicit stored rules with tuned connection weights, and replaced programming with training on data.

Connectionism was attractive because it learned gracefully, handled messy real world input well, and degraded gently, still working even when parts were damaged, much as a brain can.

It sparked sharp debates with the older symbol based view, and experts still disagree about how much of the mind is best described by rules and symbols and how much by networks and weights.

That very debate, unresolved to this day, kept the field honest and set the stage for the powerful learning systems we see now.


2.5.2 The turn to the brain and the birth of cognitive neuroscience

For most of its early life, cognitive psychology studied the mind by watching behaviour, largely leaving the physical brain to one side.

That changed dramatically as new tools made it possible to watch the living, working brain in action.

The key advances were brain imaging methods, which are techniques for producing pictures of brain activity in a living person without surgery.

The most important of these is functional magnetic resonance imaging, usually shortened to fMRI, which detects changes in blood flow to reveal which brain areas are more active during a task.

The idea is simple to grasp: brain regions doing more work call for more oxygen rich blood, and the scanner can track where that extra blood goes.

With such tools, researchers could finally connect mental processes described by cognitive psychology to specific machinery in the brain, which in systems terms means the field finally gained instrumentation on the hardware layer instead of inferring everything from the system's external behavior.

Out of this marriage a new field was born, called cognitive neuroscience, which is the study of how the brain gives rise to mental processes.

The name itself began to be used in the late 1970s, and the field flowered through the 1980s and 1990s as the scanners improved.

Cognitive neuroscience also drew on older evidence from patients with brain injuries, whose specific losses had long hinted that particular abilities depend on particular regions.

A famous example is a patient known by the initials H. M., who after brain surgery for epilepsy lost the ability to form new lasting memories, while his older memories and his intelligence stayed intact.

That heartbreaking case showed that the ability to lay down new memories is a distinct function, tied to specific brain structures: in systems terms his write path to long term storage was severed while the existing archive and the processor stayed intact, a dissociation that shaped memory research for decades.

We should be careful, though, not to expect a neat single spot for every mental function, because most abilities depend on many regions working together in networks.

Cognitive neuroscience is now one of the most active areas of the whole science of mind, and it fills a substantial part of this book.


2.5.3 The Bayesian and probabilistic synthesis of the 2000s

Around the turn of the twenty first century, a powerful new way of describing the thinking mind gained ground.

It rests on the idea that the mind is, in effect, always dealing with uncertainty and making its best guesses about a doubtful world.

The tools for this come from probability, the branch of mathematics that measures how likely things are.

At its heart sits a rule known as Bayes theorem, named after Thomas Bayes, an English minister and mathematician who lived from about 1701 to 1761.

Bayes theorem is a precise recipe for updating a belief when new evidence arrives, combining what you already expected with what you have just observed.

In plain terms, it says you should weigh your prior expectations against fresh evidence, and shift your belief by an amount that reflects how strong that evidence is.

The word prior here means the belief you held before seeing the new evidence, and updating means adjusting that belief in light of it.

Researchers proposed that the brain works in a broadly similar way, constantly combining its prior expectations with incoming sense data to arrive at its best interpretation of the world.

This is often called the Bayesian brain, or predictive processing, the idea that the brain is a prediction machine that guesses what is coming and pays special attention to its errors.

Predictive processing means that the brain continually generates expectations about its own inputs and updates itself chiefly when those expectations are wrong.

In systems terms this reframed the mind's core loop: the input is noisy evidence, the state is a probability distribution over possible worlds, the update rule is Bayes theorem, and the output is the current best estimate, published to perception and action alike.

This viewpoint elegantly explains many puzzles, such as why we can act on blurry or incomplete information, since a good prior can fill the gaps that the senses leave open.

It also ties together perception, learning, and action under a single mathematical idea, which is part of why it drew so much excitement.

Not everyone agrees that the brain is literally Bayesian, and experts debate how seriously to take the mathematics as a description of real neural machinery, so this remains an active and open question.


2.5.4 The deep-learning and foundation-model era and its challenge to the field

We arrive, finally, at our own moment, which has been reshaped by a dramatic advance in artificial intelligence.

Beginning around 2012, a form of connectionism called deep learning began to achieve results that astonished even its own researchers.

Deep learning means training neural networks that have many layers of units stacked one after another, so that each layer builds on the patterns found by the layer before it.

The word deep here simply refers to the large number of stacked layers, which allow the network to learn very rich and abstract patterns from vast amounts of data.

Fed enormous quantities of examples and running on powerful computers, these deep networks learned to recognize images, understand speech, and translate languages with remarkable skill.

In the years around 2018 to the early 2020s, a further leap produced what are now called foundation models.

A foundation model is a very large network trained on an enormous and broad body of data, which can then be adapted to a wide range of different tasks.

The best known foundation models are large language models, which are systems trained on huge amounts of text to predict the next word and, in doing so, learn to produce fluent language.

A large language model, often shortened to LLM, is a system that generates and understands human language by having learned the statistical patterns in a vast collection of writing.

These systems now write essays, answer questions, and hold conversations, and the assistant helping to shape this very book is one of them.

Their arrival poses a genuine challenge to the science of mind, and thoughtful researchers disagree about what it means.

On one hand, here at last are working systems that use language flexibly, which is exactly what behaviourism said could never be explained and what the cognitive revolution set out to understand.

On the other hand, these systems learn from far more data than any child ever sees, and it is fiercely debated whether they think in anything like the way a person does, or merely imitate the surface of thought.

In systems terms the two sides predict differently: if these networks share the mind's design, their internal representations should line up with human ones under careful comparison, while if they only imitate the surface, the input-output match should break down off the beaten path of their training data, and both predictions are being actively tested.

Some scholars see them as a powerful new model of the mind, while others warn against mistaking fluent output for real understanding, and this disagreement is entirely unsettled today.

What is clear is that the old questions from the start of this chapter, about where knowledge comes from and what it means to understand, are alive and urgent once again.

The science of mind, then, is not a finished story but an ongoing conversation, and you are joining it at a moment of unusual excitement.


We close the chapter by treating its best measured discovery, the memory system Ebbinghaus benchmarked, as this chapter's system, since it was the first cognitive process ever specified with real numbers.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Study episodes: items presented for learning, arriving through perception, together with the time and effort spent on each.

◦ Rehearsal events: repetitions and reviews of previously learned items, whether massed together or spaced over time.

◦ Retrieval requests: prompts, such as a test or a real world need, asking the store to reproduce what it holds.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Recall performance: the proportion of learned material reproduced on demand, consumed by the tasks and decisions that need it.

◦ Savings: the reduction in effort needed to relearn material, which was Ebbinghaus's sensitive measure of hidden residual memory.

◦ Reconstructions: schema-shaped retellings of stored material, as Bartlett showed, consumed by communication and further remembering.

• STATE.

◦ Memory traces: stored records of the learned items, each with a current strength.

◦ Trace stability: a durability value per trace that grows with each spaced review and governs how fast the trace decays.

◦ Schemas: the frameworks of prior knowledge that compress new material at encoding and fill gaps at retrieval.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Decay rate: how quickly an unrehearsed trace loses strength.

◦ Spacing gain: how much each successful spaced review multiplies trace stability.

◦ Meaningfulness: how well the material fits existing schemas, which lowers the effective learning cost, the very variable Ebbinghaus removed with nonsense syllables.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Initial rapid forgetting: much of the loss occurs within the first hour, with roughly two thirds of Ebbinghaus's savings gone within about a day.

◦ Slow residual decay: the surviving remainder fades only gradually over days to a month.

◦ Spaced review benefit: reviews separated by hours to days flatten the decay curve relative to the same reviews massed into one session.

• MODES.

◦ Encoding mode: active study writes new traces, engaged whenever material is attended and processed.

◦ Retention mode: traces decay passively between uses, the default when the material is untouched.

◦ Reconstruction mode: retrieval rebuilds material from gist plus schema, engaged whenever recall is requested, especially after long delays.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Rapid early loss: unreviewed material is mostly gone within a day, the practical failure that defeats cramming.

◦ Systematic distortion: schema-driven reconstruction drops odd details and inserts expected ones, producing confident but altered memories.

◦ Measurement failure in the science itself: introspection could not observe these processes, which is why the field needed savings scores and behavioral measures.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called stability with initial value one.
Create a number variable called strength with initial value one.
Create a list variable called review_days containing the days on which reviews occur.
Create a number variable called previous_day with initial value zero.
For each day from one to thirty, do the following.
    Set a number variable called elapsed to one.
    Multiply the strength by the exponential of the negative of the elapsed value divided by the stability.
    If the day is in the review_days list, then do the following.
        Set the strength to one.
        Multiply the stability by two.
    Record the day and the strength in a results list.
Print the results list so the forgetting curve and the spacing effect can be read.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for the exponential function
import math

# Define a function that simulates memory strength over a number of days given review days
def forgetting_simulation(days, review_days):
    # Create a number variable called stability with initial value one, in days
    stability = 1.0
    # Create a number variable called strength with initial value one, meaning fully learned
    strength = 1.0
    # Create an empty list variable called results
    results = []
    # For each day from one to the number of days, do the following
    for day in range(1, days + 1):
        # Multiply the strength by the exponential of negative one day divided by the stability
        strength = strength * math.exp(-1.0 / stability)
        # If the day is in the review_days list, refresh and stabilise the trace
        if day in review_days:
            # Set the strength back to one, modelling a successful review
            strength = 1.0
            # Multiply the stability by two, modelling the spacing effect
            stability = stability * 2.0
        # Append the day and the rounded strength to the results list
        results.append((day, round(strength, 3)))
    # Return the results list
    return results

# Create a list variable called crammed with no later reviews after day one
crammed = forgetting_simulation(30, [])
# Create a list variable called spaced with reviews on day one, day three, day seven, and day fourteen
spaced = forgetting_simulation(30, [1, 3, 7, 14])
# Print the retained strength after thirty days without spaced reviews
print("no reviews, day 30 strength:", crammed[-1][1])
# Print the retained strength after thirty days with spaced reviews
print("spaced reviews, day 30 strength:", spaced[-1][1])


CHAPTER 3. THE THEORETICAL PARADIGMS (FRAMEWORK)

Welcome to the part of the story where we meet the big competing ideas about how the mind actually works.

A paradigm, in plain words, is a whole way of seeing a problem: a shared set of assumptions, favourite examples, and preferred tools that a community of researchers uses to make sense of things.

In the science of the mind there is not one single agreed paradigm but several, and each one paints thinking in a different light.

For a systems reader the cleanest way to hold this chapter is to treat the four paradigms as four rival system designs for the same requirements document: each proposes a different architecture, a different data format, a different update rule, and a different account of where the system's power and its failures come from.

This chapter introduces four of the most important of these ways of seeing, explains what each one gets right and where each one struggles, and then asks how they fit together.

By the end you should be able to hear a claim about the mind and guess which paradigm it grew out of.

3.1 Symbolic computationalism

The first big idea is that thinking is a kind of calculation carried out on symbols, much like the steps a person follows when doing arithmetic on paper.

This section explains what a symbol is in this setting, how a mind built from symbols would work, and why this picture was the dominant one for the early decades of cognitive science.

3.1.1 The physical symbol system hypothesis

Let us start with the single boldest claim in this whole area, so you can see what everything else is reacting to.

A symbol, here, simply means a token that stands for something else: the way the letters c, a, t stand for a small furry animal, or the way a red light stands for stop.

Symbolic computationalism is the view that thinking is what happens when a physical system shuffles such symbols around according to rules, and that this shuffling is literally computation, the same kind of thing a computer does.

The formal version of this claim is called the physical symbol system hypothesis, and it was stated by two American scientists, Allen Newell and Herbert Simon, in a 1976 lecture and paper.

Their hypothesis says that a physical symbol system, meaning any physical machine that can create, combine, and transform symbol structures, has the necessary and sufficient means for general intelligent action.

In plainer words, they were claiming that if something is genuinely intelligent then it must be manipulating symbols, and that any system rich enough to manipulate symbols in the right way could, in principle, be intelligent.

The word necessary means you cannot have intelligence without it, and the word sufficient means having it is enough, on its own, to make intelligence possible.

An everyday image helps here: think of thinking as being like following a recipe, where the ingredients are symbols and the instructions are rules for combining them.

Just as the recipe does not care whether your kitchen is large or small, the hypothesis says intelligence does not care whether the symbols live in a brain, in a computer, or in some other machine, as long as the symbol shuffling is the same.

As a system design, this paradigm specifies discrete tokens as the data format, explicit rules as the processing, a working memory of symbol structures as the state, and serial rule application as the execution model.

This idea was powerful because it suggested that the mind could be studied as software, separately from the particular hardware, whether that hardware is made of neurons or of silicon chips.

3.1.2 Production systems and the language of thought

Now let us look at two concrete ways this symbol idea was turned into working theories, because a slogan is not yet a model.

A production system is a way of building intelligent behaviour out of many small if-then rules, where each rule, called a production, says if such and such a condition holds, then take such and such an action.

For example, one rule might say if the goal is to make tea and there is no hot water, then boil the kettle, and the system keeps matching its rules against the current situation and firing whichever one applies.

In systems terms a production system's inputs are the current contents of a working memory, its output is the action of whichever rule fires, its state is that working memory plus the rule base, and its characteristic cycle time in human modelling is about 50 milliseconds per rule firing.

Newell and Simon used production systems to model human problem solving, and this style later grew into large architectures of the mind such as ACT-R, meaning Adaptive Control of Thought - Rational, built by John Anderson, and SOAR, an architecture whose name was originally an acronym for State, Operator, And Result.

The second concrete idea is the language of thought, proposed by the American philosopher Jerry Fodor in a 1975 book of that name.

Fodor argued that thinking happens in an inner mental language, sometimes nicknamed Mentalese, which has words and a grammar just as spoken languages do, so that a thought is literally a sentence written in the head.

Jargon check: syntax means the rules for how symbols may be arranged, the grammar, while semantics means what those symbols mean, their content.

The appeal of the language of thought is that it explains why thoughts, like sentences, can be built up from parts in endless new combinations, a point we turn to next.

3.1.3 Strengths in compositionality and systematicity, weaknesses in learning and grounding

Every paradigm has things it explains beautifully and things it handles badly, and being honest about both is how you judge one fairly.

The great strength of the symbolic view is that it naturally explains two features of thought called compositionality and systematicity.

Compositionality means that the meaning of a whole is built from the meanings of its parts and the way they are put together, so that knowing the words dog, bites, and man lets you understand both the dog bites the man and the man bites the dog.

Systematicity, a term stressed by Jerry Fodor and Zenon Pylyshyn in a much cited 1988 paper, means that minds that can think one thought can usually think closely related ones: anyone who can grasp the dog bites the man can also grasp the man bites the dog, because thoughts share reusable parts.

Symbols handle this effortlessly, because rearranging tokens according to a grammar is exactly what a symbol system does.

The weaknesses, though, are just as real, and in systems terms they are both interface problems.

The first weakness is learning: classic symbolic systems are often handed their rules and symbols by a human designer, and they are not naturally good at discovering new ones for themselves from messy experience, which means the design lacks a credible training pipeline from raw data to rule base.

The second weakness is called the symbol grounding problem, a phrase from the cognitive scientist Stevan Harnad in 1990.

Grounding is the question of how a symbol ever comes to mean anything at all, rather than being just a meaningless token defined only by other meaningless tokens, which in systems terms is the missing connection between the symbol store and the sensors and actuators.

The worry is like trying to learn Chinese from a Chinese only dictionary with no pictures and no experience of the world: you could shuffle the symbols forever and never connect the word for apple to any actual apple.

So the symbolic paradigm is strong on structure and meaning making sense, but shakier on where knowledge comes from and how it touches the real world.

3.2 Connectionism and parallel distributed processing

The second big idea takes its inspiration not from logic and language but from the brain itself, with its billions of simple cells working at once.

This section explains how networks of simple units can represent and learn, and why this approach became the ancestor of today's artificial intelligence.

3.2.1 Distributed representation and learning from data

Let us begin with the basic building block, so the later ideas have somewhere to stand.

Connectionism is the view that thinking arises from the cooperation of many very simple units, loosely modelled on brain cells, that pass signals to one another through connections of varying strength.

The fuller name, parallel distributed processing, was made famous by a two volume book of that title edited by David Rumelhart and James McClelland in 1986, and the word parallel means many units are active at the same time rather than one step following another.

Each connection carries a weight, which is just a number saying how strongly one unit pushes or pulls on another, and learning in these systems means gradually adjusting those weights.

A key idea is distributed representation, which means a concept is not stored in one single place but is spread across the pattern of activity over many units at once.

Contrast this with a symbolic system, where the idea of a grandmother might sit in one labelled slot; in a distributed system the idea of a grandmother is a whole pattern lit up across thousands of units, and no single unit is the grandmother.

These networks learn from data by example: you show the network many cases, it makes a guess, you tell it how wrong it was, and it nudges its weights to do better next time.

The most influential method for this nudging is called backpropagation, short for backward propagation of errors, popularised in that same 1986 work, which is a mathematical recipe for spreading the blame for a mistake back through the connections so each weight knows which way to move.

As a system design, this paradigm specifies continuous activation vectors as the data format, weighted sums and thresholds as the processing, the weight matrix as the long-lived state, the learning rate as the key parameter, and parallel update as the execution model.

This learning from examples is the direct ancestor of the neural networks behind modern speech recognition, image labelling, and language tools.

3.2.2 Graceful degradation and content-addressable memory

Now for two lovely properties that fall out of the distributed design almost for free, and that feel very lifelike.

The first is graceful degradation, which means that when the system is damaged or fed messy input, its performance gets a little worse rather than collapsing all at once.

Because knowledge is spread over many units, losing a few units is like smudging a few pixels of a photograph: the picture dims a little but is still recognisable, unlike a filing cabinet where losing one card loses one fact completely.

This matches how real brains and real people behave, since we can often still think and remember reasonably well even when tired, distracted, or mildly injured.

The second property is content-addressable memory, which means you can retrieve a whole memory from just a piece of it.

Ordinary computer memory is address based: you must know the exact slot number to fetch what is stored there.

Human memory is content based instead: a few notes of a song, or a whiff of a smell, can call up an entire scene, and connectionist networks reproduce this by settling into the full stored pattern when given only a fragment.

In systems terms the retrieval interface takes a partial pattern as input and publishes the completed pattern as output, with the network's settling process doing the lookup without any address ever being computed.

An everyday example is recognising a friend from just their walk seen at a distance, with no face and no voice, because the partial cue is enough to complete the pattern.

3.2.3 Strengths in learning and pattern, weaknesses in structure and binding

As before, we weigh the gains against the costs so the comparison stays honest.

The clear strengths of connectionism are the mirror image of the symbolic weaknesses.

These networks are excellent at learning from raw data, at recognising patterns, at coping with noise and damage, and at grounding, since their units can be wired directly to sensors and so connect to the world.

But the weaknesses are also the mirror image, and they cluster around structure.

Connectionist systems have historically struggled with compositionality and systematicity, the very things symbols do so well, because it is not obvious how a blurry pattern of activity keeps the parts of a complex thought neatly separable and recombinable.

A sharp form of this difficulty is the binding problem, which is the question of how a system keeps track of which features belong together.

Imagine a network sees a red circle and a blue square, and it lights up units for red, blue, circle, and square all at once: how does it remember that red goes with circle and blue with square, rather than mixing them into a blue circle and a red square?

In systems terms this is a missing tagging mechanism: the design publishes feature signals on a shared bus without an agreed scheme for marking which signals belong to the same object.

Critics such as Jerry Fodor and Zenon Pylyshyn pressed exactly this point in 1988, arguing that without built in structure a network cannot guarantee the systematic, rule respecting character of thought.

Defenders reply that networks can learn approximate structure, and much recent research tries to get the best of both worlds, a theme we return to at the end of the chapter.

3.3 Dynamical, embodied, and enactive approaches

The third family of ideas challenges something both earlier paradigms took for granted: that thinking is basically computation happening inside the head.

This section introduces a looser cluster of views that treat the mind as an unfolding process spread across brain, body, and world.

3.3.1 Cognition as continuous dynamics rather than discrete computation

Let us first meet the mathematical mood of this approach, because it changes the very language used to describe thought.

The dynamical approach says that the mind is better understood as a continuously changing physical system than as a step by step manipulation of symbols.

The key piece of jargon is a dynamical system, which simply means any system whose state changes smoothly over time according to fixed laws, the way the swing of a pendulum, the sloshing of water, or the weather all evolve moment by moment.

On this view, instead of asking what computational steps the mind takes, we ask how its state flows and settles, using the mathematics of change rather than the mathematics of logic.

As a system design, this paradigm specifies a continuous state vector as the data format, differential change laws as the processing, and real physical time as a first-class citizen: timing is part of the specification, not an implementation detail.

A vivid example comes from the psychologist Esther Thelen and colleagues studying how babies learn to reach and to walk, where behaviour emerges from the shifting balance of muscle, gravity, and practice rather than from a stored program.

The point is not that no computing happens, but that treating the mind as a bunch of discrete symbol steps may miss the smooth, timed, whole body nature of much real behaviour.

Where a symbolic model tends to ignore timing, a dynamical model puts timing at the very centre.

3.3.2 The body and the environment as parts of the cognitive system

Now for the even bolder move, which is to let the mind spill out beyond the skull.

Embodied cognition is the view that the shape and workings of the body deeply influence and even constitute thinking, so that we think with our bodies and not only with our brains.

Enactive cognition, a term from Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch in their 1991 book The Embodied Mind, adds that a creature brings forth its world through its own activity, so that knowing and doing are woven together rather than separate.

There is also the extended mind idea, argued by Andy Clark and David Chalmers in a 1998 paper, that tools like a notebook or a phone can literally be part of the thinking system, not just aids to a thinking that happens only inside.

In systems terms this whole family redraws the system boundary: where the other paradigms draw the box around the brain, these views draw it around the closed loop of brain, body, and environment, so the paper you scribble on is inside the system's state and the sensing-acting cycle is the system's main loop.

An everyday example: when you work out a hard sum by jotting figures on paper, the paper is doing part of the remembering, so the calculation is really happening across you and the page together.

Another example is that we often gesture with our hands while speaking, and evidence suggests the gestures help the thinking along rather than merely decorating it.

The shared message of these embodied and enactive views is that a mind is not a lonely computer in a box but a living body actively coupled to its surroundings.

Not everyone accepts the strongest versions of these claims, and critics argue that much of thought, such as planning a holiday or doing algebra, still looks like internal computation, so this remains a lively and unsettled debate.

3.4 Bayesian and probabilistic approaches

The fourth big idea returns to the head but changes what it thinks the head is doing: not shuffling certain facts, but weighing uncertain bets.

This section explains how treating the mind as a machine for reasoning under uncertainty has become one of the most influential frameworks in recent decades.

3.4.1 The mind as an engine of inductive inference under uncertainty

Let us start with the core insight, which is that the world rarely tells us anything for sure.

The Bayesian approach says the mind works like an engine of inference under uncertainty, constantly forming best guesses about hidden causes from limited, noisy evidence.

Inductive inference means reasoning from particular observations to general conclusions that go beyond the evidence, such as concluding from a few white swans that swans tend to be white, a leap that can never be perfectly certain.

The approach is named after Thomas Bayes, an eighteenth century English clergyman, whose rule, called Bayes theorem, is a formula for updating your confidence in an idea when new evidence arrives.

In plain terms, the rule says: start with how likely you thought something was, called the prior, then adjust it in light of how well it predicted the new evidence, to reach an updated belief, called the posterior.

A homely example is a doctor who starts with a hunch about what is wrong, called the prior, then updates that hunch as test results come in, arriving at a revised diagnosis, the posterior.

As a system design, this paradigm specifies probability distributions as the data format, Bayes theorem as the update rule, the prior as the persistent state carried between updates, and evidence strength as the gain that decides how far each observation moves the belief.

The claim of Bayesian cognitive science, developed by researchers such as Joshua Tenenbaum, Thomas Griffiths, and colleagues from the early 2000s onward, is that perception, learning, and reasoning all look, at the level of the whole task, like this kind of rational updating.

Perception itself can be seen this way: your eye receives an ambiguous smear of light, and your brain settles on the most probable scene that could have produced it, which is why optical illusions fool us in systematic, predictable ways.

3.4.2 Structured probabilistic knowledge and learning-to-learn

Now for the part that lets this approach reach beyond simple guessing games toward the richness of real knowledge.

The newer Bayesian models do not treat the mind as juggling loose probabilities in a vacuum; they give it structured knowledge, meaning organised background assumptions about how the world tends to work.

For instance, a child learning words seems to assume in advance that a new word probably labels a whole object of a familiar kind, and this built in expectation lets the child learn a word from very few examples, sometimes just one.

Learning from very few examples is a real human talent, and the Bayesian answer is that strong prior structure does the heavy lifting that scarce data cannot.

There is also learning to learn, sometimes called forming a hierarchical model, which means that while solving specific problems you also learn the more general shape of that kind of problem, so the next one comes faster.

A concrete case: after learning to read a few different alphabets, you get better at learning any new alphabet, because you have learned what alphabets in general are like.

In systems terms a hierarchical model is a stack of update loops running at different speeds: the fast loop updates beliefs about the current problem in seconds, while the slow loop updates beliefs about the whole class of problems over days and years, and the slow loop's output becomes the fast loop's prior.

This blend of structure and probability is deliberately trying to marry the strengths of the symbolic paradigm, which loves structure, with the strengths of the statistical paradigm, which loves learning from data, and that ambition points us straight to the final section.

3.5 How the paradigms relate

Having met the four ways of seeing, we now step back and ask the natural question: are they enemies, teammates, or something in between?

This section describes how the paradigms have competed and cooperated, and then explains the particular stance that this book, and the konnectome project it belongs to, chooses to take.

3.5.1 Rivalry, division of labour, and attempts at reconciliation

Let us be honest that the history here has often been combative, because that is part of understanding where we are now.

For a long stretch the paradigms were rivals, each presented as the one true account, and the sharpest clash was the debate between symbolic and connectionist camps in the late 1980s, with Fodor and Pylyshyn on one side arguing that networks lacked real structure.

Over time many researchers softened into a division of labour, the idea that different paradigms simply suit different jobs: symbols for language and reasoning, networks for perception and skill, dynamics for real time movement, probability for judgement under uncertainty.

In systems terms that division assigns each design to the layer where its assumptions hold: discrete serial processing for slow deliberate tasks, parallel pattern completion for fast perceptual tasks, continuous control for the motor loop, and probabilistic updating wherever evidence is noisy.

Others have pushed for outright reconciliation, building hybrid or neurosymbolic systems, a term meaning systems that deliberately combine neural networks with symbolic rules so as to get learning and structure at once.

The Bayesian program can itself be read as a peace treaty, since its structured probabilistic models put symbol like structure and data driven learning inside a single framework.

Yet no grand unified theory of the mind has won general agreement, and thoughtful researchers still disagree about whether one paradigm is fundamental or whether the mind is genuinely many kinds of process at once, so this remains open.

3.5.2 Why konnectome treats them as complementary constraints rather than competitors

Finally, here is the attitude this book adopts, and the reason for it, stated plainly.

Konnectome is the name of the larger project this book belongs to, and its working stance is that the paradigms are best treated not as competitors fighting for a single throne but as complementary constraints.

A constraint, in plain words, is a requirement that any good answer has to respect, like the walls of a maze that any correct path must stay within.

An engineer will recognize this as reading the four paradigms not as four finished designs but as four sections of one requirements document that the true design must satisfy simultaneously.

The thought is that each paradigm has discovered something true that a complete account of the mind must honour: thought really is systematic and structured, as the symbolists insist; it really is learned, robust, and pattern rich, as the connectionists show; it really is timed, embodied, and world coupled, as the dynamical and enactive thinkers argue; and it really is a matter of sensible inference under uncertainty, as the Bayesians demonstrate.

Seen this way, a mind is whatever manages to satisfy all of these constraints at once, and the job of the science is to find the design that meets every demand rather than to crown one demand as the only one.

This is a deliberately humble and integrative posture: instead of asking which paradigm is right, konnectome asks what each one is telling us that must be kept, and treats the disagreements as clues to a richer picture rather than as a contest to be settled.

Keep this stance in mind as you read on, because the chapters ahead will keep drawing on all four ways of seeing rather than betting everything on one.


We close the chapter by writing the interface that all four rival designs are trying to implement: the belief-updating engine that takes evidence in and puts revised beliefs and choices out.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Evidence: observations from perception, noisy and incomplete, arriving as a stream over time.

◦ Task context: the current goal and situation, which determines which beliefs and rules are relevant.

◦ Feedback: the outcomes of past choices, which grade the quality of previous updates.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Updated beliefs: revised estimates of what is true, consumed by reasoning, perception, and planning.

◦ Selected actions: the rule firings or choices the current beliefs and goals recommend, consumed by the action system.

◦ Uncertainty estimates: how confident the system is, consumed by processes that decide whether to gather more evidence.

• STATE.

◦ The knowledge base: rules and symbol structures on the symbolic reading, a weight matrix on the connectionist reading, priors on the Bayesian reading.

◦ Working contents: the currently active facts, patterns, or hypotheses being processed.

◦ Slow structural knowledge: the learned shape of whole problem classes, the learning-to-learn layer.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Learning rate: how far one experience moves the knowledge base.

◦ Prior strength: how heavily existing expectations outweigh fresh evidence.

◦ Rule specificity and conflict resolution settings: which rule fires when several match, in production system terms.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ One production rule firing in human cognitive architectures: about 50 milliseconds.

◦ One elementary recognition or pattern completion step: on the order of 100 milliseconds.

◦ Belief revision across a task: seconds to minutes as evidence accumulates.

◦ Settling time of a dynamical account of an arbitrary thought process: REFUSED, because settling times are specific to each modelled system and no general literature value exists.

• MODES.

◦ Structure-driven mode: explicit rule application dominates, engaged for novel, verbal, or logical tasks.

◦ Pattern-driven mode: learned associations dominate, engaged for familiar, fast, perceptual tasks, with practice shifting tasks from the first mode to the second.

◦ Exploration versus exploitation: gathering more evidence when uncertainty is high, acting on current beliefs when it is low.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Symbolic failure: brittleness and groundlessness, where rules break outside their designed cases and tokens fail to connect to the world.

◦ Connectionist failure: binding errors and loss of systematic structure, where features are mixed across objects.

◦ Bayesian failure: bad priors, where an overweighted expectation makes the system see what it expects rather than what is there, the mechanical signature of many biases and illusions.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called prior with initial value zero point five, the belief that the coin is biased.
Create a number variable called likelihood_biased with value zero point eight, the chance a biased coin shows heads.
Create a number variable called likelihood_fair with value zero point five, the chance a fair coin shows heads.
Create a list variable called observations containing the observed coin flips.
For each observation in the observations list, do the following.
    If the observation is heads, then do the following.
        Set a number variable called evidence_biased to the likelihood_biased value.
        Set a number variable called evidence_fair to the likelihood_fair value.
    Otherwise, do the following.
        Set the evidence_biased variable to one minus the likelihood_biased value.
        Set the evidence_fair variable to one minus the likelihood_fair value.
    Set a number variable called numerator to the product of the evidence_biased and the prior.
    Set a number variable called denominator to the numerator plus the product of the evidence_fair and one minus the prior.
    Set the prior to the numerator divided by the denominator.
    Print the observation and the updated prior.
If the final prior is greater than zero point five, then print that the system believes the coin is biased.
Otherwise, print that the system believes the coin is fair.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Define a function that updates a belief about a biased coin from a list of flips
def bayesian_coin_judge(observations):
    # Create a number variable called prior with initial value zero point five
    prior = 0.5
    # Create a number variable called likelihood_biased with value zero point eight
    likelihood_biased = 0.8
    # Create a number variable called likelihood_fair with value zero point five
    likelihood_fair = 0.5
    # For each observation in the observations list, do the following
    for observation in observations:
        # If the observation is heads, use the heads likelihoods
        if observation == "heads":
            # Set evidence_biased to the likelihood of heads under the biased hypothesis
            evidence_biased = likelihood_biased
            # Set evidence_fair to the likelihood of heads under the fair hypothesis
            evidence_fair = likelihood_fair
        # Otherwise, use the tails likelihoods
        else:
            # Set evidence_biased to one minus the likelihood of heads under the biased hypothesis
            evidence_biased = 1.0 - likelihood_biased
            # Set evidence_fair to one minus the likelihood of heads under the fair hypothesis
            evidence_fair = 1.0 - likelihood_fair
        # Set numerator to the product of evidence_biased and the prior
        numerator = evidence_biased * prior
        # Set denominator to the numerator plus the product of evidence_fair and one minus the prior
        denominator = numerator + evidence_fair * (1.0 - prior)
        # Set the prior to the numerator divided by the denominator, which is Bayes theorem
        prior = numerator / denominator
        # Print the observation and the updated belief
        print(observation, "-> belief coin is biased:", round(prior, 3))
    # Return the final belief
    return prior

# Create a list variable called flips containing a run of observed coin flips
flips = ["heads", "heads", "tails", "heads", "heads", "heads"]
# Call the bayesian_coin_judge function on the flips list
final_belief = bayesian_coin_judge(flips)
# If the final belief is greater than zero point five, report a biased verdict
if final_belief > 0.5:
    # Print that the system believes the coin is biased
    print("verdict: the coin is probably biased")
# Otherwise, report a fair verdict
else:
    # Print that the system believes the coin is fair
    print("verdict: the coin is probably fair")


CHAPTER 4. LEVELS OF ANALYSIS AND EXPLANATION (FRAMEWORK)

Welcome to a chapter about a simple but powerful idea: that a thinking system can be understood at several different heights at once, and that each height answers a different kind of question.

Imagine you are trying to understand a pocket calculator.

You could ask what job it does, or how it does that job step by step, or what it is physically made of.

Those are three separate questions, and confusing them causes most of the muddles in the study of the mind.

Every engineer already knows this distinction by other names: the specification says what the system must do, the algorithm and data structures say how it does it, and the hardware says what physically runs it, and no one would debug a program by measuring the temperature of the chip.

This chapter gives you a set of lenses - ways of looking - that let you keep those questions apart, and then shows you how leading thinkers argued about which lens matters most.

4.1 Marr's three levels

The most famous version of this idea comes from David Marr, a British scientist who studied vision in the 1970s and wrote a book, published after his early death in 1982, called simply Vision.

Marr proposed that any system that processes information should be understood at three levels at the same time, and that a full explanation needs all three.

The sections below walk through each level in turn, and then look at how the levels relate to one another.

4.1.1 The computational level: the problem and why it must be solved

The computational level asks a plain question: what problem is the system actually trying to solve, and why is that a sensible problem to solve?

Here the word computational does not mean a computer chip; it means the abstract job of turning some input into some useful output.

In engineering language this level is the specification: the contract that names the inputs, the required outputs, and the reason the mapping matters, while saying nothing about how it is achieved.

Think of a cash register at a shop: at this top level, its job is to take a list of prices and return the correct total.

Notice that this description says nothing about buttons, wiring, or the exact method of adding.

It only names the goal and the logic of the goal - the what and the why, not the how.

Marr argued that this level is the one people most often skip, and that skipping it is a serious mistake.

His reason was that you cannot understand a device by studying its parts if you do not first know what the device is for.

As an everyday example, he pointed out that studying the feathers of a bird will never, on its own, explain flight; you first have to understand the problem of staying up in the air.

For vision, the computational question is something like: given the pattern of light hitting the eye, what in the outside world produced that pattern?

That is a genuinely hard problem, because many different scenes can produce the same image, and the brain must make a good guess.

Stating the problem clearly, at this level, tells you what a solution would even look like.

4.1.2 The algorithmic and representational level: the representations and processes

The second level asks how the problem is solved: what recipe, or step by step procedure, does the system follow, and what form does the information take along the way?

A step by step procedure for solving a problem is called an algorithm, and a representation is simply a chosen way of writing down information so it can be worked on.

For an engineer this level is the algorithms and data structures layer: the same specification can be met by many implementations, and choosing the data format largely decides which algorithms are cheap.

Consider adding two numbers.

You could represent them as everyday decimal numerals, the ones with digits 0 through 9, or as Roman numerals like IX and IV, or as the strings of 0s and 1s that a computer uses, called binary.

The problem being solved is the same in every case, namely finding the sum, but the representation differs, and the algorithm you use to add differs with it.

That is the key insight of this level: the same top level goal can be reached by different methods, and choosing the representation and the method is a real design decision with real consequences.

Some representations make a task easy and some make it clumsy; adding is simple with decimal numerals and painful with Roman ones.

For vision, this level would describe the particular steps the brain might take to find the edges of objects, and the particular way it stores what it has found so far.

The important thing for a beginner to hold onto is that this level is about method and format, sitting underneath the goal and above the physical hardware.

4.1.3 The implementational level: the physical realisation

The third level asks the most concrete question: what physical stuff actually carries out the procedure, and how?

This is called the implementational level, where to implement something means to build it in real material that obeys the laws of physics.

In a calculator, this level is the silicon chips, the electrical currents, and the tiny switches called transistors.

In a person, this level is the living nerve cells, called neurons, and the chemical and electrical signals that pass between them.

Marr's point was that the very same algorithm could be run on very different hardware.

The rules of addition can be carried out by a wet human brain, by a metal and silicon computer, by beads on an abacus, or even by water flowing through pipes if you were patient enough.

Because of this, knowing the physical details alone does not tell you the algorithm, and knowing the algorithm alone does not tell you the physical details.

Each level has facts of its own that the others do not fix, though the hardware does set the timing budget: a neuron signals in about a millisecond, a transistor switches in under a nanosecond, and that difference constrains which algorithms each substrate can afford to run.

4.1.4 The independence and the interaction of the levels

Having separated the three levels, we now have to be careful, because they are partly independent and partly tangled together.

They are independent in the sense that you can describe one without fully describing the others, which is why the same goal can have many algorithms and the same algorithm can have many physical builds.

This independence is genuinely useful, because it lets a psychologist study the method of thinking without first mapping every neuron, and lets a neuroscientist study brain tissue without first solving the whole puzzle of the mind.

In engineering terms the levels are an abstraction stack, and abstraction is precisely the discipline of working at one layer while trusting the interfaces to the layers above and below.

But the levels also interact, and this is where careful thinkers disagree.

The physical hardware can make some algorithms fast and cheap and others slow and expensive, so the choice of hardware quietly pushes on the choice of method, just as a chip's memory layout quietly pushes a programmer toward certain data structures.

Likewise, the problem you are trying to solve shapes which algorithms are even worth considering.

So the honest picture is a loose hierarchy, meaning a ranking of levels that constrain each other without any one level completely dictating the others.

Marr himself stressed the top down direction, believing that understanding the problem should guide everything below it, but he did not claim the levels were sealed off from one another.

4.2 Companion tri-level schemes

Marr was not the only thinker to slice the mind into levels, and it helps a beginner to see that several respected schemes rhyme with his.

Seeing the family resemblance makes the underlying idea clearer, and seeing the differences shows where the real debates live.

The following sections introduce four other well known frameworks, each from a major figure in the cognitive sciences.

4.2.1 Chomsky's competence and performance

Noam Chomsky, an American linguist whose work reshaped the study of language starting in the late 1950s, drew a line between competence and performance.

Competence is the underlying knowledge a person has of their language, the silent set of rules that tells them which sentences are well formed.

Performance is what the person actually does in real time, complete with slips of the tongue, forgotten words, coughs, and false starts.

Here is an everyday example: you know, deep down, that a very long sentence with many clauses stacked inside it can still be grammatical, yet in practice you would lose track of it halfway through.

Your competence says the sentence is fine; your performance breaks down.

An engineer would say competence is the specification of the language system and performance is the runtime behavior of its implementation, complete with buffer limits and dropped packets, so the two can legitimately disagree.

Chomsky argued that the science of language should aim first at competence, the clean underlying knowledge, rather than at the noisy surface of performance.

This maps loosely onto Marr, because competence is close to a computational level description of what the language system knows, while performance leans toward the algorithmic and physical business of producing speech under real world limits.

4.2.2 Newell's bands and time scales, from the biological to the social

Allen Newell, an American researcher who helped found the field of artificial intelligence, offered a scheme organised by time rather than by abstraction.

Artificial intelligence, often shortened to AI, is the effort to build machines that carry out tasks we would call intelligent in a human.

In his 1990 book Unified Theories of Cognition, Newell described human action as a stack of bands, where each band is a range of time scales at which different things happen.

At the fastest, the biological band, events in single neurons take roughly thousandths of a second.

Above that sits the cognitive band, where basic mental steps take on the order of tenths of a second to a few seconds.

Higher still is the rational band, covering minutes to hours, where a person pursues goals in a way that looks sensibly planned.

At the top is the social band, spanning days, years, and generations, where whole communities shape behaviour.

Newell's message was that phenomena at each time scale call for their own kind of explanation, and that you should not expect the vocabulary of milliseconds to explain the vocabulary of years.

This is a levels idea told through the clock, and every systems engineer uses the same trick: hardware clock cycles, request latencies, deployment cycles, and product lifetimes are analysed with different tools precisely because they live in different bands.

It pairs naturally with Marr's more abstract ladder, and this book's TIME CONSTANTS blocks are Newell's idea applied one process at a time.

4.2.3 Pylyshyn's functional architecture and cognitive penetrability

Zenon Pylyshyn, a Canadian cognitive scientist, gave us two ideas that sharpen the boundary between Marr's middle and bottom levels.

The first is functional architecture, which means the fixed, built in operations of the mind that are not themselves changed by what you happen to believe or want.

Think of it as the basic instruction set of the mind, the primitive moves that everything else is built out of, exactly as a processor's instruction set is fixed while the programs running on it change freely.

The second idea is cognitive penetrability, which is a test for telling which processes belong to that fixed architecture and which do not.

A process is cognitively penetrable if your beliefs, goals, or knowledge can reach in and change how it works.

In systems terms the test asks whether a component exposes a configuration interface to the rest of the system: penetrable processes accept runtime reconfiguration by beliefs and goals, while architectural processes run the same way no matter what the higher layers know.

Here is the classic example: certain visual illusions do not go away even after you are told, and fully believe, that the two lines are the same length.

Because your knowledge cannot penetrate and fix the illusion, Pylyshyn argued that the part of vision producing it is part of the fixed architecture rather than part of ordinary reasoning.

This gives researchers a practical way to draw the line between the changeable software of thought and the fixed machinery beneath it.

4.2.4 Dennett's physical, design, and intentional stances

Daniel Dennett, an American philosopher, approached levels from the side of the observer, asking not what a system is but what stance you should take to predict it best.

A stance here just means a viewpoint you adopt in order to make sense of something.

The physical stance predicts a thing purely from its material and the laws of physics; you use it when you expect a dropped rock to fall.

The design stance predicts a thing from what it was built or evolved to do, without worrying about its physics; you use it when you assume an alarm clock will ring because that is what alarm clocks are for.

The intentional stance predicts a thing by treating it as if it had beliefs and desires and acted rationally on them; you use it when you say the chess program moved its bishop because it wanted to protect its king.

Dennett's clever point is that the intentional stance can be wildly useful even for systems that do not literally have minds, because it lets us predict complex behaviour quickly.

An engineer switches stances all day without noticing: debugging a burned board is the physical stance, reading an interface contract is the design stance, and saying the load balancer wants to drain that node is the intentional stance, each chosen for predictive convenience.

These three stances echo Marr's levels, with the physical stance near implementation, the design stance near the algorithm and the problem, and the intentional stance sitting at the highest, most goal focused view.

4.3 The debate over levels

So far the levels have looked tidy, but researchers have argued hard about how they fit together and which one deserves priority.

These disagreements are not idle; they shape how billions are spent on brain research and how findings are interpreted.

The following sections lay out three of the central arguments in plain terms.

4.3.1 The claim that algorithm constrains computation

One line of argument pushes back on Marr's top down spirit by insisting that the middle level, the algorithm, actually limits what counts as the right problem description.

The idea is that a purely abstract statement of the problem is too loose, because it ignores that the brain has finite time and finite resources.

Once you take those limits seriously, the argument goes, the set of realistic algorithms narrows the sensible problem descriptions rather than the other way round.

For example, describing vision as finding the single mathematically perfect interpretation of an image may be the wrong top level goal, because no fast algorithm could ever compute it.

A better top level description might be finding a good enough answer quickly, precisely because that is what an achievable algorithm can deliver.

Every engineer has lived this argument: a specification that no implementation can meet within the latency budget is a wrong specification, and requirements get rewritten to match what the platform can actually deliver.

On this view the levels talk back to each other from the bottom up, and computation cannot be settled in splendid isolation from the methods available.

4.3.2 The warning that neuroscience needs behaviour

A second and much discussed argument warns that studying the brain's physical level without a clear account of behaviour can fail to explain anything.

This point was made vividly by Eric Jonas and Konrad Kording in a 2017 paper with a memorable setup.

They took a microprocessor, a simple computer chip whose every wire is already fully understood, and applied to it the very methods neuroscientists use on brains.

Despite having complete access to the chip, those methods failed to recover how the chip actually worked, or what program it was running.

The lesson they drew is that mountains of physical detail do not, by themselves, add up to understanding, and that without a firm grip on the higher levels the data can mislead.

In systems terms: probing voltages on a running chip, with no concept of instructions, programs, or tasks, produces data without a decoder, because the meaning of the hardware activity lives at the levels above it.

In Marr's language, this is a plea not to drown at the implementational level while ignoring the computational and algorithmic questions that give the data meaning.

Not everyone agrees the analogy is airtight, since brains and chips differ in important ways, but the warning is widely taken to heart.

4.3.3 Reverse engineering versus mechanistic explanation

A third debate is about what kind of explanation we are even after, and here two camps use different words for the goal.

Reverse engineering means starting from what a system does and working backward to figure out the design that would achieve it, much as one might take apart a rival's gadget to learn its trick.

This way of thinking is very comfortable with Marr's top down order, since it begins from the problem and the function.

The rival view prizes mechanistic explanation, which means describing the actual parts of a system and showing, concretely, how their arrangement and activity produce the behaviour.

A mechanism, in this sense, is a set of real components whose organised interaction makes something happen, like the gears and springs that together make a watch tell time.

Supporters of mechanistic explanation worry that reverse engineering can drift into just so stories, tidy tales of what the system might be for that are never grounded in real parts.

Supporters of reverse engineering reply that a heap of parts explains nothing until you know the function they serve.

In systems terms the two camps would deliver different documents: the reverse engineers a specification with a proposed design, the mechanists a verified wiring diagram with traced causal paths, and a complete explanation plainly needs both documents to agree.

Many researchers now try to hold both, seeking accounts that are both function first and honestly tied to the machinery, and this blended aim leads directly into the next section.

4.4 Cognitive computational neuroscience as the level-bridging programme

There is now a research programme whose whole purpose is to connect the levels rather than choose among them, and it goes by the name cognitive computational neuroscience.

The phrase stacks three ideas: cognitive, meaning about the mind and its tasks; computational, meaning built from precise, runnable models; and neuroscience, meaning grounded in the biology of the brain.

The aim is to build models that answer the what and why, spell out the how, and still match what real brains do.

The following two sections describe the main tools this programme uses to stitch the levels together.

4.4.1 Model classes that span the levels

A model, in this setting, is a working system, usually a computer program, that is meant to stand in for some part of the mind or brain so that its behaviour can be tested against reality.

Different families of models sit at different heights, and the programme deliberately uses several so that the levels can be linked.

At the top sit task models, which capture only the goal and the ideal solution, close to Marr's computational level.

In the middle sit process models and, importantly, neural network models, which are systems of many simple units loosely inspired by neurons that learn to perform a task by adjusting the strengths of their connections.

These network models are prized here precisely because a single model can both perform a real task, honouring the top level, and produce internal activity that can be compared with brain activity, reaching toward the bottom level.

At the most detailed end sit biophysical models, which try to reproduce the electrical and chemical behaviour of actual neurons.

In systems terms the programme maintains one model per abstraction layer and checks that the layers stay consistent, the way an engineering team keeps a specification, a reference implementation, and a hardware design in sync.

By moving deliberately among these classes, researchers can ask how a change at one level shows up at another, which is exactly the bridging that earlier debates found so hard.

4.4.2 Representational comparison between models and brains

The final tool is a way of checking whether a model and a brain are handling information in a similar way, even when they are built of utterly different stuff.

The trick is to compare representations, meaning the internal patterns of activity that stand for things, rather than comparing the hardware directly.

A widely used version of this is called representational similarity analysis, which works on a clever principle.

Instead of asking whether a model and a brain light up in the same physical spots, it asks whether they treat the same things as similar and the same things as different.

For instance, if a brain treats a cat and a dog as more alike than a cat and a car, a good model of that brain should do the same, sorting the items into the same web of similarities.

Because this method compares patterns of sameness and difference, it can line up a computer model against living brain tissue despite their having nothing physical in common.

In systems terms it is a hardware-independent conformance test: instead of diffing the internals byte for byte, it checks that two implementations induce the same similarity structure over the same inputs, which is a test any two realisations of one algorithm should pass.

That is a direct, practical bridge between Marr's algorithmic level, where representations live, and his implementational level, where brains do their work.

With this tool, the old question of how the levels connect stops being only a matter of argument and becomes something researchers can measure.


We close the chapter by writing the levels framework itself as a system: the analysis engine a researcher runs when explaining any information-processing device.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ The target system's behaviour: input-output records from experiments, the evidence every level must answer to.

◦ The target system's physical measurements: recordings and images of the hardware in action.

◦ Candidate task descriptions: proposed statements of what problem the system is solving and why.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A computational level account: the specification, naming the problem and its logic, consumed by theorists and model builders.

◦ An algorithmic level account: the proposed representations and procedures, consumed by process modellers and by artificial intelligence builders.

◦ An implementational level account: the mapping from procedure to physical machinery, consumed by neuroscientists and engineers.

• STATE.

◦ The current best hypothesis at each level, held simultaneously and revised as evidence arrives.

◦ The recorded constraints each level currently places on the others, such as timing budgets and resource limits.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Direction of emphasis: how strongly top down problem-first reasoning is weighted against bottom up mechanism-first reasoning.

◦ Resource realism: how strictly candidate specifications are required to be computable within the hardware's time and energy budget.

◦ Penetrability threshold: the evidence required to classify a process as fixed architecture rather than changeable strategy.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Biological band events in single neurons: on the order of 1 millisecond.

◦ Cognitive band elementary steps: on the order of 100 milliseconds to a few seconds.

◦ Rational band goal pursuit: minutes to hours.

◦ Social band change: days to generations.

◦ A characteristic duration for the analysis process itself: REFUSED, because how long it takes a research community to settle a levels question is not a quantity the literature supports with a number.

• MODES.

◦ Top down mode: analysis starts from the task and works toward the machinery, triggered when the function is clear and the mechanism is obscure.

◦ Bottom up mode: analysis starts from the machinery and works toward the task, triggered when rich physical data exist but the function is uncertain.

◦ Bridging mode: models at several levels are run and compared at once, triggered when both kinds of account exist and must be reconciled, as in cognitive computational neuroscience.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Level confusion: answering a question posed at one level with facts from another, the root of most muddles this chapter warns about.

◦ Drowning in implementation: collecting physical detail without higher level accounts, the failure the microprocessor study dramatised.

◦ Just so storytelling: accepting an elegant top level account that is never checked against the parts, the failure the mechanists warn about.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called prices containing the input numbers, the shared computational level problem.
Define a function called sum_left_to_right that takes a list of numbers.
    Create a number variable called total with initial value zero.
    For each price in the list, add the price to the total.
    Return the total.
Define a function called sum_by_pairing that takes a list of numbers.
    Copy the list into a working list.
    While the working list has more than one item, do the following.
        Remove the first two items from the working list.
        Calculate their sum.
        Append the sum to the end of the working list.
    Return the single remaining item.
Call the sum_left_to_right function on the prices list and store the result.
Call the sum_by_pairing function on the prices list and store the result.
If the two results are equal, then print that two different algorithms satisfied the same computational level specification.
Otherwise, print that an implementation has a bug.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Define a function that sums a list left to right, the first algorithmic level design
def sum_left_to_right(numbers):
    # Create a number variable called total with initial value zero
    total = 0
    # For each price in the numbers list, add the price to the total
    for price in numbers:
        # Add the price to the total
        total = total + price
    # Return the total
    return total

# Define a function that sums a list by repeated pairing, a second algorithmic level design
def sum_by_pairing(numbers):
    # Copy the numbers list into a working list
    working = list(numbers)
    # While the working list has more than one item, do the following
    while len(working) > 1:
        # Remove the first item from the working list
        first = working.pop(0)
        # Remove the next item from the working list
        second = working.pop(0)
        # Append the sum of the two removed items to the end of the working list
        working.append(first + second)
    # Return the single remaining item
    return working[0]

# Create a list variable called prices, the input named by the computational level specification
prices = [3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9, 2, 6]
# Call the sum_left_to_right function on the prices list and store the result
result_one = sum_left_to_right(prices)
# Call the sum_by_pairing function on the prices list and store the result
result_two = sum_by_pairing(prices)
# If the two results are equal, the two algorithms meet the same specification
if result_one == result_two:
    # Print that two different algorithms satisfied the same computational level specification
    print("same spec, two algorithms, one answer:", result_one)
# Otherwise, an implementation has a bug
else:
    # Print that an implementation has a bug
    print("implementations disagree:", result_one, result_two)

CHAPTER 5. THE METHODS OF COGNITIVE SCIENCE (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter is about the toolbox.

Cognition happens inside the head, where nobody can watch it directly, so the science of the mind lives or dies by the cleverness of its methods for measuring something invisible.

This chapter walks through those methods, from the simple stopwatch experiment to brain scanners and computer models, and it asks a plain but important question about each one: how do we know it is telling us the truth?

The tag (FRAMEWORK) means this chapter does not describe a mental capacity itself.

Instead it describes the tools and rules that let us study those capacities carefully, so that the later chapters can rest on solid ground.

Read as a systems engineer would, every method in this chapter is a measurement channel: it takes hidden internal state as input, produces an observable number as output, and adds its own noise and bias along the way, so the recurring engineering question is how to recover the hidden signal from the corrupted reading.


5.1 The logic of the behavioural experiment

Before any fancy equipment, the oldest and still the most powerful tool in the field is the controlled experiment.

The idea is simple: change one thing on purpose, hold everything else steady, and watch what happens to behaviour.

This section lays out the basic grammar of that method, the vocabulary and the safeguards that turn a casual observation into evidence.

In systems terms, an experiment is a probe of a black box: the experimenter drives one input line while clamping the others, and reads the output to infer the transfer function inside.


5.1.1 Independent, dependent, and control variables; within and between designs

An experiment is a way of asking nature a yes-or-no question by deliberately changing something and measuring the result.

The thing the researcher deliberately changes is called the independent variable, which just means the input that the experimenter sets, for example whether a word is shown for a short time or a long time.

The thing the researcher measures is called the dependent variable, which means the outcome that is allowed to vary and that presumably depends on the input, for example how many words a person later remembers.

A control variable is anything the researcher holds constant on purpose so that it cannot muddy the result, for example keeping the room equally bright for every person.

The logic is that if only the independent variable was allowed to change, then any change in the dependent variable can be blamed on it and on nothing else.

There are two broad ways to arrange the people in a study.

In a within-subjects design, the same person experiences every condition, so each person is compared against themselves, which is efficient and cancels out the fact that people naturally differ.

In a between-subjects design, different groups of people each experience only one condition, which avoids the problem that doing one condition might teach or tire a person before they reach the next.

Neither design is universally better, and choosing between them is one of the first real decisions a researcher makes.

As a system, the design maps directly onto signal processing: the independent variable is the controlled input, the dependent variable is the measured output, control variables are clamped inputs, and the within versus between choice is a choice between reusing one noisy channel repeatedly or averaging across many parallel channels.


5.1.2 Confounds, counterbalancing, and the validities

A confound is a hidden second thing that changed at the same time as the thing you meant to change, so that you cannot tell which of the two caused the result.

For example, if the hard problems were always shown in the morning and the easy problems always in the afternoon, then tiredness is a confound, because time of day sneaked in alongside difficulty.

Counterbalancing is the standard cure for one common confound, the confound of order.

It means giving different people the conditions in different sequences, so that being first or last is spread evenly across conditions and cannot favour any one of them.

Researchers also worry about several kinds of validity, which is a word for the different ways a study can be trustworthy or not.

Internal validity is the confidence that the change you made, and not some confound, really caused the result.

External validity is the confidence that the result would also hold outside the laboratory, in ordinary life, with ordinary people.

Construct validity is the confidence that your measure really captures the mental thing you claim it does, rather than something else wearing the same name.

These validities often trade against one another, because the tightly controlled study that is strongest on internal validity is often the most artificial and so the weakest on external validity.

In systems language, a confound is crosstalk between input lines, counterbalancing is a scheduling algorithm that decorrelates the nuisance input from the signal input, and the validities are three distinct failure modes of the measurement channel: contaminated input, restricted operating range, and a mislabelled output.


5.1.3 The experimental and the individual-differences traditions

There are two great research traditions in psychology, and they ask different questions with the same subject matter.

The experimental tradition asks what is true of people in general, and it treats the differences between individuals as noise to be averaged away.

The individual-differences tradition does the opposite: it treats those very differences as the signal, and asks why some people remember more, react faster, or reason better than others.

The experimental tradition tends to manipulate variables and compare condition against condition, while the individual-differences tradition tends to measure people and study how their scores correlate.

For most of the twentieth century these two traditions barely spoke to each other, a split the psychologist Lee Cronbach famously called the two disciplines of scientific psychology in 1957.

Modern cognitive science increasingly tries to marry them, for example by asking whether a laboratory effect that appears reliably on average is actually stable and measurable within each individual, which turns out to be a surprisingly hard thing to guarantee.

This is a debate about analysis rather than a mechanism, and the two sides predict different things in systems terms: the experimental tradition predicts that averaging across units recovers a shared transfer function, while the individual-differences tradition predicts that the units genuinely differ in their parameters, so that the average describes nobody in particular.


5.2 Mental chronometry

Mental chronometry is the study of the mind through the timing of behaviour, chiefly through how long a response takes.

The founding bet of this whole approach is that mental steps take measurable time, and that by timing them carefully we can infer the hidden stages between a stimulus arriving and a response leaving.

This section traces that bet from its first clever version to its modern refinements.

The systems reading is latency analysis: treat the mind as a pipeline of processing stages, feed it inputs, time the outputs, and reverse-engineer the stage structure from the pattern of delays.


5.2.1 Reaction time as the founding measure

Reaction time (RT) is simply the interval between the appearance of a stimulus and the person's response to it, usually measured in milliseconds, which are thousandths of a second.

It is the founding measure of experimental psychology because it is objective, because it does not depend on asking people to describe their own thoughts, and because it varies in orderly ways with the difficulty of a task.

The insight that makes reaction time powerful is that thinking is not instantaneous, so a harder mental operation should on average take longer than an easier one.

By comparing how long different tasks take, a researcher can begin to reason backward from the timing to the machinery that produced it.

Reaction time became central in the nineteenth century and it remains, well into the era of brain scanning, one of the most informative single numbers a psychology experiment can collect.

As a measurement channel, reaction time takes the total pipeline latency as input and delivers a single number in milliseconds as output, with simple detection responses landing around 200 milliseconds and choice responses typically taking on the order of 100 milliseconds or more beyond that, depending on the number of alternatives.


5.2.2 Donders' subtraction method and the pure-insertion assumption

The Dutch physiologist Franciscus Donders had a beautiful idea in the 1860s: if you want to know how long a single mental step takes, build two tasks that differ by exactly that one step and subtract one timing from the other.

For example, a simple reaction task, where you press a key the instant any light appears, involves detecting and responding.

A choice reaction task, where you press one key for a red light and another for a green light, involves detecting, then deciding which light it is, and then responding.

Donders reasoned that the extra time the choice task takes, once you subtract the simple task, is the time it takes the mind to make the decision, an idea now called the subtraction method.

The whole trick rests on one large assumption, called pure insertion, which is the claim that you can add a mental stage to a task without changing any of the other stages at all.

If adding the decision step secretly also slows down the perceiving step, then the subtraction no longer isolates a clean quantity, and the estimate is wrong.

Pure insertion is the method's great vulnerability, and later researchers doubted that any mental stage can really be slipped in without disturbing its neighbours, which is exactly the weakness the next method was designed to sidestep.

In systems terms, subtraction assumes the pipeline is modular with no coupling between stages: inserting a module changes total latency by exactly that module's latency, and the method fails precisely when the modules share resources or interact.


5.2.3 Sternberg's additive-factors method and the logic of stages

In the 1960s Saul Sternberg offered a cleverer version that did not require you to believe in pure insertion.

Instead of adding and removing whole stages, his additive-factors method varies two different things at once and watches how their effects combine.

The core logic is this: if two experimental factors each affect a different mental stage, their effects on reaction time should simply add together, whereas if they affect the same stage, they should interact, meaning one factor makes the other's effect bigger or smaller.

In his famous memory-scanning task, Sternberg gave people a short list of digits to hold in mind and then asked whether a probe digit was on the list.

He found that making the list longer added a fixed chunk of time, and that blurring the probe with visual noise added another chunk, and crucially that these two effects were additive and did not interact.

He read this additivity as evidence that stimulus encoding and memory searching are genuinely separate, serial stages of processing.

The additive-factors method was a real advance because it turned the assumption of separate stages from something you had to take on faith into something the data could support or refute.

The systems reading is a diagnostic protocol: perturb two suspected modules independently and inspect whether their latency costs superpose, since superposition is the signature of serial, non-interacting stages and interaction is the signature of a shared stage.


5.2.4 The speed-accuracy trade-off and distributional analysis of response time

Reaction time hides a trap: people can almost always go faster if they are willing to make more mistakes, and slower if they want to be more careful.

This is the speed-accuracy trade-off, and it means that a fast reaction time is only impressive if accuracy did not collapse to earn it.

Because of this trade-off, looking at speed alone or accuracy alone can badly mislead you, since a group that looks faster might simply be gambling on being sloppier.

Modern researchers therefore analyse speed and accuracy together, often with mathematical models that treat a decision as the gradual piling up of evidence until a threshold is crossed, of which the best known is the drift-diffusion model, described more fully in a later chapter on decision making.

There is a second refinement worth knowing.

Rather than throwing away all the individual response times and keeping only their average, researchers increasingly study the whole distribution, meaning the full spread of fast and slow responses.

The shape of that distribution carries information that the mean alone destroys, for example whether a manipulation shifted every response a little or instead produced a scattering of unusually slow responses, and these two patterns can point to very different underlying causes.

In systems terms, the trade-off reveals a tunable parameter inside the observer, a response threshold that trades latency against error rate, so speed and accuracy are two outputs of one underlying process and must be modelled jointly rather than read separately.


5.3 Psychophysics and signal detection

Psychophysics is the oldest quantitative branch of psychology, and its subject is the lawful relationship between the physical world and our inner sensations of it.

It asks measurable questions like how much brighter a light must become before you notice, and it answers them with numbers.

This section covers the classical laws, the smart procedures used to measure a threshold, and the modern framework that dissolved the very idea of a fixed threshold into two separate quantities.

The systems reading is calibration: psychophysics characterises the input-output function of the sensory front end, and signal detection theory decomposes the observer into a noisy sensor stage followed by a decision stage with its own adjustable cut-off.


5.3.1 Thresholds and the classical psychophysical laws of Weber, Fechner, and Stevens

A threshold is the boundary of what can be sensed.

The absolute threshold is the smallest amount of a stimulus, such as the dimmest light or the faintest tone, that a person can detect.

The difference threshold, also called the just noticeable difference, is the smallest change in a stimulus that a person can tell apart from the original.

In the nineteenth century Ernst Weber discovered that this just noticeable difference is not a fixed amount but a fixed proportion of the starting stimulus, a regularity now called Weber's law.

In everyday terms, if you are holding a light bag you notice a small added weight, but if you are holding a heavy bag you need a much larger addition to notice at all, because the noticeable change scales with what is already there.

Gustav Fechner built on this to propose Fechner's law, which says that sensation grows as the logarithm of the stimulus, meaning that each time the physical intensity multiplies, the felt intensity only adds a step.

This is why a room with a hundred candles does not feel a hundred times brighter than a room with one candle.

In the twentieth century Stanley Smith Stevens argued that a power law fits a wider range of senses better than Fechner's logarithm, a relationship now called Stevens' power law.

A power law can capture the fact that some sensations, like the felt intensity of an electric shock, actually grow faster than the physical stimulus rather than slower.

Experts still debate whether the logarithmic or the power form is the deeper truth, and recent work has tried to reconcile the two, so this is a case where the field has useful laws but not a single settled equation.

In systems terms these laws are competing specifications of the sensor's transfer function, with physical intensity as input and sensation magnitude as output, and the Weber fraction is the sensor's constant of proportional resolution.


5.3.2 Adaptive and staircase methods

Measuring a threshold the naive way is wasteful, because you spend most of your trials on stimuli that are obviously visible or obviously invisible and so teach you little.

Adaptive methods fix this by letting the difficulty of each trial depend on how the person did on the previous ones, so the testing concentrates near the threshold where the useful information lives.

The staircase method is the simplest version.

If the person detects the stimulus, the next stimulus is made a little weaker, and if they miss it, the next is made a little stronger, so the stimulus level walks up and down and hovers around the threshold like a ball settling into a valley.

More sophisticated adaptive procedures, with names like QUEST and the Psi method, use a running statistical estimate to choose each trial's difficulty so as to pin down the threshold as quickly as possible.

These methods matter because they make delicate measurements practical, getting a reliable number from a tired human in a reasonable number of trials.

The systems reading is a feedback control loop: the observer's yes or no response is the error signal, the stimulus level is the controlled variable, the step size is the loop gain, and the procedure converges when the level oscillates in a narrow band around the true threshold.


5.3.3 Sensitivity and bias: the separation of d-prime from criterion

Signal detection theory is one of the most important ideas in the whole methods toolkit, because it splits a single messy number into two meaningful ones.

The problem it solves is this: when someone says they detected a faint signal, their answer blends two very different things, namely how good their senses actually are and how willing they are to say yes.

A nervous, cautious person and a bold, trigger-happy person might have identical eyes and ears yet give completely different answers, and the old idea of a single threshold could not tell them apart.

Signal detection theory imagines that every moment carries some internal noise, and that a real signal adds to that noise, so the person must decide whether what they are experiencing is noise alone or signal plus noise.

From how often a person correctly says yes to a signal, called a hit, and how often they wrongly say yes when there was nothing, called a false alarm, the theory computes two separate numbers.

The first is sensitivity, written d-prime, which measures how far apart the signal and the noise really are for that person, that is, the true keenness of their perception.

The second is the criterion, which measures where the person set their personal cut-off for saying yes, that is, their bias toward caution or boldness.

This separation is profound because it lets us ask, cleanly, whether a drug or a disease or an instruction changed what people could perceive as opposed to merely changing how ready they were to report it, and that distinction shows up everywhere from radiology to memory research to lie detection.

In systems terms this is a two-parameter decomposition of a binary classifier: d-prime is the separation of the two input distributions in units of their noise, the criterion is the placement of the decision boundary, and the hit and false alarm rates are the two observable outputs from which both parameters can be recovered.


5.4 Indirect and process-tracing methods

Sometimes you cannot ask the mind about itself directly, either because the process is unconscious or because asking would disturb it.

Indirect methods get at hidden processing sideways, by watching how one task leaks into another, or by tracking where the eyes go, or by pulling apart conscious and unconscious contributions to a single response.

This section surveys those clever sidelong approaches.

The systems reading is side-channel analysis: when the main output of a process is inaccessible, measure its leakage into timing, gaze, and interference, and reconstruct the hidden computation from those secondary emissions.


5.4.1 Priming, interference, and dual-task paradigms

Priming is the finding that a recent encounter with something makes it easier to process again, even when you do not consciously remember the encounter.

For example, if you have just seen the word doctor, you will recognise the word nurse a little faster, because the first word pre-activated related meanings, and researchers use this speed-up as a fingerprint of what the mind connected without being told to.

Interference is priming's mirror image, where one process gets in the way of another, and it is a powerful tool precisely because the interference reveals that two things are competing for the same machinery.

The classic example is the Stroop task, where naming the ink colour of a word is slowed when the word spells a different colour, showing that reading is so automatic it barges in uninvited.

Dual-task paradigms push this logic further by asking a person to do two things at once and measuring how much each suffers.

If doing task A ruins your performance on task B, the reasonable inference is that A and B draw on a shared, limited resource, whereas if they coexist happily, they probably rely on separate systems.

By systematically pairing tasks, researchers map out which mental operations share a bottleneck and which run independently, which is a central question for the chapters on attention.

In systems terms these are load tests: priming measures residual activation left in a shared store by a previous input, typically over a window of tens to hundreds of milliseconds for semantic priming, and dual-task interference measures contention for a shared resource by driving two processes at once and reading the throughput loss.


5.4.2 Eye-tracking and the eye-mind assumption

Eye-tracking uses a camera to record exactly where a person is looking, moment by moment, and for how long.

It is valuable because the eyes move several times a second toward whatever the mind is currently working on, so the record of gaze becomes a running commentary on attention and processing.

The interpretive bridge here is called the eye-mind assumption, proposed by Marcel Just and Patricia Carpenter, which is the claim that what a person is looking at is what they are currently thinking about, and that they keep looking at it until they are done processing it.

This assumption is what lets researchers read a long fixation as a sign of difficulty, for example when a reader pauses on a confusing word.

Like all such bridges the assumption is only roughly true, because attention can secretly slip away from where the eyes point, and the mind can work on something after the eyes have already moved on.

Still, in tasks like reading, where the coupling between eye and mind is tight, eye-tracking gives an unusually direct and continuous window onto cognition as it unfolds.

As a measurement channel, eye-tracking samples gaze position continuously and outputs a stream of fixations, each lasting roughly 200 to 300 milliseconds in ordinary reading, punctuated by rapid jumps called saccades that take a few tens of milliseconds, and the eye-mind assumption is the decoding rule that maps this stream onto the hidden processing sequence.


5.4.3 Implicit measures and the process-dissociation procedure

An implicit measure tries to reveal a mental content or process without asking the person to report it directly, which matters when people cannot or will not tell you the truth, as with hidden attitudes or unconscious memory.

The difficulty is that almost any task blends conscious and unconscious influences, so a single score does not tell you how much of each was at work.

The process-dissociation procedure, developed by Larry Jacoby, is an ingenious way to separate the two.

The trick is to run two conditions, one in which conscious memory and unconscious influence would push toward the same answer, and one in which they would push toward opposite answers.

By comparing performance across these two arrangements, the method estimates a number for the controlled, conscious contribution and a separate number for the automatic, unconscious contribution to the very same behaviour.

This is conceptually similar to how signal detection theory splits sensitivity from bias, and it reflects a recurring ambition in the field: to take one observed response and mathematically divide it into the distinct hidden processes that combined to produce it.

In systems terms this is source separation: one observed output is modelled as the mixture of two hidden generators, and by arranging conditions where the generators align and where they oppose, the mixing equations can be solved for each generator's separate contribution.


5.5 Computational modelling and model evaluation

A verbal theory says something like attention acts as a filter, which sounds fine but can quietly mean many different things.

A computational model forces the theory to be spelled out as explicit rules or equations that a computer can actually run, which exposes vague spots and lets the theory generate exact predictions.

This section describes the main families of such models and, just as importantly, the disciplined ways of deciding whether a model is any good.

The systems reading is that a model is an executable specification of the process under study, and model evaluation is the acceptance test suite that decides whether the specification is trustworthy.


5.5.1 The model families: symbolic, connectionist, Bayesian, reinforcement-learning, sequential-sampling

There are several major styles of computational model, and each embodies a different guess about what kind of machine the mind is.

Symbolic models treat thought as the manipulation of discrete symbols according to rules, rather like a logic engine or a computer program, and they are strong at capturing structured, rule-governed reasoning.

Connectionist models, also called neural networks, treat thought as patterns of activity spreading across many simple interconnected units, and they are strong at learning from experience and at gracefully tolerating damage and noise.

Bayesian models treat the mind as an engine of inference under uncertainty that combines prior beliefs with new evidence according to the mathematics of probability, and they are strong at explaining how people cope with incomplete and ambiguous information.

Reinforcement-learning models treat the mind as a system that learns which actions lead to reward and adjusts its behaviour to earn more of it over time, and they connect closely to the brain's dopamine system.

Sequential-sampling models treat a decision as the gradual accumulation of noisy evidence until enough has piled up to trigger a choice, and they excel at jointly explaining the speed and the accuracy of simple decisions.

These families are not strict enemies, and much modern work blends them, but knowing the cast of characters helps you understand what any given theory is really claiming.

In systems terms the families differ in their core data structure and update rule: discrete symbols with rule application, continuous activation vectors with weighted propagation, probability distributions with Bayesian updating, value estimates with reward-driven correction, and evidence accumulators with threshold crossing.


5.5.2 Fitting, and comparison by information criteria, cross-validation, and Bayes factors

Having a model is not enough, because a model usually has adjustable numbers, called parameters, that must be tuned so the model matches real data, and this tuning is called fitting.

The catch is that a model with enough free parameters can fit almost any data, the way a rubber ruler can be bent to match any curve, so a good fit alone proves little.

The real test is a balance between fitting the data well and staying simple, because an overly complicated model tends to memorise the accidental noise in one data set and then fail on the next, a failure known as overfitting.

Information criteria, such as the Akaike information criterion (AIC) and the Bayesian information criterion (BIC), are formulas that reward good fit but subtract a penalty for each extra parameter, giving a fairer comparison between simple and complex models.

Cross-validation takes a more direct approach: it fits the model on part of the data and then checks how well it predicts the held-out part it has never seen, which directly punishes a model that merely memorised.

Bayes factors compare two models by the weight of evidence the data provide for one over the other, automatically taking model complexity into account.

The shared lesson across all these tools is that the goal is not to explain the data you already have, but to predict data you have not yet seen.

In systems terms fitting is parameter estimation for the executable specification, and the comparison tools are regularised scoring functions that take model fit and model complexity as inputs and output a ranking designed to favour predictive rather than memorised performance.


5.5.3 Parameter recovery, identifiability, and generalisation as the real tests

Beyond fit, a trustworthy model must pass some deeper checks that are easy to skip and easy to fail.

Parameter recovery asks a simple honesty question: if you use the model to generate pretend data with known settings, and then fit the model back to that pretend data, do you recover the settings you put in?

If you cannot, then the numbers the model reports on real data are meaningless, because the fitting procedure cannot reliably find the truth even when the truth is known.

Identifiability is the closely related property that different parameter settings do not produce identical predictions, because if two very different internal states look exactly the same on the outside, no data can ever tell them apart.

Generalisation is the ultimate test, and it means the model's ability to predict genuinely new situations, new tasks, or new people, rather than just the situation it was built on.

A model that fits its original data beautifully but cannot generalise has told you about that one data set and not about the mind.

These standards are demanding, and the field has grown far stricter about them in recent years, part of a broader reckoning about credibility that closes this chapter.

In systems terms these checks are loopback tests: feed the system's own known output back through the estimator and verify the round trip, prove that the mapping from parameters to predictions is invertible, and confirm performance on inputs outside the training envelope.


5.6 A glance at the neuroscience methods

Cognitive science increasingly reaches for the brain itself, using instruments that measure or perturb neural activity while a person thinks.

No single instrument sees everything, because each trades off between seeing when something happens and seeing where it happens, and between merely watching and actually intervening.

This section gives a brief tour, since the companion neuroscience document treats these tools in depth.

The systems reading is a sensor suite: each instrument samples the same underlying process at a different temporal and spatial resolution, and only the fusion of several channels gives a trustworthy picture.


5.6.1 The temporal methods: electroencephalography and magnetoencephalography

Some brain methods are prized for their exquisite sense of timing.

Electroencephalography (EEG) records the tiny electrical voltages produced by the coordinated firing of neurons, using sensors placed on the scalp.

Its great strength is temporal resolution, meaning it can track changes millisecond by millisecond, fast enough to follow the flicker of thought as it unfolds.

Its weakness is spatial resolution, meaning it is poor at telling you exactly where inside the brain a signal came from, because the skull smears the electrical picture.

Magnetoencephalography (MEG) records instead the faint magnetic fields that accompany that same neural electrical activity.

MEG shares EEG's excellent timing and does somewhat better at locating sources, because magnetic fields pass through the skull less distorted, though it requires a large and expensive shielded machine.

Both methods are especially suited to questions about the order and speed of mental events, such as how many milliseconds after a word appears the brain registers that it is unexpected.

As sensors, both sample the neural signal on a millisecond timescale but blur its location, so their output is a precise timeline with a fuzzy map attached.


5.6.2 The spatial methods: functional imaging, decoding, and representational similarity

Other methods trade timing for a sharp sense of place.

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) measures brain activity indirectly by detecting changes in blood flow and blood oxygen, because active brain regions call for more oxygenated blood.

Its strength is spatial resolution, letting researchers localise activity to small regions across the whole brain, but its weakness is sluggish timing, because the blood response lags several seconds behind the neural activity it reflects.

For many years fMRI was used simply to ask which region lit up more in one condition than another, but the analysis has grown far more sophisticated.

Decoding, also called multivariate pattern analysis, asks whether the fine pattern of activity across many locations contains enough information to read off what a person is seeing or thinking, which reveals information the blunt lit-up-or-not approach misses.

Representational similarity analysis goes further and compares the geometry of these patterns, asking which things the brain treats as similar and which as different, and then comparing that structure directly against the structure predicted by a computational model.

This last technique is central to the level-bridging programme described earlier, because it provides a common yardstick for comparing brains and models on the same footing.

As a sensor, fMRI outputs a sharp spatial map filtered through a haemodynamic response that peaks roughly 5 to 6 seconds after the neural event, so its timeline is smeared while its map is precise, the mirror image of the electrical methods.


5.6.3 The causal methods: stimulation, lesion, and single-unit recording

Watching the brain is not the same as proving that a region causes a behaviour, because two things can rise and fall together without one making the other happen.

To establish cause, researchers turn to methods that intervene rather than merely observe.

Brain stimulation methods, such as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), briefly and harmlessly disrupt or excite a patch of cortex from outside the skull, so that if disrupting a region reliably impairs a task, that region plausibly contributes to it.

The lesion method studies people or animals in whom a part of the brain has been damaged, by stroke, injury, or surgery, and asks what abilities are lost, which historically gave some of the strongest evidence linking regions to functions.

Single-unit recording, done mostly in animals and occasionally in human patients during clinical surgery, uses a tiny electrode to listen to the firing of individual neurons, offering the sharpest possible view of what one cell is actually representing.

Each causal method has ethical and practical limits, and each sees only part of the picture, which is why the strongest conclusions come from many methods pointing the same way.

In systems terms these are fault-injection tests: instead of passively reading outputs, the experimenter perturbs or removes a component and observes which functions degrade, which is the standard engineering way to establish that a component is on the causal path.


5.7 The credibility of the field

A science is only as trustworthy as its findings are repeatable, and in the 2010s psychology confronted the uncomfortable discovery that many of its published findings did not repeat.

This section describes that reckoning honestly, both the crisis of unreproducible results and the deeper crisis of weak theories, along with the reforms now reshaping how the science is done.

The systems reading is quality assurance: the field discovered that its publication pipeline was systematically passing defective results, diagnosed the pipeline faults, and installed new process controls.


5.7.1 The replication crisis and its diagnosis

A finding is only believable if other researchers can obtain it again, and around 2011 the field began to suspect that a worrying share of its results could not be reproduced.

The alarm became concrete in 2015, when a large collaboration called the Open Science Collaboration tried to repeat one hundred published psychology studies and found that only about a third produced a clearly significant result the second time, and that even the effects that survived were on average about half as large as first reported.

This episode is now called the replication crisis, and its diagnosis pointed less to outright fraud than to subtler bad habits.

Chief among them were small samples that made results unstable, a publishing culture that printed exciting positive findings and buried unexciting null ones, and what came to be called researcher degrees of freedom, meaning the many small analysis choices a researcher can make, perhaps unconsciously, until a result crosses the line into significance.

The uncomfortable summary is that a literature built this way will be dotted with false positives that look convincing but vanish on retesting.

In systems terms the diagnosis is a biased filter in the pipeline: publication acted as a selection gate that passed noise peaks preferentially, so the archived literature overestimated effect sizes by construction.


5.7.2 The theory crisis and weak verbal models

Fixing unreliable data is necessary but not sufficient, because a second, quieter problem concerns the theories themselves.

Many theories in psychology are stated only in words, and verbal theories are slippery, because they can be stretched after the fact to accommodate almost any result, which means they rarely make a sharp prediction that could prove them wrong.

This is often called the theory crisis, and the complaint is that the field has accumulated far more effects than genuine explanations, and that its loose verbal models cannot be decisively tested.

The proposed remedy overlaps with the modelling standards described earlier: state theories as explicit computational models so that their predictions are precise, and so that a wrong theory can actually be caught and discarded.

The theory crisis is a reminder that gathering more reliable facts does not automatically produce understanding, and that clear, falsifiable theory is a separate and equally hard achievement.

In systems terms a verbal theory is an underspecified interface: it names inputs and outputs but omits the transfer function, so no observable behaviour can ever violate it, and the remedy is to demand an executable specification.


5.7.3 The reforms: preregistration, registered reports, open data, and multi-laboratory replication

The response to these crises has been a wave of practical reforms collectively known as open science, and they are steadily changing daily research practice.

Preregistration means writing down your hypotheses and your analysis plan publicly before you collect the data, which locks in your choices and prevents the after-the-fact flexibility that manufactures false positives.

Registered reports go a step further: a journal reviews and accepts the study design before any results exist, and commits to publishing the outcome whatever it turns out to be, which removes the incentive to chase only exciting findings.

Open data and open materials mean sharing the raw numbers and the exact procedures, so that others can check the analysis and reuse the work.

Multi-laboratory replication means many teams around the world running the same study together, which produces far more stable estimates than any single small study could.

These reforms are widely adopted and already appear to be improving the reliability of new work, though they demand more effort and cannot by themselves supply the strong theories the field still needs.

In systems terms these reforms are process controls: preregistration freezes the analysis configuration before the data arrive, registered reports decouple the accept decision from the output value, open data enables independent audit, and multi-laboratory replication averages across independent noisy channels.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Stimulus events under experimenter control, delivered as visual, auditory, or other physical signals with known timing and intensity, originating from the experimental apparatus.

◦ Behavioural responses from the participant, arriving as key presses, spoken words, or gaze positions, each stamped with a time and an accuracy value.

◦ Physiological signals from recording instruments, arriving as voltage traces from electroencephalography, magnetic field traces from magnetoencephalography, or blood-oxygen images from functional magnetic resonance imaging.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Summary statistics such as mean reaction times, accuracy rates, hit rates, and false alarm rates, in numeric form, consumed by statistical tests and computational models.

◦ Estimated latent parameters such as d-prime, criterion, thresholds, and model parameters, in numeric form, consumed by theories and by later chapters of this book.

◦ Published findings with open data and preregistered plans, in archival form, consumed by the wider scientific community and by replication efforts.

• STATE.

◦ The running experimental design: which condition each trial belongs to, the counterbalancing schedule, and the trial counter.

◦ The accumulating data set of stimulus and response pairs across trials and participants.

◦ For adaptive procedures, the current stimulus level and the recent history of correct and incorrect responses that steer the next trial.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Sample size and trial count, which set the precision of every estimate.

◦ The significance threshold and the model comparison penalty terms of the Akaike and Bayesian information criteria.

◦ The staircase step size and the target proportion correct that an adaptive procedure converges toward.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Simple reaction time of about 200 milliseconds, and additional choice time on the order of 100 milliseconds or more per added decision demand.

◦ Reading fixations of about 200 to 300 milliseconds, with saccades of a few tens of milliseconds between them.

◦ The functional magnetic resonance imaging haemodynamic response peaking about 5 to 6 seconds after the neural event, against millisecond resolution for electroencephalography.

◦ Time for a literature to self-correct through replication: REFUSED, because no honest single value exists for how long fields take to overturn false findings.

• MODES.

◦ Observation mode, where instruments passively record activity, switched to whenever the question is what correlates with what.

◦ Intervention mode, where stimulation or lesion evidence perturbs the system, switched to when the question is what causes what.

◦ Exploratory mode versus confirmatory mode in analysis, with preregistration as the explicit switch that locks the pipeline into confirmatory mode before data arrive.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Confounded designs that attribute an effect to the wrong cause, violated pure insertion in subtraction logic, speed-accuracy trade-offs misread as ability differences, reverse inference from brain activity to process, overfitted models that cannot generalise, and a publication filter that fills the literature with false positives.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called signal level with initial value ten.
Create a number variable called step size with initial value one.
Create an empty list called reversal levels.
Create a text variable called last direction with initial value none.
Repeat forty times.
    Present a trial at the current signal level and record whether the observer detected it.
    If the observer detected the signal, then do the following.
        If last direction equals up, then append the current signal level to reversal levels.
        Set last direction to down.
        Subtract step size from signal level.
    Otherwise, do the following.
        If last direction equals down, then append the current signal level to reversal levels.
        Set last direction to up.
        Add step size to signal level.
Calculate the sum of the values in reversal levels divided by the count of reversal levels.
Return that average as the estimated threshold.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for the simulated observer.
import random

# Define a function that returns true when a simulated observer detects a signal of the given level.
def observer_detects(level, true_threshold=5.0, noise=1.0):
    # Create a number variable called internal response equal to the level plus random noise.
    internal_response = level + random.gauss(0.0, noise)
    # Return whether the internal response exceeds the true threshold.
    return internal_response > true_threshold

# Define a function that runs a simple up-down staircase and returns the estimated threshold.
def staircase(trials=40, start_level=10.0, step=1.0):
    # Create a number variable called level with the starting value.
    level = start_level
    # Create an empty list called reversals.
    reversals = []
    # Create a variable called last direction with initial value none.
    last_direction = None
    # Repeat once for each trial.
    for _ in range(trials):
        # Present a trial and record whether the observer detected the signal.
        detected = observer_detects(level)
        # If the observer detected the signal, step downward.
        if detected:
            # If the previous step was upward, record a reversal at this level.
            if last_direction == "up":
                reversals.append(level)
            # Set the direction to down.
            last_direction = "down"
            # Subtract the step size from the level.
            level = level - step
        # Otherwise, step upward.
        else:
            # If the previous step was downward, record a reversal at this level.
            if last_direction == "down":
                reversals.append(level)
            # Set the direction to up.
            last_direction = "up"
            # Add the step size to the level.
            level = level + step
    # Calculate the average of the reversal levels as the threshold estimate.
    return sum(reversals) / len(reversals)

# Seed the random generator so the run repeats exactly.
random.seed(1)
# Print the estimated threshold from one staircase run.
print("Estimated threshold:", round(staircase(), 2))


CHAPTER 6. ONTOLOGIES AND THE TAXONOMY OF COGNITION (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter is about naming and sorting the mind's parts.

Before you can study attention or memory, you have to agree on what those words mean and how they relate, and it turns out that the field's everyday vocabulary is looser and more troublesome than it first appears.

An ontology, in the sense used here, is a formal, organised catalogue of the concepts in a field and the relationships among them, ideally written so precisely that a computer could use it.

The tag (FRAMEWORK) fits because this chapter supplies the organising scaffolding that lets the catalogue of mental processes in later chapters hang together, and because a clear taxonomy is a precondition for comparing findings across studies and, for a project like konnectome, across minds and machines.

In systems terms an ontology is the schema of the whole enterprise: it declares the types, the allowed relationships, and the naming rules, so that data collected by different laboratories can be joined like tables in a shared database.


6.1 Why a machine-readable taxonomy matters

The words we use for mental faculties grew up haphazardly over centuries, and they do not cut the mind at reliable joints.

A machine-readable taxonomy tries to replace this fuzzy vocabulary with something explicit and consistent, so that different laboratories mean the same thing by the same term and their results can be pooled.

This section explains the core problem such a taxonomy must solve.

The systems reading is interface standardisation: without an agreed schema, every laboratory publishes in its own private format and the results cannot be integrated.


6.1.1 The mapping from tasks to processes and back

The central difficulty is that we cannot observe mental processes directly, we can only observe behaviour on tasks, and the link between the two runs in a tangled, many-to-many way.

A single task almost always calls on several mental processes at once, for example a memory test also requires attention, perception, and motivation to complete.

And a single mental process, such as attention, shows up across dozens of different tasks that on the surface look nothing alike.

So there is no tidy one-to-one dictionary translating tasks into processes, and building a good taxonomy means carefully specifying which tasks are believed to tap which processes, in both directions.

Getting this mapping right matters enormously, because if we mislabel what a task measures, then every conclusion we draw from it about the underlying process inherits the error.

In systems terms the mapping is a many-to-many relation between two node types, tasks and processes, and the taxonomy's job is to store that relation explicitly so that queries can run in either direction.


6.1.2 The reverse-inference problem restated as an ontology problem

Reverse inference is the tempting but risky move of looking at an observation and concluding which mental process produced it.

In brain imaging it takes a specific form: seeing a region light up, and inferring that a particular mental process must have been engaged because that region is associated with it.

The logic is shaky whenever the region serves more than one function, because then its activity does not uniquely point to any single process, just as seeing wet ground does not prove it rained since a sprinkler could be the cause.

This chapter's insight is that reverse inference is really an ontology problem in disguise.

The inference is only as good as the catalogue of process-to-region and process-to-task links it relies on, so building a rigorous, quantitative ontology is precisely what would let researchers say how much a given observation actually licenses a claim about a hidden process.

In other words, cleaning up the taxonomy is not bookkeeping, it is the path to making a whole class of common inferences trustworthy.

In systems terms reverse inference is decoding a hidden state from an ambiguous output symbol, and its reliability is set by the selectivity of the mapping: an output emitted by only one hidden state identifies it, while an output shared by many states carries little evidence about any of them.


6.2 The standard ontologies

Several serious, publicly built ontologies of cognition already exist, each with its own emphasis and its own way of carving the field.

Knowing the main ones is useful both as a map of current thinking and as raw material for any project, such as konnectome, that needs a principled vocabulary of the mind.

This section introduces the three most influential.

Read as systems, the three differ in what they take as their primary record type: processes linked to tasks, experiments described by their ingredients, or clinical dimensions tied to biology.


6.2.1 The Cognitive Atlas and its bipartite graph of processes and tasks

The Cognitive Atlas is a collaborative, expert-built ontology of the mind, developed chiefly by Russell Poldrack and colleagues at Stanford.

Its defining design choice is to keep two kinds of things separate and then connect them, an arrangement mathematicians call a bipartite graph, meaning a network with two distinct classes of nodes and links only between the classes.

On one side sit mental concepts, the processes such as working memory, response inhibition, or episodic recall.

On the other side sit tasks, the concrete experimental procedures such as the Stroop task or the n-back task.

The links then record which tasks are thought to measure which processes, capturing exactly the tangled mapping described earlier in an explicit, queryable form.

The Atlas matters because it turns loose textbook vocabulary into a structured resource that neuroimaging databases can use to pool studies that target the same process, even when those studies used different tasks.

In systems terms the Atlas is a queryable two-table database with a link table between them: its inputs are expert-curated assertions, its output is the set of tasks or processes returned by a query, and its correctness depends entirely on the curation of the links.


6.2.2 The Cognitive Paradigm Ontology and the classification of experiments

The Cognitive Paradigm Ontology (CogPO) tackles a different slice of the problem: it aims to describe experiments themselves in a rigorous, standardised way.

Rather than focusing on the abstract mental process, CogPO breaks each experimental paradigm down into concrete, describable ingredients.

These ingredients include the type of stimulus presented, for example whether it was a picture or a sound, the instructions given to the participant, and the type of response required, for example a button press or a spoken word.

By describing experiments in this common language, CogPO makes it possible to find and compare studies that share the same structure even if researchers labelled them differently.

It grew out of the BrainMap project's long effort to catalogue the neuroimaging literature, and it complements the Cognitive Atlas: where the Atlas emphasises the processes and their links to tasks, CogPO emphasises the fine anatomy of the tasks and conditions themselves.

In systems terms CogPO is a structured record format for experiments, a fixed set of fields for stimulus, instruction, and response, which makes experiments comparable by field matching rather than by fuzzy name matching.


6.2.3 The Research Domain Criteria and its cognitive systems domain

The Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) is an ontology born from a different motive, coming from the United States National Institute of Mental Health with the goal of rethinking mental illness.

Its founding argument is that traditional psychiatric categories, which sort people by clusters of symptoms, do not map cleanly onto the brain, and that research might progress faster by studying basic biological and behavioural dimensions that cut across those categories.

RDoC therefore lays out a set of domains, each containing more specific constructs, and treats them as dimensions along which everyone varies, from healthy to disordered, rather than as boxes people are in or out of.

One of these domains is explicitly the cognitive systems domain, which includes constructs such as attention, perception, declarative memory, language, and cognitive control, echoing the very faculties catalogued in this outline.

RDoC is relevant here because it is a working, influential ontology that ties cognitive processes to biology and to clinical variation, and because its dimensional, cross-cutting philosophy is itself a strong claim about how the mind should be carved.

In systems terms RDoC replaces categorical fault codes with continuous health parameters: instead of asking which diagnostic box a person is in, it reads each construct as a dial that runs from typical function to breakdown.


6.3 The organising axes that recur as tags rather than chapters

Some distinctions in cognitive science are too pervasive to be a single topic, because they run through nearly every faculty at once.

Rather than devoting a chapter to each, this outline treats them as recurring axes, labels that can be attached to almost any process to locate it along a shared dimension.

This section names the three most important such axes.

In systems terms the axes are tag fields in the schema: every process record carries a value on each axis, and the axes support queries that cut across the chapter structure.


6.3.1 The levels-of-analysis axis

The first recurring axis is the level of analysis, the choice of grain at which you describe a mental process, introduced in full in the chapter on Marr's levels.

At the top level you can ask what problem a process solves and why, in the middle level what representations and step-by-step procedures it uses, and at the bottom level how the brain physically implements it.

This axis is an axis rather than a chapter because you can, and should, ask these three questions of any capacity, whether it is vision, memory, or decision.

Tagging where a given theory or finding sits on this axis prevents a common confusion, namely people talking past each other because one is describing the abstract goal while the other is describing the neural wiring.

In systems terms the three levels are the requirements specification, the algorithm and data structures, and the hardware, and the tag records which of the three a given claim is about.


6.3.2 The symbolic to connectionist to Bayesian paradigm axis

The second recurring axis runs across the major theoretical paradigms introduced earlier, from symbolic to connectionist to Bayesian.

At one end, a process can be modelled as the rule-governed manipulation of discrete symbols, at another as patterns spreading through a neural network, and at another as probabilistic inference under uncertainty.

This too is an axis rather than a chapter because almost any faculty has been modelled in more than one of these styles, and the interesting question is usually which style, or which blend, best captures a particular process.

Placing a theory on this axis quickly tells you what it will be good at explaining and where it will likely struggle, since each paradigm carries characteristic strengths and blind spots.

In systems terms this tag records the model's core machine type, a rule engine, a weighted network, or a probability engine, and each machine type predicts a distinct profile of strengths and failure modes.


6.3.3 The automatic and controlled, System One and System Two axis

The third recurring axis distinguishes fast, effortless, automatic processing from slow, effortful, controlled processing, a contrast popularised as System One and System Two thinking.

System One refers to mental operations that run quickly and without conscious effort, like reading a familiar word or sensing that a face is angry.

System Two refers to operations that are slow, deliberate, and demanding of attention, like solving a hard multiplication or weighing an unfamiliar decision.

This distinction reappears across perception, memory, reasoning, and action, which is exactly why it is treated as an axis that can tag many processes rather than a single isolated topic.

It is worth flagging that the neat two-system picture is a useful simplification rather than a literal map of two boxes in the brain, and many researchers now prefer to speak of a continuum of automaticity, a point developed in the later chapters on dual-process theory.

In systems terms this tag records the process's execution mode, roughly whether it runs as a fast pipelined routine without central resources or as a slow serial routine that occupies the limited central controller, with the caveat that real processes sit on a continuum between the two.


6.4 The trade-offs of the three organisations

There are three natural ways to organise the whole science of cognition, and none is simply correct, because each buys some advantages at the cost of others.

Understanding these trade-offs explains why this outline, and the konnectome project behind it, deliberately keeps more than one organisation in view rather than committing to a single scheme.

This section lays out the three and what each is good for.

In systems terms this is a choice of decomposition: by user-facing capability, by shared mechanism, or by whole-system architecture, and mature engineering documents typically maintain all three views of one system.


6.4.1 Faculty organisation for coverage and teaching

The first way to organise the field is by faculty, meaning by traditional capacities such as perception, attention, memory, language, and thought.

Its great virtue is coverage and clarity, because it maps onto how the subject is naturally taught and how newcomers already think about the mind, making sure nothing important is left out.

This is why textbooks, and indeed the bulk of this outline, are arranged by faculty.

Its weakness is that faculties are convenient labels rather than sharply separate machines, and organising by them can subtly imply that memory and attention are more independent than they really are, when in truth they overlap and interpenetrate everywhere.

In systems terms this is decomposition by feature list: complete and readable, but it hides the fact that many features are implemented by the same shared components.


6.4.2 Process organisation for mechanism

The second way is to organise by underlying process or mechanism, meaning by the actual operations the mind performs, such as inference, evidence accumulation, or error-driven learning, regardless of which faculty they show up in.

Its virtue is that it aims at explanation, grouping phenomena by the machinery that produces them rather than by surface appearance, so that the same learning mechanism can be recognised whether it shows up in perception, motor skill, or reward.

This is the organisation that ontologies like the Cognitive Atlas push toward, and it is where genuine mechanistic understanding lives.

Its weakness is that our knowledge of the true underlying processes is still incomplete and contested, so a purely process-based organisation risks committing prematurely to mechanisms that may later prove wrong.

In systems terms this is decomposition by shared library: it exposes reuse and mechanism, but it requires already knowing the internals, which for the mind are only partly known.


6.4.3 Architecture organisation for integration and theory

The third way is to organise by architecture, meaning by proposals for how all the pieces fit together into a single working mind, the subject of the later parts of this outline.

Its virtue is integration, because it refuses to study each faculty in isolation and instead demands an account of how perception, memory, attention, and action share resources and cooperate in real time.

This is the organisation most relevant to building an artificial mind, since a functioning system cannot be a loose pile of separate modules but must be one coordinated whole.

Its weakness is that it is the most speculative, because no proposed architecture yet explains the entire mind, so organising everything around one architecture risks bending the facts to fit a theory that is still unfinished.

The honest conclusion, and the stance of this outline, is that the three organisations are complementary lenses, and that a mature science, or a serious attempt to build a mind, needs all three at once.

In systems terms this is the whole-system blueprint view: it is the only view that specifies interfaces and resource sharing among all components, and it is also the view most likely to be revised, because the blueprint is still a draft.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Term proposals and definitions from researchers, arriving as curated assertions about processes, tasks, and their links, from expert communities such as the Cognitive Atlas contributors.

◦ Experiment descriptions, arriving as structured records of stimulus type, instruction, and response type, in the style of the Cognitive Paradigm Ontology.

◦ Empirical findings from the literature, arriving as reports that a given task engaged a given process or region, which the ontology must reconcile.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A queryable vocabulary of mental processes and tasks with explicit links, consumed by neuroimaging databases, meta-analyses, and projects such as konnectome.

◦ Reverse-inference support: for a given observation, the set of candidate processes and a measure of how selectively the observation points to each, consumed by researchers interpreting data.

◦ Tag values on the recurring axes, level of analysis, modelling paradigm, and automaticity, consumed by every later chapter as classification metadata.

• STATE.

◦ The current graph of concept nodes, task nodes, and the links between them, including definitions and provenance for each assertion.

◦ Version history, because an ontology is revised as evidence accumulates and old links are corrected or retired.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ The granularity of concepts, meaning how finely a faculty is split into sub-processes.

◦ The evidence standard a proposed link must meet before it is admitted to the graph.

◦ The selectivity threshold above which a reverse inference is treated as informative rather than negligible.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ REFUSED for processing timescales, because an ontology is a knowledge structure rather than a running mental process and has no characteristic latency of its own.

◦ Revision timescale of years, in the loose sense that community ontologies such as the Cognitive Atlas and the Research Domain Criteria are updated over years rather than seconds, though no precise value is defensible.

• MODES.

◦ Curation mode, where experts add and revise terms and links, triggered by new evidence or disputes over definitions.

◦ Query mode, where users and machines read the graph to pool studies or evaluate an inference, triggered by any analysis that needs a shared vocabulary.

◦ Dimensional mode versus categorical mode of description, with the Research Domain Criteria representing an explicit switch from category boxes to continuous dimensions.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Fuzzy or circular definitions that let two laboratories use one word for two processes, many-to-many task and process mappings collapsed into false one-to-one dictionaries, unwarranted reverse inference from a non-selective marker, and premature commitment to a carving of the mind that later evidence overturns.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a dictionary called task links that maps each task name to the list of process names it engages.
Create a text variable called observed task holding the name of the task that showed an effect.
Look up the list of processes linked to the observed task and call it the candidates.
Create an empty dictionary called selectivity.
For each process in the candidates, do the following.
    Create a number variable called task count with initial value zero.
    For each task in the task links dictionary, do the following.
        If the process appears in that task's list, then add one to task count.
    Calculate one divided by task count and store the result in selectivity under the process name.
Find the process with the largest selectivity value.
Return that process and its selectivity as the best supported reverse inference.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Define a small bipartite ontology mapping tasks to the processes they engage.
task_links = {
    # The Stroop task engages response inhibition and attention.
    "stroop": ["response_inhibition", "attention"],
    # The n-back task engages working memory and attention.
    "n_back": ["working_memory", "attention"],
    # The go no-go task engages response inhibition.
    "go_no_go": ["response_inhibition"],
    # The digit span task engages working memory.
    "digit_span": ["working_memory"],
    # The visual search task engages attention and perception.
    "visual_search": ["attention", "perception"],
}

# Define a function that scores a reverse inference from an observed task effect.
def reverse_inference(observed_task):
    # Look up the candidate processes linked to the observed task.
    candidates = task_links[observed_task]
    # Create an empty dictionary called selectivity.
    selectivity = {}
    # For each candidate process, measure how selectively it points back.
    for process in candidates:
        # Count how many tasks in the ontology engage this process.
        task_count = sum(1 for procs in task_links.values() if process in procs)
        # Store one divided by the task count as the selectivity of this process.
        selectivity[process] = 1.0 / task_count
    # Find the candidate process with the largest selectivity value.
    best = max(selectivity, key=selectivity.get)
    # Return the best candidate and the full selectivity table.
    return best, selectivity

# Score a reverse inference from an effect observed in the Stroop task.
best, table = reverse_inference("stroop")
# Print each candidate process with its selectivity score.
for process, score in sorted(table.items(), key=lambda item: -item[1]):
    # Print the process name and its rounded selectivity.
    print(process, round(score, 2))
# Print the best supported inference.
print("Best supported process:", best)





================================================================================

PART TWO. PERCEPTION: BUILDING THE WORLD FROM SIGNALS

================================================================================

CHAPTER 7. PSYCHOPHYSICS AND SENSORY CODING (PROCESS)

This chapter opens the study of perception at its root, where the physical world first makes contact with the nervous system.

It asks two linked questions: how the raw intensity of a stimulus turns into a felt sensation, and how the cells of the senses represent the world in the language of neural activity.

The tag (PROCESS) marks this as a description of a real cognitive capacity, the machinery of sensing, which any model of the mind must eventually reproduce.

Do not worry that some ideas here also appeared in the methods chapter, because there they were tools for measuring the mind, while here they are the subject matter itself, the actual workings of the senses.

In systems terms this chapter specifies the front-end transducer of the whole cognitive system: physical energy in, compressed neural code out, with automatic gain control keeping the limited-range hardware usable across an enormous input range.


7.1 The measurement of sensation

Perception begins with a translation problem: the world offers physical quantities like light energy and air pressure, and the mind experiences sensations like brightness and loudness, and these two do not line up in a simple straight line.

This section is about the lawful, measurable relationship between the physical stimulus and the sensation it produces, which is the founding achievement of scientific psychology.

The systems reading is the transfer function of the sensory transducer: a compressive, lawful mapping from input intensity to output magnitude, characterised by its thresholds and its curve shape.


7.1.1 Absolute and difference thresholds

The most basic facts about a sense are its limits, and thresholds are the way we measure those limits.

The absolute threshold is the faintest stimulus a person can detect, such as the dimmest candle flame visible on a dark night or the softest sound audible in a silent room.

The difference threshold, also called the just noticeable difference, is the smallest change between two stimuli that a person can reliably tell apart, such as the least added weight that makes a bag feel heavier.

These thresholds are not sharp walls but fuzzy zones, because near the limit a stimulus is sometimes detected and sometimes missed, so a threshold is conventionally defined as the level detected on some fixed proportion of trials, often half.

Thresholds matter because they quantify the sensitivity of a sense, letting us compare, for example, how vision fares in dim light against how it fares in bright light, or how one person's hearing compares with another's.

They are also the historical seed from which all of quantitative psychology grew, because they showed that even something as private as a sensation can be pinned to a number.

In systems terms the absolute threshold is the noise floor of the sensor, the difference threshold is its intensity resolution, and the fuzziness of both reflects the ever-present internal noise on the channel.


7.1.2 Weber's law, Fechner's law, and Stevens' power law

Once you can measure thresholds, a beautiful regularity appears, and it concerns how the just noticeable difference changes as the stimulus grows.

Weber's law, discovered by Ernst Weber in the nineteenth century, states that the just noticeable difference is a roughly constant fraction of the starting stimulus rather than a fixed amount.

In plain terms, adding one candle to a room lit by one candle is obvious, but adding one candle to a room already lit by a hundred is unnoticeable, because what counts is the proportional change, not the absolute change.

Gustav Fechner extended this into Fechner's law, which proposes that the strength of a sensation grows in proportion to the logarithm of the physical stimulus, meaning that equal multiplications of the stimulus produce equal additions to the sensation.

This logarithmic squashing is why our senses can cope with an enormous range of intensities, from a whisper to a jet engine, without being overwhelmed, because each large multiplication of energy adds only a modest step of sensation.

In the twentieth century Stanley Smith Stevens argued that a power law fits the data across many senses better than Fechner's logarithm, an idea called Stevens' power law.

The power law is more flexible because its exponent can differ from sense to sense, so it captures the fact that some sensations, like the pain of an electric shock, actually grow faster than the physical stimulus rather than being squashed.

It is honest to say that experts still debate which formulation is most fundamental, and recent work has tried to unify them, so these are enormously useful laws rather than a single finished equation of sensation.

In systems terms Weber's law says the sensor's resolution is proportional rather than absolute, with the Weber fraction as the constant of proportionality, and the logarithmic and power laws are two candidate compression curves for the transducer, both achieving wide dynamic range through a limited output range.


7.1.3 Signal detection theory as the modern replacement for the threshold

The very idea of a single fixed threshold turns out to be too simple, and signal detection theory is the framework that replaced it.

The problem is that whether a person reports detecting a faint stimulus depends not only on their senses but also on their willingness to say yes, so a cautious person and a bold person can behave differently with identical eyes and ears.

Signal detection theory reconceives detection as a decision made against a background of ever-present internal noise, where a real signal simply adds a bit of extra activity on top of that noisy baseline, and the observer must judge whether what they feel is noise alone or signal plus noise.

From the pattern of correct detections, called hits, and mistaken detections of nothing, called false alarms, the theory extracts two separate numbers.

Sensitivity, written d-prime, captures how distinguishable the signal really is from the noise, that is, the true acuity of the sense.

The criterion captures how much evidence the person demands before saying yes, that is, their personal bias toward caution or boldness.

This framework is a genuine advance over the old threshold because it explains why detection seems to shift with mood, motivation, and expectation without the senses themselves changing at all, and because it gives a clean way to ask whether an intervention altered perception or merely altered a person's reporting style.

In systems terms the observer is a noisy sensor feeding a thresholded comparator: d-prime is the signal-to-noise separation at the sensor stage, the criterion is the comparator's set point, and only the sensor stage counts as perception proper, while the set point is policy.


7.2 Sensory coding

Beyond measuring sensation lies a deeper question: how do the cells of a sensory system actually represent the world, using nothing but patterns of electrical activity?

This section turns from the psychology of thresholds to the neuroscience of the code, describing how individual neurons and populations of neurons carry information about what is out there.

The systems reading is encoding design: what data format the nervous system uses on its input lines, and why that format is an efficient fit to the statistics of the natural world.


7.2.1 Feature detectors and receptive fields

A foundational discovery is that many sensory neurons are picky, responding strongly to some specific feature of the world and ignoring the rest.

The region of the world, or of the sense organ, that a given neuron listens to is called its receptive field, meaning the patch of visual space, or of skin, or the band of sound frequencies, that can drive that cell.

In the 1950s and 1960s David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel, working in the visual cortex of cats, found neurons that fired vigorously to an edge or bar of light at a particular orientation and location, and barely at all to other orientations, work that later earned a Nobel Prize.

Such cells came to be called feature detectors, because each seems tuned to signal the presence of a particular elementary feature, such as an edge tilted just so.

The appealing picture that followed is hierarchical: simple feature detectors early in the system combine to build detectors for more complex patterns further along, so that edges assemble into shapes and eventually into whole objects.

This idea remains hugely influential and directly inspired the design of modern artificial vision networks, though researchers now caution that real neurons are often less like single dedicated detectors and more like contributors to a shared population code, which is the subject of the next sub-section.

In systems terms a feature detector is a matched filter: its input is the activity within its receptive field, its output is a firing rate that peaks when the input matches its preferred template, and stacking such filters in layers yields a feature hierarchy of increasing abstraction.


7.2.2 Population codes and efficient coding

A single neuron is a noisy and ambiguous reporter, so the nervous system generally represents things not by one cell but by the combined activity of many, an arrangement called a population code.

In a population code, the identity of a stimulus, such as the exact direction of a moving dot, is read from the overall pattern of firing across a whole group of broadly tuned neurons, rather than from any one cell alone.

This is more robust, because the loss or noise of a single neuron barely dents a message carried by thousands, and it is more precise, because averaging across many coarsely tuned cells can pin down a value finer than any single cell could.

Overlapping this idea is the efficient coding hypothesis, proposed by Horace Barlow around 1961, which asks why sensory systems are built the way they are and answers with a principle of economy.

The hypothesis is that the senses are adapted to the statistics of the natural world, and that they encode incoming information in a compressed, non-redundant form, spending as few neural resources as possible to carry as much information as possible.

A striking success of this idea is that when researchers mathematically design filters to represent natural images as efficiently as possible, the filters that emerge closely resemble the actual receptive fields Hubel and Wiesel found in the visual cortex.

Efficient coding thus offers a why to accompany the what: the brain's sensory code looks the way it does because that shape is an economical fit to the world it evolved to represent.

In systems terms a population code is a distributed, redundant encoding read out by averaging across noisy channels, and efficient coding is the design principle that the encoder is matched to the input statistics, the same principle that underlies engineered data compression.


7.2.3 Adaptation and gain control

Sensory systems do not report absolute values so much as changes and contrasts, and two closely related mechanisms, adaptation and gain control, are why.

Adaptation is the tendency of sensory neurons to reduce their response to an unchanging stimulus over time, which is why you stop noticing a constant smell, the steady hum of a refrigerator, or the feel of your clothes on your skin.

This is useful because a constant stimulus carries little new information, so it makes sense to quiet down about it and stay alert to change, which is where the news lies.

Gain control is the automatic adjustment of a system's sensitivity to match the current conditions, rather like the way a camera adjusts its exposure so it can work in both dim and bright scenes.

A vivid everyday example is walking from bright sunshine into a dark cinema, where at first you can see nothing and then, over minutes, your visual system turns up its gain until the dim room becomes visible.

Together, adaptation and gain control let a sense with a limited response range operate across the enormous span of intensities the world actually presents, by continuously recentring itself on the current context.

These mechanisms also explain a whole family of aftereffects and illusions, since a system freshly adapted to one thing will temporarily misjudge what comes next, a theme picked up in the next chapter.

In systems terms adaptation is a high-pass filter that transmits change and attenuates constants, and gain control is automatic range adjustment, operating on timescales from fractions of a second for rapid contrast adaptation up to the roughly 20 to 30 minutes that full dark adaptation of the eye's rod system requires.


7.3 The senses beyond vision

Vision dominates both everyday life and the research literature, but it is only one sense among several, and the others reveal coding principles of their own.

This section broadens the view to hearing, to the chemical and bodily senses, and to the often overlooked sense of the body's own internal state.

In systems terms each sense is a separate transducer with its own encoding scheme, and comparing them reveals which design principles, such as population coding and gain control, are universal.


7.3.1 Audition and the coding of frequency and time

Hearing, or audition, is the sense that turns vibrations of air into the experience of sound, and its central coding problem is how to represent the frequency of a sound, which we hear as pitch.

The inner ear contains a coiled structure called the cochlea, along which different positions respond best to different frequencies, high frequencies near one end and low near the other.

This gives the first coding scheme, called place coding, in which the pitch of a sound is signalled by which place along the cochlea is most strongly stimulated, rather like keys along a piano.

But there is a second scheme, called temporal coding, in which neurons fire in step with the rhythm of a sound wave, so that the timing of the neural firing itself carries the frequency, at least for lower-pitched sounds where the neurons can keep up.

The current consensus is that hearing uses both schemes together, leaning on temporal coding for low frequencies and place coding for high ones, with a transition in between.

Audition is also exquisitely sensitive to timing in a second sense, because the tiny difference in when a sound reaches the two ears, a matter of fractions of a millisecond, is used to locate where the sound came from, which shows how the auditory system exploits time with remarkable precision.

In systems terms the cochlea is a mechanical frequency analyser whose output uses two multiplexed channels, a place channel and a timing channel, and the binaural localisation circuit resolves interaural time differences down to about ten microseconds, one of the finest timing measurements the nervous system makes.


7.3.2 The chemical and somatic senses

Two further families of sense round out the traditional picture, the chemical senses and the somatic senses.

The chemical senses are smell, called olfaction, and taste, called gustation, and they work by detecting molecules rather than energy.

Smell detects airborne molecules using a large family of receptor types in the nose, and because most natural odours are mixtures, the brain recognises a smell from the overall pattern of which receptors are activated, another example of a population code.

Taste detects molecules dissolved in the mouth and is usually described in terms of a small set of basic qualities, sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and the savoury quality called umami, with much of what we call flavour actually arising from smell working alongside taste.

The somatic senses are the body senses, and they include touch, temperature, pain, and proprioception, which is the sense of where your limbs are without looking.

Touch relies on several kinds of specialised receptors in the skin, each tuned to different features such as light pressure, vibration, or stretch, so that even a single fingertip carries several parallel streams of information.

Pain deserves special mention because it is not a simple readout of tissue damage but a protective signal that the brain actively constructs and can amplify or dampen depending on context, attention, and emotion, which is why the same injury can hurt very differently on different occasions.

In systems terms olfaction is a combinatorial population code across hundreds of receptor types, touch is a set of parallel labelled lines each carrying one feature stream, and pain is a prioritised alarm channel whose gain is actively modulated by central state rather than fixed by the injury.


7.3.3 Interoception as perception of the internal milieu

Interoception is the perception of the internal state of the body, the sense that reports on your heartbeat, your breathing, your hunger, your temperature, and the state of your organs.

The word means, roughly, inward perception, and it names the mostly unconscious monitoring of what is often called the internal milieu, meaning the body's own inner environment.

For a long time this sense was neglected, but it has become a major topic because of growing evidence that our reading of the body's internal signals is deeply tied to emotion and feeling.

The idea, developed by researchers such as Antonio Damasio, Bud Craig, and Lisa Feldman Barrett, is that much of what we experience as emotion is in part the brain's interpretation of interoceptive signals, so that a racing heart and tightened stomach become the felt substance of fear or excitement.

Interoception also appears to matter for the sense of having a body and being a self, and disturbances in it are increasingly linked to conditions such as anxiety, depression, and eating disorders.

It is fair to say this is an active and unsettled frontier, where the basic phenomena are established but the precise mechanisms and their links to feeling are still being worked out, which is exactly why it belongs in a modern map of perception rather than as an afterthought.

In systems terms interoception is the system's internal telemetry: sensors on the body's own hardware feed a monitoring channel whose outputs are consumed by regulation and, on current theories, re-interpreted upstream as the raw material of felt emotion.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Physical energy and matter from the environment: light intensity and wavelength at the retina, air pressure waves at the cochlea, mechanical force and temperature at the skin, and airborne or dissolved molecules at the nose and mouth.

◦ Internal bodily signals: heartbeat, breathing, gut state, and blood chemistry, arriving through interoceptive pathways.

◦ Modulatory signals from central states such as attention, expectation, and emotion, which adjust gain and, in the case of pain, the alarm level.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Graded sensation magnitudes such as brightness, loudness, heaviness, and warmth, on a compressed scale, consumed by perceptual organisation in the next chapter.

◦ Neural codes: firing rates of feature detectors and patterns across populations, consumed by downstream recognition and decision circuits.

◦ Detection decisions, yes or no reports about faint signals, jointly determined by sensitivity and criterion, consumed by behaviour and by experimenters.

• STATE.

◦ The current adaptation level of each sensory channel, meaning the recent stimulus history each channel has recentred itself on.

◦ The current gain setting of each channel, tuned to the prevailing intensity range.

◦ The observer's current decision criterion, set by expectation, motivation, and instruction.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ The Weber fraction of each sense, the constant proportion that sets the just noticeable difference, on the order of a few percent for weight discrimination.

◦ The exponent of Stevens' power law, which differs by sense and determines whether sensation is compressed or expanded relative to the stimulus.

◦ d-prime and criterion, the separation and cut-off of the detection stage.

◦ Receptive field size and tuning width, which set the spatial and featural resolution of each neuron.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Rapid sensory adaptation operating within fractions of a second to seconds, as when a steady touch fades from awareness.

◦ Full dark adaptation of the eye's rod system requiring roughly 20 to 30 minutes.

◦ Interaural time differences resolved down to about ten microseconds for sound localisation.

◦ A single settled value for the timescale of interoceptive integration: REFUSED, because the literature reports mechanisms across heartbeats and hours without one agreed characteristic constant.

• MODES.

◦ Low-gain mode for intense environments and high-gain mode for faint ones, switched automatically by ambient intensity, as in light and dark adaptation.

◦ Temporal coding mode for low sound frequencies and place coding mode for high ones, switched by whether neurons can fire in step with the waveform.

◦ Conservative versus liberal reporting mode, switched by payoffs, expectations, and instructions acting on the decision criterion rather than on the senses.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Aftereffects and illusions following adaptation, dazzle and temporary blindness when gain is set for the wrong regime, response bias masquerading as sensitivity change, chronic pain as an alarm channel stuck at high gain, and disordered interoception implicated in anxiety, depression, and eating disorders.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called weber fraction with initial value zero point zero five.
Create a list called baseline intensities holding the values ten, one hundred, and one thousand.
Create an empty list called measured jnds.
For each baseline in baseline intensities, do the following.
    Create a number variable called increment with initial value zero.
    Repeat until the observer reliably notices the increment.
        Add a small step to the increment.
        Present the baseline and the baseline plus the increment, and ask whether they differ.
    Append the final increment to measured jnds.
For each baseline and its measured jnd, calculate the jnd divided by the baseline.
Report each ratio, and note that the ratios are approximately equal, which is Weber's law.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for the simulated observer.
import random

# Define a function that returns true when a simulated observer notices the difference between two intensities.
def notices_difference(base, comparison, weber_fraction=0.05, noise=0.3):
    # Calculate the proportional difference between the two intensities.
    proportional_difference = (comparison - base) / base
    # Calculate a noisy internal signal in units of the Weber fraction.
    internal_signal = proportional_difference / weber_fraction + random.gauss(0.0, noise)
    # Return whether the internal signal exceeds one unit.
    return internal_signal > 1.0

# Define a function that measures the just noticeable difference at a given baseline.
def measure_jnd(base, step_ratio=0.002, repeats=20):
    # Create a number variable called increment with initial value zero.
    increment = 0.0
    # Repeat while the observer fails to notice the increment reliably.
    while True:
        # Add a small step proportional to the baseline to the increment.
        increment = increment + step_ratio * base
        # Count how many times out of the repeats the observer notices the difference.
        hits = sum(1 for _ in range(repeats) if notices_difference(base, base + increment))
        # If the observer notices on at least half the repeats, stop searching.
        if hits >= repeats // 2:
            # Return the increment as the just noticeable difference.
            return increment

# Seed the random generator so the run repeats exactly.
random.seed(2)
# For each baseline intensity, measure the just noticeable difference and its ratio to the baseline.
for base in [10.0, 100.0, 1000.0]:
    # Measure the just noticeable difference at this baseline.
    jnd = measure_jnd(base)
    # Print the baseline, the just noticeable difference, and their ratio.
    print("Baseline", base, "JND", round(jnd, 2), "ratio", round(jnd / base, 3))


CHAPTER 8. PERCEPTUAL ORGANISATION AND CONSTANCY (PROCESS)

This chapter is about how the mind turns a chaotic wash of sensory signals into a stable, organised world of objects and surfaces.

The senses deliver a jumble of edges, patches, and intensities, and yet we effortlessly see a coherent scene, which means the mind is doing a great deal of active organising that we never notice.

The tag (PROCESS) marks this as a genuine cognitive capacity, the work of perceptual organisation, that any complete model of the mind must account for.

The chapter also introduces one of the oldest and most illuminating debates in the field, about whether the richness of perception comes from the world or from the mind.

In systems terms this chapter describes the parser that sits above the sensory front end: it takes the raw feature stream as input, groups it into candidate objects, factors out the viewing conditions, and outputs a stable scene description.


8.1 The Gestalt principles of grouping

Early in the twentieth century a group of German psychologists, the Gestalt school, noticed something that still guides research: we do not perceive scattered dots and lines, we perceive organised wholes, and the whole is different from the mere sum of its parts.

Gestalt is simply the German word for form or shape, and these researchers set out the rules by which the mind decides which bits of a scene belong together.

This section presents those grouping rules and the master principle behind them.

The systems reading is a clustering stage: the grouping principles are the distance and similarity measures the parser uses to decide which elements belong to one unit.


8.1.1 Proximity, similarity, good continuation, closure, and common fate

The Gestalt psychologists identified several principles of grouping, each describing a cue the mind uses to decide which elements form a single unit.

Proximity is the principle that things close together are seen as belonging together, so a set of dots spaced into clusters looks like clusters rather than a uniform field.

Similarity is the principle that things that look alike, in colour, shape, or size, are grouped together, so a grid of mixed red and black dots organises itself into stripes or blocks by colour.

Good continuation is the principle that we prefer to see smooth, continuous lines and contours, so when two lines cross we see them as passing through each other rather than as bending sharply at the meeting point.

Closure is the principle that we tend to complete incomplete figures, mentally filling small gaps so that a circle drawn with breaks in it still reads as a circle.

Common fate is the principle that elements moving together in the same direction are grouped as one object, which is why a flock of birds or a set of dots drifting together is instantly seen as a unit.

These principles matter because they reveal that perception is not passive copying but active organising, and because they are so reliable that designers, artists, and engineers use them deliberately to make images and interfaces easy to read.

In systems terms each principle is a linkage rule in a clustering algorithm: proximity links by spatial distance, similarity by feature distance, good continuation by contour smoothness, closure by gap tolerance, and common fate by shared motion vector, and the perceived units are the connected clusters those rules produce.


8.1.2 Figure and ground, and the law of pragnanz

Two further Gestalt ideas sit at a deeper level than the specific grouping cues.

Figure-ground organisation is the mind's fundamental division of a scene into a figure, the object that stands out and seems to have a shape, and the ground, the background that seems to extend behind it.

This division is something the mind imposes, and in ambiguous cases it can flip, as in the famous picture that can be seen either as two faces in profile or as a single vase, where the very same contour belongs first to one interpretation and then to the other.

Overseeing all the grouping principles is the master rule the Gestaltists called the law of pragnanz, sometimes translated as the principle of good form or simplicity.

It states that, of all the ways a scene could possibly be organised, the mind tends to settle on the simplest, most regular, most stable interpretation available.

In plain terms, perception prefers the tidiest story that fits the evidence, which is why we see a partly hidden shape as a whole simple object rather than as a bizarre fragment.

This drive toward simplicity is a recurring theme in perception research and reappears in modern probabilistic theories, which recast good form as the most probable interpretation given how the world usually works.

In systems terms figure-ground assignment is the labelling of which side of each contour owns it, and the law of pragnanz is the parser's objective function, a preference for the lowest-complexity description consistent with the input, which modern theories reinterpret as maximising probability under a model of the world.


8.2 Perceptual constancy

Here is a small miracle we take completely for granted: as you walk toward a friend, the image of them on your retina swells enormously, yet you never think your friend is growing.

Perceptual constancy is the name for this stability, the mind's ability to perceive the unchanging properties of objects even as the raw sensory image of them changes drastically with distance, angle, and lighting.

This section describes the main constancies and the deep computational trick they all share.

The systems reading is normalisation: the constancies are correction stages that divide out the viewing conditions so that the output tracks object properties rather than raw image properties.


8.2.1 Size, shape, lightness, and colour constancy

The world offers several constancies, each keeping one property of an object steady despite a shifting sensory image.

Size constancy is the perception that an object stays the same size even as its retinal image grows and shrinks with distance, which is why a car driving away looks like a receding car rather than a shrinking one.

Shape constancy is the perception that an object keeps its true shape even as the angle of view distorts its projected outline, which is why a door swinging open still looks rectangular although its image on the eye is a slanted trapezoid.

Lightness constancy is the perception that a surface keeps its shade of grey, a lump of coal looking black and a sheet of paper looking white, even when a shadow or a bright light dramatically changes how much light each actually sends to the eye.

Colour constancy is the matching perception that an object keeps its colour, a banana looking yellow at noon and at sunset, even though the wavelength mixture reaching the eye differs greatly under different lighting.

These constancies matter because they are the difference between perceiving a stable world of real objects and being overwhelmed by a meaningless flux of changing images.

They are also revealing failures waiting to happen, because when the cues that support a constancy are stripped away or contradicted, the constancy breaks and a striking illusion appears.

In systems terms each constancy is a dedicated correction channel that takes the raw image measurement plus an estimate of the viewing condition, distance, angle, or illumination, and outputs the inferred object property, and each channel fails predictably when its viewing-condition estimate is wrong.


8.2.2 Constancy as the discounting of the illuminant and the viewpoint

Underneath all the constancies lies a single deep problem and a single deep strategy.

The problem is that the sensory image confounds two things, the true property of the object and the conditions under which it is being viewed, so the light reaching your eye from a surface mixes the surface's own colour with the colour of the light shining on it.

To recover the object's true property, the mind must somehow factor out, or discount, the contribution of the viewing conditions, whether that is the illumination, the distance, or the angle.

Colour constancy, for instance, requires the visual system to estimate what the lighting is and then discount it, effectively asking what colour this surface would be under neutral light, a computation sometimes described as discounting the illuminant.

Size constancy similarly requires the mind to take account of distance, effectively multiplying the retinal image size by the estimated distance to recover the true size.

This is a genuinely hard inference, because there is no unique answer, a given image could be produced by countless combinations of object and viewing conditions, and the mind resolves the ambiguity by leaning on assumptions about how the world usually is.

This framing, that perception solves an ill-posed problem by making sensible assumptions, is the bridge to the two grand theories of seeing that close the chapter, and to the Bayesian account developed later in the outline.

In systems terms the image is the product of two unknown inputs, object property and viewing condition, and constancy is blind source separation: estimate the viewing condition from scene-wide cues, divide it out, and accept that the factorisation is only as good as the assumptions that constrain it.


8.3 Illusion and multistability

Illusions are not mere curiosities or malfunctions, they are among the most informative phenomena in perception, because they show the machinery working in a case where it gets the answer wrong.

This section treats illusions as evidence, and then turns to the special case where perception cannot make up its mind and flips between interpretations.

The systems reading is diagnostics by adversarial input: illusions are crafted inputs that expose the parser's built-in assumptions, and bistable figures are inputs that leave its objective function with two equal minima.


8.3.1 Illusions as the visible cost of useful assumptions

An illusion is a perception that reliably departs from physical reality, and the key word is reliably, because a good illusion fools everyone in the same way every time, which means it is revealing a built-in feature of the system rather than a random error.

The modern understanding is that most illusions are the flip side of the assumptions that usually serve us well.

Because the mind must guess at reality from ambiguous sensory data, it relies on assumptions about how the world normally behaves, and an illusion is what happens when a clever experimenter constructs a scene that violates those assumptions.

For example, the visual system assumes that light usually comes from above, so a bump and a dent, which produce opposite patterns of shading, are told apart by that assumption, and an image with reversed shading will be seen with bumps and dents swapped.

Size illusions likewise arise when misleading depth cues fool the system's distance-based size correction into scaling two identical shapes differently.

Seen this way, illusions are not bugs but the visible price of a system that is optimised for the ordinary world and can be tricked by extraordinary arrangements, which is exactly why researchers prize them as a window onto the assumptions perception normally hides.

In systems terms an illusion is a deterministic wrong output produced by a correct algorithm running on an input outside its design envelope, and the reliability of the error is what lets researchers read the algorithm's hidden assumptions from the failure pattern.


8.3.2 Bistable percepts and the dynamics of switching

A special and fascinating class of stimuli are those that are genuinely ambiguous, offering two equally good interpretations, so that perception cannot settle and instead flips back and forth.

These are called bistable, or more generally multistable, percepts, and famous examples include the Necker cube, a line drawing of a cube that seems to pop inside out, and the duck-rabbit figure that switches between two animals.

The striking thing is that the physical image never changes at all, yet your experience of it changes, which proves vividly that perception is an active interpretation the brain constructs rather than a passive copy of the input.

Researchers study the dynamics of these switches, meaning the timing and rhythm of the flips, because that timing carries clues about the underlying mechanism.

A common finding is that once you perceive one interpretation, that reading gradually fatigues or adapts while the suppressed alternative recovers, until the balance tips and perception jumps to the other reading, only for the cycle to repeat.

Multistability is valuable precisely because it lets researchers hold the stimulus perfectly constant while the perception changes, which isolates the brain's own contribution and makes it a favourite tool for studying the neural basis of conscious perception.

In systems terms a bistable stimulus puts the parser's objective function into two equal minima, and the observed oscillation, with dwell times typically of a few seconds per interpretation, is the signature of adaptation slowly raising the cost of the current minimum until the state jumps to the other.


8.4 The two grand approaches to seeing

Running through all of perception is a fundamental disagreement about where the richness of what we see comes from, and this disagreement has organised the field for over a century.

This section lays out the two great answers, associated with two towering figures, and explains why the mature view treats them as partly reconcilable rather than as a simple contest with a winner.

This is a debate rather than a mechanism, and in systems terms the two sides disagree about the required complexity of the internal model: direct perception predicts that a rich enough input stream removes the need for internal inference, while constructivism predicts that inference machinery is indispensable because the input underdetermines the world.


8.4.1 Direct perception and the ecological optics of Gibson

One answer, associated with the psychologist James Gibson, is that perception is direct, meaning that the world already contains enough information to specify itself, and the perceiver simply picks it up without needing to build or infer anything.

Gibson developed what he called ecological optics, the study of the rich structure present in the light that reaches a moving observer, arguing that this structure, especially as it changes when we move, directly reveals the layout of surfaces and objects.

A central idea of his is the affordance, which means the possibilities for action that an object or surface offers to a particular animal, so a chair affords sitting and a handle affords grasping, and Gibson claimed we perceive these action possibilities directly rather than computing them.

The strength of this view is its insistence that perception is for action, that it is embedded in a moving, behaving body, and that the environment supplies far more information than earlier theories assumed, which was a genuine and lasting correction.

Its weakness, in the eyes of critics, is that it underplays the internal processing that must occur, and it struggles to explain illusions and ambiguous figures, where the same information yields different percepts, since a purely direct theory has trouble saying why the mind ever gets it wrong.

In systems terms Gibson's claim is that the input channel of a moving observer carries enough structure to specify the scene without an internal model, so the system reduces to a well-designed pick-up device, and the theory's predictive weakness is that identical inputs should then never yield different outputs, which bistable figures show they do.


8.4.2 Constructivism and the unconscious inference of Helmholtz

The opposing answer, with roots in the nineteenth-century work of Hermann von Helmholtz, is that perception is constructed, meaning the sensory input is too impoverished and ambiguous to specify the world on its own, so the mind must actively build the percept by drawing on knowledge and assumptions.

Helmholtz coined the phrase unconscious inference to capture this, the idea that perceiving is like an unconscious, automatic reasoning process in which the mind infers the most likely cause of the sensory data given how the world usually works.

On this view, when you see a partly hidden object as whole, or discount a shadow to judge a surface's true colour, you are performing a rapid unconscious inference you never notice.

This constructivist tradition explains illusions and ambiguity naturally, because they are simply cases where the inference is led astray or cannot decide, and it fits the constancies and the Gestalt drive toward simple, probable interpretations.

Its risk is the opposite of Gibson's, that it can over-attribute to internal machinery what might actually be carried by richer information in the world.

The mature position in modern perception science is that both were partly right, and the contemporary Bayesian and predictive-coding theories, developed later in this outline, can be read as a formal reconciliation, treating perception as inference in Helmholtz's spirit while taking seriously Gibson's insight that the world's structure and the observer's own movement supply much of the information that inference relies on.

In systems terms constructivism specifies perception as an inference engine that combines the input with stored assumptions to output the most probable world state, and the modern reconciliation keeps that engine while crediting Gibson with showing that an active, moving observer greatly enriches the engine's input.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ The raw feature stream from sensory coding: edges, patches, colours, motions, and depths, in the format of population activity delivered by the previous chapter's front end.

◦ Viewing-condition cues: depth cues for distance, scene-wide statistics for the illuminant, and self-motion signals from the moving observer.

◦ Stored assumptions about the regularities of the world, such as light coming from above and objects being simple and continuous.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A parsed scene description: grouped units, a figure-ground labelling, and object properties corrected for viewing conditions, consumed by object recognition in the next chapter.

◦ Affordance-relevant layout information, the surfaces and possibilities for action, consumed by the motor system.

◦ A single settled interpretation of ambiguous input, consumed by conscious experience, with a flip event published when a bistable stimulus switches.

• STATE.

◦ The currently selected interpretation of the scene and the adaptation level of each competing interpretation, which drives bistable switching.

◦ The running estimates of the viewing conditions, illumination, distance, and viewpoint, that the constancy corrections divide out.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ The grouping thresholds: the maximum spatial distance for proximity linking, the feature tolerance for similarity linking, and the gap size closure will bridge.

◦ The weighting of each depth and illumination cue in the viewing-condition estimate.

◦ The simplicity preference of the pragnanz objective, the strength of the bias toward the tidiest interpretation.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Perceptual organisation itself completing within roughly 100 to 200 milliseconds of stimulus onset, on the timescale of a single fixation.

◦ Bistable percepts dwelling on one interpretation for a few seconds before switching, with wide variation across people and stimuli.

◦ A precise constant for the decay of a suppressed interpretation's adaptation: REFUSED, because reported recovery dynamics vary with stimulus and paradigm and no single citable value exists.

• MODES.

◦ Settled mode, where one interpretation clearly wins and the scene is stable, the default for unambiguous input.

◦ Multistable mode, entered when two interpretations score equally, producing alternation driven by adaptation and recovery.

◦ Constancy-intact mode versus constancy-broken mode, switched by whether the viewing-condition cues are available, since stripping the cues converts stable perception into illusion.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Grouping illusions where the linkage rules bind elements that do not belong together, figure-ground reversals, size and lightness illusions when the discounting stage receives misleading cues, shading reversals under the light-from-above assumption, and unstable alternation on ambiguous figures.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list called points holding the coordinate pairs of the dots in the display.
Create a number variable called grouping distance with initial value two.
Create a list called labels with one entry per point, each with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called current cluster with initial value zero.
For each point that still has label zero, do the following.
    Add one to current cluster.
    Create a list called frontier holding that point.
    While the frontier is not empty, do the following.
        Remove a point from the frontier and give it the current cluster label.
        For each other point that still has label zero, do the following.
            Calculate the distance between the two points.
            If the distance is less than the grouping distance, then append the other point to the frontier.
Report each cluster and the points it contains, which is the grouping by proximity.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for the distance calculation.
import math

# Define a function that returns the distance between two points.
def distance(a, b):
    # Return the square root of the sum of the squared coordinate differences.
    return math.sqrt((a[0] - b[0]) ** 2 + (a[1] - b[1]) ** 2)

# Define a function that groups points into clusters by proximity.
def group_by_proximity(points, grouping_distance=2.0):
    # Create a dictionary called labels with no entries yet.
    labels = {}
    # Create a number variable called current cluster with initial value zero.
    current_cluster = 0
    # For each point that has no label yet, grow a new cluster.
    for start in points:
        # If the point already has a label, skip it.
        if start in labels:
            continue
        # Add one to the current cluster number.
        current_cluster = current_cluster + 1
        # Create a list called frontier holding the starting point.
        frontier = [start]
        # While the frontier is not empty, absorb close neighbours.
        while frontier:
            # Remove a point from the frontier and give it the current cluster label.
            point = frontier.pop()
            labels[point] = current_cluster
            # For each unlabelled neighbour within the grouping distance, add it to the frontier.
            for other in points:
                if other not in labels and distance(point, other) < grouping_distance:
                    frontier.append(other)
    # Return the dictionary mapping each point to its cluster.
    return labels

# Create a display of dots arranged in two spatial clumps and one distant dot.
dots = [(0, 0), (1, 0), (0, 1), (8, 8), (9, 8), (8, 9), (20, 0)]
# Group the dots by proximity.
result = group_by_proximity(dots)
# Print each dot with the cluster the grouping assigned it.
for dot in dots:
    # Print the dot coordinates and its cluster number.
    print(dot, "belongs to cluster", result[dot])

CHAPTER 9. OBJECT AND PATTERN RECOGNITION (PROCESS)

This chapter is about one of the quietest miracles your mind performs every waking second.

You look up, and without any effort you know that the thing on the desk is a cup, the shape in the doorway is your friend, and the marks on this page are letters.

That act of turning raw light into a named, known thing is called object recognition, and pattern recognition is the same idea applied to any organised input, such as a sound, a face, or a written word.

Viewed as an engineered system, recognition is a classifier: a subsystem that takes a stream of sensory measurements as input and publishes a category label, plus a confidence estimate, as output, typically within about 150 milliseconds of the image arriving.

It matters because almost everything else the mind does, from remembering to talking to acting, depends on first knowing what it is looking at.

It is also far harder than it feels, because the same object throws a different image onto your eye every time you see it, yet you recognise it anyway, and explaining how is a central puzzle of the science of the mind.


9.1 Theories of recognition

Here we meet the main families of ideas about how the mind matches what it sees to what it already knows.

Each theory is really an answer to one engineering question: what data structure is stored in memory, and what comparison operation is run between the incoming image and that store?

As we go, notice that the theories are not simply right or wrong; each captures part of the truth, and the honest modern view borrows from several at once.


9.1.1 Template, prototype, and feature theories

A theory of recognition has to say what kind of stored pattern an incoming image is matched against, and these three theories give three different answers.

Template theory is the simplest idea: the mind stores a complete picture, called a template, of each thing it knows, and recognition is finding the stored picture that best overlaps the incoming image.

A template is just a stored full copy, the way a cookie cutter is a fixed shape you press against the dough.

In systems terms, the template store is a lookup table of raw images, and the matching operation is a pixel-by-pixel overlap score, which is cheap to compute but brittle.

The trouble is that real objects never present the exact same image twice, because they shift in size, angle, lighting, and position, so a rigid stored picture almost never lines up, and pure template matching quickly breaks down.

Prototype theory softens this by storing not every picture but an average, called a prototype, that summarises all the examples of a category you have ever seen.

A prototype is like the typical face you would get if you blended a thousand faces together; no single person looks exactly like it, but everyone is measured against it.

As a system, the prototype store is a running average per category, updated incrementally with each new example, and the comparison is a distance measurement between the incoming feature values and each stored average.

This handles variety much better, because a new example only has to resemble the average rather than match a fixed copy, and it explains why some members of a category feel more typical than others: they simply lie closer to the stored average.

Feature theory takes a different route again: it says the mind first breaks an image into a list of simple parts, called features, such as edges, curves, and angles, and then recognises the whole by the combination of features present.

A feature is a small building-block property, the way the letter A can be described as two slanted lines and a crossbar.

Strong support for feature theory came from the discovery of brain cells that respond to specific simple features, such as a line at a particular tilt, and from behavioural studies showing that letters sharing features are confused with one another more often, which is exactly the failure signature a feature-based comparator would produce.

The modern consensus is that no single one of these three is the whole story, and that recognition uses feature-like early analysis feeding prototype-like and example-like stored knowledge, a pipeline rather than a single stage.


9.1.2 Recognition by components and structural description

This is a specific and influential feature-style theory that tries to explain how we recognise three-dimensional objects from almost any angle.

It was proposed by the psychologist Irving Biederman in 1987 and is called recognition-by-components (RBC).

The core claim is that the mind carries a small alphabet of simple three-dimensional shapes, which Biederman called geons, a made-up word from geometric ions, meaning basic geometric units.

A geon is a simple volume such as a brick, a cylinder, a cone, or a wedge, and Biederman proposed a set of roughly thirty-six of them.

The powerful idea is that these few dozen shapes, combined in different arrangements, can describe the tens of thousands of everyday objects we recognise, much as a small alphabet of letters spells countless words.

Recognition, on this view, is a three-step pipeline: extract the edges of the object, identify which geons are present, and then read off how the geons are arranged relative to one another.

This arrangement information is called a structural description, meaning a stored account of the parts of an object and how they connect, for example a cylinder attached to a bent tube for a coffee mug.

A major selling point is viewpoint invariance, which means the description stays the same even when you move around the object, because geons are recognised from edge features that do not change with small shifts in angle, so the system's output is stable under a whole class of input transformations.

Biederman showed that when the relations between parts were disrupted, or when the crucial junctions between parts were erased, recognition suffered badly, which supports the idea that part-relations carry the load.

The limits of the theory are just as instructive: it handles boxy, part-based objects like chairs and animals well, but it struggles with things that do not divide neatly into simple volumes, such as a specific human face, a crumpled cloth, or a particular tree, where telling one example from another matters.


9.1.3 View-based against object-based recognition

This sub-section is about a long and genuinely unsettled argument over whether the mind stores objects as flat remembered views or as angle-free three-dimensional descriptions.

The object-based, or structural-description, position, associated with Biederman and with Marr, says the mind builds a description that does not depend on your viewpoint, so recognition should be roughly as fast and accurate from any angle.

The view-based, or image-based, position, associated with researchers such as Michael Tarr, Heinrich Bulthoff, Tomaso Poggio, and Shimon Edelman, says the mind instead stores a set of specific two-dimensional snapshots, or views, of each object, taken from the angles at which you have seen it.

In systems terms the two sides predict different cost curves: a view-based system pays a processing-time cost that grows with the angular distance between the input and the nearest stored view, while a purely object-based system predicts a flat cost curve, the same speed at every angle.

The experimental evidence, gathered heavily in the 1990s, mostly showed viewpoint dependence: people really are slower to recognise objects seen from novel angles, and the slowing grows with the size of the rotation, which fits the view-based account and resembles the time cost of mentally rotating an image.

But the picture is genuinely mixed, because under some conditions, especially with objects made of clearly distinct parts, viewpoint costs shrink or vanish, which is what the structural view predicts.

The honest current summary, reached after what researchers themselves called the viewpoint debate, is that both are partly right: recognition is often viewpoint-dependent, yet the brain can also use part-structure when it is available, and the two mechanisms may live in different but cooperating neural systems.

So this is a good early example of a place where experts do not pretend there is one clean answer.


9.2 The computational theory of vision

This section steps back from psychology experiments to ask a more engineering-like question: as a matter of pure information, what steps must any seeing system carry out to get from light to knowledge?

The answer given here is a famous staged theory of vision and a companion claim that the brain splits vision into two great processing streams.

The value of this section is that it gives you a scaffold onto which the earlier theories can hang.


9.2.1 Marr's primal sketch, two-and-a-half-dimensional sketch, and three-dimensional model

This is the single most influential blueprint for how seeing could work, laid out by the British neuroscientist David Marr in his book Vision, published in 1982 after his early death.

Marr argued that vision is the process of building, from a flat pattern of light on the eye, an increasingly rich description of the three-dimensional world that produced it, and that this happens in a sequence of stages, each a more useful representation than the last.

A representation here just means a coded description the brain can work with, the way a map is a representation of a landscape.

Read as a system, Marr's proposal is a pipeline of data formats, where each stage consumes the output format of the stage below and publishes a richer format to the stage above.

The first stage is the primal sketch, which describes the raw image in terms of where the intensity of light changes sharply, that is, edges, bars, blobs, and boundaries.

The primal sketch is still tied to the flat image and says nothing yet about depth; it is like a pencil outline that has marked all the important contours.

The second stage is the two-and-a-half-dimensional sketch, usually written as the 2.5D sketch, which adds depth and surface orientation but only from the viewer's own vantage point.

It is called two-and-a-half-dimensional, rather than fully three-dimensional, because it records how far away and how tilted each visible surface is from where you happen to be standing, but not the hidden back of the object, so it is a viewer-centred description, meaning it is anchored to your position.

The third stage is the three-dimensional model, a full object-centred description, meaning one that describes the object's shape in its own terms, independent of your viewpoint, so you could recognise it from anywhere.

Marr also framed a broader methodological lesson, that any information-processing system should be understood at three levels, but that levels idea is treated in its own chapter elsewhere in this work, so here we keep to the visual stages.

Marr's specific machinery has been superseded in its details by later work, including the neural-network models we meet below, but the core insight, that vision proceeds by building layered representations of steadily greater abstraction, remains foundational.


9.2.2 The two visual streams: the what and the where or how

This sub-section explains a landmark discovery about how vision is organised in the brain: it does not travel down one road but splits into two.

The idea began with Leslie Ungerleider and Mortimer Mishkin around 1982, who proposed, from studies of monkeys, that after early processing in the primary visual cortex, which is the first main visual area at the back of the brain, visual information flows along two anatomically separate pathways, called streams.

The ventral stream runs from the back of the brain forward and downward into the temporal lobe, the region on the side of the brain, and they labelled it the what pathway because it seemed to handle the identity of objects.

The dorsal stream runs from the back of the brain upward into the parietal lobe, the region toward the top and back, and they labelled it the where pathway because it seemed to handle the locations of objects.

In systems language, one input bus fans out into two parallel processors with different output consumers: the ventral stream publishes identity labels to memory and language, while the dorsal stream publishes spatial coordinates to the motor system on a faster, tighter deadline.

In 1992 Melvyn Goodale and David Milner offered an important re-reading of the dorsal stream.

Working partly from a patient known by the initials D.F., who had a condition called visual form agnosia, meaning she could not consciously recognise the shape or orientation of objects, they noticed something striking.

D.F. could not say how a slot was tilted, yet she could post a card through it accurately, showing that her vision-for-action was intact even though her vision-for-perception was ruined.

From cases like this, Goodale and Milner argued that the better description of the dorsal stream is not where but how, that is, vision used to guide action such as reaching and grasping in real time, while the ventral stream builds the conscious perception we use to recognise and remember.

So the modern label is often the what versus how distinction, and it captures a deep point: seeing in order to know and seeing in order to do can come apart, and can even rely on different brain tissue.

The strict two-streams story has been softened by later evidence showing the streams talk to each other constantly rather than working in isolation, but the basic division remains one of the best-supported ideas in the science of vision.


9.3 Special cases and models

Some recognition problems are special enough, or well studied enough, to deserve their own treatment, and this section collects three of them.

Faces and printed words are cases where humans become extraordinary experts, and deep artificial neural networks are the newest and most powerful working model of how recognition might actually be computed.

Each shows the general principles of this chapter sharpened to a fine point.


9.3.1 Face recognition and its functional model

Recognising faces is worth singling out because we are stunningly good at it, we do it for thousands of individuals, and it can break down on its own while other vision stays intact, which hints at special machinery.

The most widely used map of how face recognition works is the functional model of Vicki Bruce and Andrew Young, published in 1986.

A functional model here means a diagram of the separate processing steps and the information that flows between them, without yet saying where in the brain each step lives, which makes it exactly a systems interface diagram in the sense this book uses.

Bruce and Young proposed that after an initial perceptual step, several kinds of information are pulled from a face in parallel, that is, at the same time along different routes, rather than one after another.

These include the person's identity, their emotional expression, and the lip movements of speech, and the model's evidence that these are separate is that they can be damaged separately, so a person may read expressions yet fail to recognise who someone is, or the reverse.

For familiar people the model proposes a chain of stores: first a face recognition unit, which fires when a known face is seen, then a person identity node, which holds who the person is and links to biographical knowledge, and only last the person's name.

This ordering explains a common everyday experience: you can feel sure you know a face, and even recall the person's job, while their name stubbornly refuses to come, because the name sits at the far end of the chain, and a chain fails most often at its last link.

The condition in which face recognition specifically fails is called prosopagnosia, meaning face blindness, and its existence, sometimes without any loss of general object recognition, is a main reason many researchers think faces engage partly dedicated processing.


9.3.2 Reading and visual word recognition as an acquired expertise

This sub-section makes a simple but profound point: reading is not something evolution built us for, so it must be assembled in each brain from parts meant for other jobs.

Writing is only a few thousand years old, far too recent for any specialised reading instinct to have evolved, and yet a skilled reader identifies a printed word in a fraction of a second, which is why reading is called an acquired expertise, meaning a high skill built through long training rather than given at birth.

The neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene described this as neuronal recycling, the idea that learning to read repurposes a patch of the visual system, sometimes called the visual word form area, that would otherwise handle general object and shape recognition.

Studies of skilled reading reveal that we do not simply read letter by letter; whole familiar words are recognised almost as fast as single letters, a finding known as the word superiority effect, where a letter is identified more accurately inside a real word than alone.

Eye-tracking, which records exactly where the eyes land, shows that reading is a series of quick jumps, called saccades, separated by brief pauses, called fixations, that each last roughly 200 to 250 milliseconds in skilled readers, and that skilled readers skip many short and predictable words entirely, which tells us recognition is fast and partly driven by expectation.

As a system, then, reading takes letter-shape features as input, consults a learned dictionary of letter strings as stored state, and publishes word identities several times per second to the language system downstream.

Reading also illustrates the theories from earlier in the chapter, because models of word recognition combine feature-level analysis of letter shapes with higher knowledge of which letter strings are real words, exactly the blend of bottom-up and top-down processing that recurs throughout perception.

Here bottom-up means driven by the incoming marks on the page, and top-down means guided by what you already know and expect.


9.3.3 Deep neural networks as models of the ventral stream

This is the frontier where the science of human vision meets modern artificial intelligence, and it is the part of this chapter most directly relevant to a project like konnectome.

A deep neural network is a computer model loosely inspired by the brain, built of many layers of simple artificial units that pass signals forward, where deep simply means it has many such layers stacked one after another.

When these networks, especially a kind called a convolutional neural network that is specialised for images, are trained on millions of labelled pictures, they become very good at naming objects.

The surprising scientific discovery, reported around 2014 by James DiCarlo, Daniel Yamins, and colleagues, is that such networks are not only good at the task but also come to resemble the brain internally.

Specifically, the pattern of activity in the network's layers can predict the pattern of activity of real neurons along the ventral stream, including a late visual region called inferior temporal cortex, better than any earlier hand-designed theory managed.

Even more striking, the match is hierarchical: early network layers best predict early visual brain areas, and later layers best predict later brain areas, echoing Marr's idea of representations that grow more abstract stage by stage.

This has made these goal-driven models, meaning models shaped by training them to succeed at a task, the current best quantitative account of object recognition in the primate brain.

The claim needs care, though, and researchers are candid about the gaps.

The networks can be fooled by tiny image changes invisible to us, they usually need far more labelled training than a child ever gets, and matching neural activity is not the same as proving the brain computes in the same way, so the models are best seen as the strongest working hypothesis rather than a finished explanation.


9.4 Perceptual learning

This section is about a fact that surprises many people: perception itself gets better with practice, quietly and often without your awareness.

Perceptual learning means long-lasting improvement in the ability to sense fine differences, brought about by experience, as opposed to learning facts or skills of movement.

It matters because it shows the senses are not fixed instruments but are tuned by a lifetime of use, and it has practical uses from training radiologists to read scans to rehabilitating impaired vision.


9.4.1 The improvement of perception with practice

The basic phenomenon is that repeated exposure and practice sharpen the very acuity of a sense, letting people detect and discriminate differences they simply could not at the start.

A classic demonstration uses vernier acuity, which is the ability to tell whether two short line segments are perfectly aligned or slightly offset, a discrimination so fine it beats the spacing of the eye's own sensor cells.

With practice over days, people become markedly better at this, and the improvement is real and stable, not just a matter of understanding the task.

In systems terms, perceptual learning is a slow parameter-update process: its input is many labelled or feedback-scored trials, its output is a lasting change in the tuning and read-out weights of the recognition pipeline, and its characteristic timescale is days to weeks of spaced sessions rather than seconds.

Everyday and professional versions are all around us: wine tasters learn to notice flavours a novice cannot, chick sexers and radiologists learn to see distinctions invisible to the untrained eye, and musicians hear pitch differences the rest of us miss.

Researchers have found that this improvement is helped by suitable practice conditions, including enough trials, spacing the practice across sessions rather than cramming, and, when needed, feedback about whether a judgment was right.

Importantly, some of the change appears to happen quite early in the visual system, reflected in the sharpening of the tuning of low-level detectors, while some reflects the brain learning to read out existing signals more wisely at higher levels, and both stories have evidence.


9.4.2 Specificity and transfer of perceptual learning

The most theoretically interesting feature of perceptual learning is how narrow it often is, a property called specificity.

Specificity means that the improvement is tied tightly to the exact conditions of training and does not automatically carry over, called transfer, to even slightly different conditions.

In the vernier studies, for instance, training at one orientation of the lines often failed to help much when the lines were rotated, and training in one small patch of the visual field, or in one eye, frequently did not transfer to another location or to the other eye.

This tightness is a clue about mechanism: if learning fails to transfer between eyes or across small shifts in position, it suggests that at least part of the change is happening very early in vision, before the signals from the two eyes are fully combined and while position is still finely mapped.

That inference is why specificity became a prized piece of evidence, because behaviour was being used to locate a change inside the processing hierarchy, the way an engineer uses which inputs a bug follows to locate the faulty module.

The story has grown more nuanced, however, and this is another honest it-depends in the field.

Later work showed that transfer can be coaxed out under the right training regimes, for example by a technique called double training, in which practising a second task at a new location can unlock transfer of the first, which suggests that some of the specificity reflects how the brain learns to route and read out information rather than a hard limit fixed in early sensory cells.

So the current view is that perceptual learning involves changes at more than one level, and that whether it stays specific or generalises depends on how training is arranged.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Retinal image stream: a two-dimensional array of light intensities and colours, delivered continuously from the eyes via the primary visual cortex.

◦ Edge and feature maps: locations and orientations of contrast changes, computed by early visual areas.

◦ Contextual expectations: predictions about likely objects in the current scene, arriving top-down from memory and the current task.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Category label: the identity of the recognised object or pattern, consumed by memory, language, and decision systems.

◦ Confidence signal: a graded estimate of match quality, consumed by attention and decision systems.

◦ Structural description: parts and their spatial relations, consumed by the action system for grasp planning.

• STATE.

◦ A long-term store of learned patterns: templates, prototypes, exemplar views, structural descriptions, and learned feature weights.

◦ The current partial interpretation of the image while matching is still in progress.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Match threshold: how close an input must be to a stored pattern before a label is committed.

◦ Feature weights: how strongly each feature dimension counts in the distance computation, tuned by perceptual learning.

◦ Prototype learning rate: how far each new example moves the stored category average.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Core recognition latency: about 150 milliseconds from image onset to a category-selective brain response, established by rapid-categorisation studies.

◦ Reading fixation duration: about 200 to 250 milliseconds per fixation in skilled readers.

◦ Perceptual learning: days to weeks of spaced practice for stable gains.

◦ Extra cost of unfamiliar viewpoints: REFUSED as a single value, because the slowing grows with rotation angle and varies by object class rather than taking one citable constant.

• MODES.

◦ Fast familiar mode: a well-learned pattern matches immediately and the label is published in a single feed-forward pass; triggered by high-confidence match above threshold.

◦ Effortful scrutiny mode: matching is ambiguous, so recurrent processing, eye movements, and context are recruited; triggered by low match confidence.

◦ Expert mode: a trained domain such as faces or print engages dedicated, highly tuned circuitry; triggered by stimuli from the trained domain.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Confusion errors between patterns that share features, such as similar letters.

◦ Viewpoint failures: slower or wrong labels for objects seen from unfamiliar angles.

◦ Agnosias after brain injury: visual form agnosia, where shape recognition fails while vision-for-action survives, and prosopagnosia, where face recognition fails selectively.

◦ Overgeneralisation from prototypes: a new example is forced into the nearest familiar category even when it belongs to none.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called categories that holds the known category names.
Create a table variable called prototypes that maps each category name to a list of stored feature values.
Define a function called recognise that takes a list called input_features.
    Create a text variable called best_category with initial value of nothing.
    Create a number variable called best_distance with initial value of infinity.
    For each category in categories, do the following.
        Set a number variable called distance to zero.
        For each position in the feature list, calculate the difference between the input feature value and the prototype feature value for this category, square that difference, and add the result to distance.
        If distance is less than best_distance, set best_distance to distance and set best_category to the category.
    Return best_category and best_distance.
Define a function called learn that takes a category name and a list called input_features.
    For each position in the feature list, move the stored prototype value for that category a small step toward the input value, where the step is the learning rate multiplied by the difference.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the square root function from the math module.
from math import sqrt

# Create a table called prototypes that maps each category name to its stored average feature values.
prototypes = {
    # The cup prototype has feature values for roundness, height, and handle presence.
    "cup": [0.9, 0.4, 1.0],
    # The bottle prototype has its own feature values.
    "bottle": [0.8, 0.9, 0.0],
    # The box prototype has its own feature values.
    "box": [0.1, 0.5, 0.0],
}

# Create a number variable called learning_rate with initial value zero point one.
learning_rate = 0.1

# Define a function called recognise that takes a list of input feature values.
def recognise(input_features):
    # Create a variable called best_category with initial value of nothing.
    best_category = None
    # Create a number variable called best_distance with initial value of infinity.
    best_distance = float("inf")
    # For each category and its prototype in the prototype table, do the following.
    for category, prototype in prototypes.items():
        # Calculate the sum of squared differences between input and prototype features.
        total = sum((i - p) * (i - p) for i, p in zip(input_features, prototype))
        # Set distance to the square root of that sum.
        distance = sqrt(total)
        # If distance is less than best_distance, remember this category as the best so far.
        if distance < best_distance:
            # Set best_distance to distance.
            best_distance = distance
            # Set best_category to the category.
            best_category = category
    # Return the best category and its distance.
    return best_category, best_distance

# Define a function called learn that nudges a category prototype toward a new example.
def learn(category, input_features):
    # For each feature position, move the stored value a small step toward the input value.
    for k in range(len(input_features)):
        # Add the learning rate multiplied by the difference to the stored value.
        prototypes[category][k] += learning_rate * (input_features[k] - prototypes[category][k])

# Recognise a new object that is round, short, and has a handle.
label, dist = recognise([0.85, 0.35, 0.9])
# Print the recognised label and the match distance rounded to three places.
print("Recognised:", label, "distance:", round(dist, 3))
# Learn from this example so the cup prototype shifts slightly toward it.
learn(label, [0.85, 0.35, 0.9])
# Print the updated cup prototype to show that learning changed the stored state.
print("Updated cup prototype:", [round(v, 3) for v in prototypes["cup"]])


CHAPTER 10. BAYESIAN PERCEPTION AND PREDICTIVE CODING (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter offers a single, powerful idea for understanding perception, and it is tagged as a framework because it is a way of thinking that ties many findings together rather than one more isolated fact.

The idea is that perception is not a passive recording of the world but an active best guess, a piece of reasoning under uncertainty.

Your senses never give you the world directly; they give you noisy, ambiguous clues, and the brain has to infer what most likely caused them.

In systems terms, this chapter recasts the perceptual system as an inference engine: its inputs are noisy evidence plus stored expectations, its output is the most probable interpretation, and its core loop is the repeated reduction of the mismatch between what was predicted and what arrived.

This chapter shows how the mathematics of probability, and a brain theory called predictive coding, turn that inference into something precise and testable, and it underlies much of the most influential thinking in perception today.


10.1 Perception as probabilistic inference

This section introduces the central move: treating the perceiving brain as something like a scientist or a detective, combining evidence with prior expectations to reach the most probable conclusion.

The word probabilistic just means dealing in likelihoods rather than certainties, and inference means reasoning from clues to a conclusion.

Once you see perception this way, a great deal of otherwise puzzling behaviour falls into place.


10.1.1 Priors, likelihoods, and the ideal observer

To make the detective idea precise, the science borrows three linked concepts from probability theory, named after the eighteenth-century mathematician Thomas Bayes, whose rule tells us how to update beliefs with evidence.

A prior is what you believed before the current evidence arrived, that is, your background expectation, such as the everyday fact that light usually comes from above.

A likelihood is what the current sensory evidence tells you, that is, how probable the incoming signal would be under each possible state of the world.

Bayes' rule combines the two into a posterior, meaning your updated belief after weighing prior expectation against fresh evidence, and perception, on this view, is the brain settling on the most probable posterior.

As a computation, the update takes two inputs, the prior and the likelihood, multiplies them, renormalises, and publishes the posterior as its single output, and it can run again the instant new evidence arrives, so belief tracks the world continuously.

An ideal observer is a useful yardstick: it is an imaginary perceiver that combines priors and likelihoods perfectly according to Bayes' rule, making the best possible use of the available information.

Researchers compare real human performance against this ideal to ask how close people come to optimal, and in many basic perceptual tasks people come remarkably close, which is a main reason the framework is taken seriously.

A homely example is the hollow-mask illusion: a hollow, concave face mask looks convex, like a normal face popping outward, because your strong prior that faces bulge outward overrules the actual depth evidence.

This shows priors are not a bug but a feature; they let you resolve genuinely ambiguous input quickly, at the occasional cost of a predictable error.


10.1.2 Perception as the inversion of a generative model

This sub-section gives the deepest version of the idea, and it is worth slowing down for because it reframes what seeing is.

A generative model is the brain's internal understanding of how the world produces the signals that reach the senses, that is, how objects, lighting, and geometry generate the image on your eye.

The problem the brain faces is that it only receives the end product, the sensory signal, and must work backwards to the causes, which is called inverting the generative model, meaning running the causal story in reverse to infer what must have created the input.

This is genuinely hard because the same sensory signal could have been produced by many different arrangements of the world, a difficulty called the inverse problem, and it is why perception cannot be a simple readout.

For example, a small nearby object and a large far object can cast the very same image, so the eye's signal alone cannot decide between them, and only prior knowledge about likely sizes and distances breaks the tie.

In systems terms, the generative model is a stored forward simulator, and perception is a search process over that simulator's inputs: find the world-state that, when run forward, best reproduces the signal actually received.

Framing perception as model inversion unifies it with imagination and prediction, because the very same internal model that explains incoming signals can also be run forward to generate expectations or imagined scenes.

This lineage traces back to Hermann von Helmholtz in the nineteenth century, who called perception unconscious inference, meaning the mind draws conclusions about the world automatically and without our awareness, and the Bayesian framework is in many ways the modern mathematical form of his insight.


10.2 Cue combination

This section takes the abstract idea of probabilistic perception and shows it working in one of its clearest and most convincing arenas: how the brain blends multiple sources of information about the same thing.

A cue is any single source of evidence about a property of the world, such as the shading, the outline, or the touch that all tell you about an object's shape.

The beautiful result of this section is that the brain does not just average cues; it combines them in almost exactly the mathematically best way.


10.2.1 The optimal integration of cues within and across the senses

The question here is what the brain should do when it has two or more cues to the same quantity, and the elegant answer is that it should trust each cue in proportion to how reliable it is.

Reliability means how consistent and noise-free a cue is; a sharp clear view is highly reliable, a glimpse in fog is not.

The statistically best strategy, called maximum-likelihood estimation, is to take a weighted average of the cues in which each cue's weight is set by its reliability, so that clearer cues pull the final estimate more strongly.

As a computation this is a small, fast pipeline: inputs are two or more cue estimates each tagged with a reliability, the operation is a reliability-weighted average, and the output is a single fused estimate published within the same perceptual moment.

The landmark demonstration in humans came from Marc Ernst and Martin Banks in 2002, who had people judge the height of a ridge using sight and touch together.

They found that people combined the visual and the felt information in the statistically optimal fashion, weighting each sense by its reliability, and that when they blurred the visual cue to make it less reliable, touch automatically took over more of the decision, exactly as the mathematics predicts.

This happens both within one sense, for example combining shading and outline within vision, and across senses, for example combining sight and touch or sight and sound, which is why it is such strong evidence that the brain really does something like optimal probabilistic inference.

A further payoff is that combining cues this way yields a final estimate more precise than either cue alone, so integration is not just tidy but genuinely useful.


10.2.2 Reliability weighting and its behavioural signatures

This sub-section looks more closely at the fingerprints that reliability weighting leaves in behaviour, the tell-tale signs that let researchers confirm it is really happening.

The first signature is the shift in dominance: when one cue is made less reliable, its influence on the final percept drops and the other cue's influence rises, in a graded, predictable way rather than all-or-nothing.

The second signature concerns errors, which in this context means variability, the trial-to-trial wobble in a person's judgments.

The theory makes a strong quantitative prediction: the wobble of the combined estimate should be smaller than the wobble of either cue alone, and should take a specific value calculable from the two cues' reliabilities, and experiments repeatedly confirm this reduced and predictable variability.

A third signature appears when cues are put into mild conflict, by giving slightly different values to sight and touch; the perceived value lands between them, but nearer the more reliable cue, again just as reliability weighting predicts.

These signatures matter because they turn a nice-sounding story into a risky, checkable claim: the weighted-average system and a simple winner-take-all system predict measurably different outputs from the same inputs, and the data side with the weighted average.

The fact that perception passes these tests across many combinations of senses is one of the sturdiest bodies of evidence for the Bayesian view.

It is worth adding the honest caveat that optimality is not universal; people can depart from the ideal when cues are very discrepant, when priors are unusual, or in some clinical conditions, so near-optimal under good conditions is the fair summary.


10.3 Predictive coding

This section introduces a specific and ambitious proposal for how the inference of the earlier sections might actually be carried out by brain tissue.

Predictive coding is the idea that the brain is organised as a hierarchy that is constantly trying to predict its own incoming signals, and that what travels up through the system is mainly the errors in those predictions.

It is one of the most discussed theories in modern neuroscience, and this section lays out its logic, its account of attention, and, importantly, the real disagreements about how well it is supported.


10.3.1 Hierarchical prediction and the propagation of prediction error

The core mechanism of predictive coding is a two-way conversation between levels of a processing hierarchy, and it neatly reuses the generative-model idea from earlier.

The proposal, given an influential computational form by Rajesh Rao and Dana Ballard in 1999, is that higher levels of the brain constantly send predictions downward about what the lower levels should be sensing.

Each lower level then compares the prediction it receives against what it actually gets, and computes the difference, which is called the prediction error, meaning the part of the signal that was not expected.

Only this prediction error is sent back up the hierarchy, not the whole raw signal, because whatever was correctly predicted is already known upstairs and would be wasteful to resend.

The higher levels use the error to revise their guesses, then send down improved predictions, and the loop repeats until the errors are as small as possible and the system has settled on its best interpretation.

In systems terms each level runs the same tight loop: subscribe to the prediction from above and the signal from below, publish the residual difference upward, update the local estimate by a step proportional to the error, and repeat until the error falls below a settling threshold.

This is efficient, because the brain only ever transmits the surprising part of the input, and it is powerful, because Rao and Ballard showed that such a hierarchy could reproduce subtle known properties of real visual neurons that were otherwise hard to explain.

Karl Friston later generalised this scheme and linked it to a broader mathematical principle, but that wider free-energy story is treated in its own chapter elsewhere; here the key takeaway is the machinery of downward prediction and upward error.


10.3.2 Precision weighting as the mechanism of attention

This sub-section explains one of predictive coding's most attractive extra features: it offers a natural account of what attention is doing, in the same language as everything else.

The added ingredient is precision, which means the estimated reliability, or trustworthiness, of a signal, and it is the same notion of reliability we met in cue combination, now applied to prediction errors.

The proposal is that the brain does not treat all prediction errors as equally important; it weights each error by its precision, turning up the volume on errors it judges reliable and turning it down on errors it judges noisy.

Attention, on this account, simply is the act of increasing the precision, the gain or weight, assigned to prediction errors coming from whatever is currently relevant, so that those signals have more influence on what you perceive and do.

In systems terms, precision is a gain parameter multiplying each error channel, and attention is the controller that sets those gains, which makes attention an ordinary tunable parameter of the inference loop rather than a separate mysterious faculty.

This is appealing because it explains, in one stroke, why attended things are perceived more vividly and drive behaviour more strongly: their error signals have been amplified.

It also connects attention to the reliability-weighting mathematics of the previous section, suggesting that paying attention and trusting a reliable cue may be two faces of the same underlying operation.

The idea is elegant, and it is one of the main reasons predictive coding has been so influential, but as the next sub-section stresses, elegance is not the same as proof.


10.3.3 The empirical evidence and its disputes

This sub-section is deliberately even-handed, because predictive coding is a case where the theory's popularity has run ahead of settled evidence, and a beginner deserves to know that.

On the supportive side, there are real findings that fit: brain-imaging studies often show reduced responses to expected stimuli and larger responses to surprising ones, which is what a system transmitting prediction error should do, and effects such as repetition suppression, where a repeated stimulus draws a weaker response, sit comfortably in the framework.

The theory also has the virtue of being general, explaining perception, attention, and learning with one small set of principles, and it has inspired a great deal of productive research.

On the sceptical side, several serious objections remain open.

One is anatomical: the theory makes specific claims about separate populations of neurons that carry predictions and errors and about which cortical layers and connections they use, and the brain evidence for these specific circuits is still incomplete and contested.

Another is that many findings taken as support, such as smaller responses to expected inputs, can often be explained equally well by simpler and older ideas like neural adaptation or attention effects, so they do not uniquely confirm predictive coding.

A third is that the framework is so flexible that critics worry it can be adjusted to fit almost any result, which makes it hard to prove wrong, and a theory that cannot fail a test is scientifically weaker for it.

In systems terms the two camps predict different traffic on the wires: predictive coding says the upward channels should carry mainly residual error and should quiet down as predictions improve, while the older adaptation account says responses shrink through local fatigue with no downward prediction channel needed, and current measurements do not yet cleanly separate the two.

The fair summary in 2026 is that predictive coding is a leading, actively debated framework with genuine successes and genuine unanswered challenges, not an established fact, and honest researchers on both sides say so plainly.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Sensory evidence: noisy measurement streams from every sense, each carrying an implicit reliability.

◦ Prior beliefs: stored expectations about world states, supplied by memory and the generative model.

◦ Top-down predictions: expected sensory values sent downward from higher levels of the hierarchy.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Posterior estimate: the current best interpretation of the world, consumed by decision, memory, and action systems.

◦ Prediction error: the residual mismatch between prediction and input, sent upward to revise higher-level estimates.

◦ Uncertainty estimate: the width of the posterior, consumed by attention and by active-sensing controllers.

• STATE.

◦ The current estimate at every level of the hierarchy.

◦ The generative model itself: learned mappings from causes to expected sensory consequences.

◦ Running precision estimates for each input channel.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Prior strength: how heavily stored expectation counts against fresh evidence.

◦ Precision gains: the per-channel weights on prediction errors, adjusted by attention.

◦ Update step size: how far each error nudges the current estimate per loop iteration.

◦ Settling threshold: the error level below which the system commits to an interpretation.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Perceptual settling on an interpretation: on the order of one hundred to a few hundred milliseconds, consistent with the latency of expectation-sensitive brain responses.

◦ Prior learning: hours to a lifetime, since priors such as light-from-above are built from long-run experience.

◦ Number of loop iterations to convergence in the brain: REFUSED, because the theory's iteration count is a model construct with no agreed empirical measurement.

• MODES.

◦ Evidence-dominated mode: reliable, high-precision input drives the posterior; triggered by clear sensory conditions.

◦ Prior-dominated mode: weak or ambiguous input lets expectation dominate, as in the hollow-mask illusion; triggered by low sensory precision.

◦ Learning mode: persistent unexplained error updates the generative model itself rather than just the current estimate; triggered by errors that will not settle.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Prior-driven illusions: predictable misperceptions such as the hollow-mask illusion when expectation overrules evidence.

◦ Miscalibrated precision: trusting noisy channels or distrusting good ones, proposed as a component of hallucination and delusion in psychosis.

◦ Sluggish updating: overly strong priors make perception slow to register genuine change.

◦ Non-optimal integration when cues conflict grossly, where the system may split rather than fuse them.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called estimate with initial value equal to the prior mean.
Create a number variable called prior_mean that holds the expected value before evidence arrives.
Create a number variable called step_size with a small positive initial value.
Create a number variable called sensory_precision that holds the trust placed in the input.
Create a number variable called prior_precision that holds the trust placed in the expectation.
For a fixed number of iterations, do the following.
    Set a number variable called sensory_error to the difference between the sensory input and the estimate.
    Set a number variable called prior_error to the difference between the prior mean and the estimate.
    Set a number variable called weighted_error to the sum of sensory_precision multiplied by sensory_error and prior_precision multiplied by prior_error.
    Add step_size multiplied by weighted_error to the estimate.
    If the absolute value of weighted_error is below the settling threshold, stop the loop.
Return the estimate as the perceived value.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a number variable called prior_mean that holds the expected depth of a face, bulging outward.
prior_mean = 1.0
# Create a number variable called sensory_input that reports a hollow face, bulging inward.
sensory_input = -1.0
# Create a number variable called prior_precision that holds strong trust in the face prior.
prior_precision = 4.0
# Create a number variable called sensory_precision that holds weak trust in the ambiguous depth cue.
sensory_precision = 1.0
# Create a number variable called step_size with a small positive value.
step_size = 0.05
# Create a number variable called threshold that sets when the loop may settle.
threshold = 0.001

# Define a function called perceive that runs the error-minimisation loop.
def perceive(estimate):
    # For up to two hundred iterations, refine the estimate.
    for iteration in range(200):
        # Set sensory_error to the difference between the input and the current estimate.
        sensory_error = sensory_input - estimate
        # Set prior_error to the difference between the prior mean and the current estimate.
        prior_error = prior_mean - estimate
        # Set weighted_error to the precision-weighted sum of the two errors.
        weighted_error = sensory_precision * sensory_error + prior_precision * prior_error
        # Add step_size multiplied by weighted_error to the estimate.
        estimate = estimate + step_size * weighted_error
        # If the weighted error is smaller than the threshold, stop early.
        if abs(weighted_error) < threshold:
            # Leave the loop because the system has settled.
            break
    # Return the settled estimate and the number of iterations used.
    return estimate, iteration + 1

# Start the estimate at zero, an uncommitted percept.
percept, steps = perceive(0.0)
# Print the settled percept, which lands near the prior, reproducing the hollow-mask illusion.
print("Settled percept:", round(percept, 3), "after", steps, "iterations")
# Print the exact Bayesian answer for comparison, the precision-weighted average of prior and input.
ideal = (prior_precision * prior_mean + sensory_precision * sensory_input) / (prior_precision + sensory_precision)
# Print the ideal value so the reader can see the loop converged to it.
print("Ideal Bayesian percept:", round(ideal, 3))


CHAPTER 11. MULTISENSORY INTEGRATION AND PERCEPTION FOR ACTION (PROCESS)

This chapter is about two ways that perception reaches beyond a single sense working in isolation.

The first half is about how the brain fuses information from different senses, sight, sound, touch, and more, into one seamless experience of the world.

The second half is about how perception is ultimately in the service of action, so that seeing, hearing, and moving form a single tight loop rather than separate departments.

Both themes push against a natural but mistaken picture of the mind as a passive camera; the real perceiver is a multi-sensing, moving agent, and in systems terms this chapter describes a fusion module feeding a closed-loop controller.


11.1 Multisensory integration

This section is about how the brain decides when signals from different senses belong to the same event and then blends them.

Multisensory integration means the combining of information from two or more senses into a single unified perception.

It matters because the world usually stimulates several senses at once, a barking dog is seen and heard, and a mind that merges these clues perceives more accurately and reacts faster than one that keeps them apart.


11.1.1 The principles of multisensory combination

Decades of careful recording, much of it by Barry Stein, Alex Meredith, and colleagues from neurons in a midbrain structure called the superior colliculus, revealed that multisensory combination follows a few simple and reliable rules.

The superior colliculus is a small brain area that helps orient the eyes and head toward events, and it is packed with cells that respond to more than one sense.

The first rule is the spatial rule: signals from different senses are combined, and combination is strongest, when they come from roughly the same place, because a sound and a sight from the same spot are likely to share a cause.

The second rule is the temporal rule: signals are combined most strongly when they occur at roughly the same time, within a temporal binding window on the order of one hundred milliseconds, since events that truly go together tend to stimulate the senses together within a short interval.

The third rule is the principle of inverse effectiveness, which says, perhaps surprisingly, that the boost from combining senses is largest when each single sense on its own is weak.

In plain terms, when each cue is faint and unreliable, adding a second sense helps enormously, whereas when one cue is already strong and clear there is little left to gain, which is exactly the sensible behaviour you would want.

At the level of single neurons this shows up as superadditivity, meaning the cell's response to the combined stimulus can be greater than the sum of its responses to each stimulus alone, a genuine bonus from combination rather than mere addition.

In systems terms these rules are the gating conditions of the fusion module: two input channels are merged only when their spatial and temporal tags agree within tolerance, and the gain on the merged output rises as the individual inputs weaken.

Notice how well these rules fit the Bayesian ideas of the previous chapter: combining nearby, simultaneous cues, and leaning hardest on combination when single cues are unreliable, is precisely what optimal reliability-weighted inference recommends.


11.1.2 Crossmodal illusions as evidence of integration

The strongest everyday proof that the senses truly merge, rather than just sit side by side, comes from crossmodal illusions, where what you sense in one channel is changed by another.

Crossmodal simply means across different senses, and a crossmodal illusion is a case where one sense reliably distorts another, revealing that the brain was combining them.

The ventriloquist effect is the familiar one: you hear the puppet, not the motionless performer, speak, because vision captures the perceived location of the sound and pulls it toward the moving mouth.

This is not a stage trick alone; it is a general fact that when sight and sound conflict about location, and vision is the more reliable cue for space, the brain shifts the heard position toward the seen one, just as reliability weighting predicts.

The McGurk effect, reported by Harry McGurk and John MacDonald in 1976, is more startling: if you watch a face mouthing one syllable while a different syllable is played, you often hear a third syllable that was never spoken, because the brain fuses the seen lip movements with the heard sound.

The sound-induced flash illusion, sometimes called the double-flash illusion, runs the influence the other way: a single flash of light accompanied by two quick beeps is often seen as two flashes, showing that here sound, being more reliable for timing, reshapes vision.

Together these illusions make the case that integration is automatic and often outside our control, and their direction, vision winning for space, hearing winning for time, matches the sensible principle that each sense dominates where it is most reliable.

In systems terms the illusions are the fusion module's characteristic failure signature under conflicting inputs: it outputs a single fused value pulled toward the higher-precision channel, rather than reporting the conflict, which is exactly what a weighted-average design would do.

This is another place where the framework of the previous chapter and the phenomena of this one line up neatly, which is part of why the Bayesian view of perception has been so influential.


11.2 Perception for action

This section shifts from combining senses to the purpose of perception, and its message is that we largely perceive in order to act.

For most of the history of the field, perception was studied as if the goal were a rich inner picture, but here the emphasis is on the closed loop in which perception continuously guides movement and movement continuously changes what is perceived.

This action-centred view reshapes how we understand both seeing and moving.


11.2.1 The sensorimotor loop and the closing of perception onto movement

The central concept here is the sensorimotor loop, which means the continuous cycle in which the senses inform movement and movement in turn produces new sensory input.

The word sensorimotor just joins sensory and motor, that is, sensing and moving, to stress that they are two halves of one process.

In a laboratory a stimulus goes in and a response comes out, but in real life there is no such tidy start and finish; you reach for a cup, which changes what you see, which adjusts your reach, which changes what you see again, around and around.

A key idea within this loop is that the brain does not wait passively for feedback, because the senses and nerves are too slow for that; instead it predicts the sensory consequences of its own actions using an internal model called a forward model.

A forward model is a piece of internal machinery that estimates, in advance, what your senses will report given the movement you are about to make, so the system can respond to expected outcomes without waiting for them to arrive.

In systems terms the forward model takes a copy of each outgoing motor command as input and publishes a predicted sensory signal as output, bridging the sensory feedback delay of roughly one hundred milliseconds or more that would otherwise make fast control unstable.

This predictive trick explains why you cannot tickle yourself: your brain predicts the sensation your own hand will cause and cancels it, whereas another person's touch is unpredicted and therefore ticklish.

It also explains how you keep the world looking stable even though your eyes dart around several times a second, because the brain anticipates the visual shift its own eye movement will cause and discounts it.

The lesson of this sub-section is that perception and action are not a sender and a receiver but a single coupled system running in a continuous loop.


11.2.2 Optimal feedback control and the coupling of estimate and command

This sub-section presents the leading modern theory of how movement is controlled, and it makes the coupling of perceiving and acting mathematically explicit.

The theory, called optimal feedback control, was brought to prominence for motor behaviour by Emanuel Todorov and Michael Jordan in 2002.

Feedback control means adjusting an action moment by moment based on sensory feedback about how it is actually going, the way you steer a car by constantly correcting rather than aiming once and hoping.

The theory says the motor system works in two tightly linked parts: an estimator that maintains the best current guess about the state of the body and world, blending prediction with feedback in the Bayesian way we have seen, and a controller that issues the movement commands.

In systems terms the estimator subscribes to delayed sensory feedback and to the forward model's predictions and publishes a state estimate, while the controller subscribes to that estimate and to the task goal and publishes motor commands, and the two run as one loop cycling continuously through a movement.

The estimate and the command are coupled because good commands depend on a good estimate of where your limb actually is, and the sensory consequences of the commands feed back to refine the estimate, closing the loop of the previous sub-section.

A striking prediction of the theory is the minimal intervention principle, which says the controller should only correct deviations that actually threaten the goal, and should leave alone any variability that does not matter for the task.

In everyday terms, when you carry a full cup you rigidly control its tilt but let your elbow wander freely, because tilt matters for not spilling and elbow angle does not, and experiments confirm that people really do control task-relevant dimensions tightly while allowing sloppiness elsewhere.

This is a deep and confirmed insight: skilled movement is not about following one perfect trajectory but about spending control effort only where it counts, and it shows the motor system behaving like the same kind of clever, reliability-aware inference engine we saw in perception.


11.3 Active perception

This final section completes the picture by stressing that perceivers are not still.

Active perception means that we gather sensory information by moving, choosing where to look, what to touch, and how to sample the world, rather than waiting for it to arrive.

The theme unifies the whole chapter: perception is something an agent does, using its body, and often the smartest thing to do when you are unsure is to move so as to find out.


11.3.1 The active sampling of the world by eye, hand, and body

The starting observation is that our senses are not evenly good everywhere, so we must aim them, and this aiming is itself part of perceiving.

The clearest case is vision, because only the very centre of your eye, a tiny region called the fovea, sees in sharp detail, while the periphery is blurry.

The fovea is the small central pit of the retina packed with fine detectors, and because it is so small, you must move your eyes constantly, in the quick jumps called saccades, roughly three to four times per second, to point it at whatever you want to see clearly.

This means visual experience is built from a rapid series of small high-resolution samples stitched together, not from one big sharp snapshot, even though it feels like the latter.

In systems terms, gaze control is a scheduler: its inputs are the current question and a coarse map of the scene, its output is the next fixation target, and it reallocates the single high-resolution sensor several times per second.

The Russian scientist Alfred Yarbus showed in the 1960s that where people move their eyes over a picture depends strongly on what they are trying to find out, so the same scene draws quite different scan patterns for different questions, proving that looking is goal-driven sampling, not passive reception.

The same active principle holds for the other senses: you move your fingertips over a surface to feel its texture, sniff actively to smell, and turn your head to localise a sound, so touch, smell, and hearing are also sampled by movement.

The general point is that the body is part of the perceptual system, positioning and pointing the senses, and perception cannot be fully understood if you pretend the perceiver holds still.


11.3.2 Action as a means of resolving perceptual uncertainty

This closing sub-section gives active perception its sharpest and most modern formulation: sometimes you act specifically in order to learn.

The idea is that when the senses leave you uncertain about the world, one of the best things a mind can do is choose an action that will deliver the missing information.

This is called active sensing, and it treats the choice of where to look or reach as a decision aimed at reducing uncertainty, at maximising how much you expect to learn.

A homely example is picking up and turning an unfamiliar object to see its hidden side, or leaning in to inspect a faint mark, or moving your eyes to the one spot in a scene that would settle a question, each an action selected because it promises to be informative.

Researchers have formalised this using the probability ideas of the previous chapter, treating the perceiver as choosing actions that are expected to shrink its uncertainty the most, which links active perception back to Bayesian inference and to Yarbus's finding that gaze follows the question being asked.

In systems terms this closes the largest loop in the chapter: the uncertainty output of the inference engine becomes an input to the action controller, which selects the movement expected to reduce that uncertainty fastest.

This reframes the relationship between perceiving and acting one final time: action is not merely the output of perception but also one of its most powerful inputs, because moving is how an agent goes and gets the evidence it lacks.

It is a fitting close to the chapter, because it shows perception, integration, and action woven into a single purposeful loop, which is exactly the kind of embodied, self-directed intelligence that a project aiming at humanlike machine cognition must reproduce.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Per-sense estimates: location, timing, and identity signals from vision, hearing, touch, and the other senses, each tagged with spatial position, arrival time, and reliability.

◦ Motor command copies: duplicates of outgoing movement commands, delivered to the forward model.

◦ Task goals: the current aim of the movement or the current perceptual question, from executive systems.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Fused percept: a single unified estimate of each event's location, timing, and identity, consumed by decision and memory systems.

◦ State estimate: the best current guess of body and world state, consumed by the motor controller.

◦ Motor commands: muscle-level instructions, consumed by the body, with copies routed back to the forward model.

◦ Sampling actions: the next fixation, touch, or sniff, chosen to gather missing information.

• STATE.

◦ The forward model: learned mappings from commands to their predicted sensory consequences.

◦ The running state estimate of limb positions and object locations during a movement.

◦ Learned reliability profiles for each sense in each domain, such as vision for space and hearing for time.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Spatial and temporal binding tolerances: how far apart in space and time two signals may be and still be fused.

◦ Per-sense reliability weights, which set each sense's pull on the fused estimate.

◦ Control gains, concentrated on task-relevant dimensions under the minimal intervention principle.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Temporal binding window for fusing sight and sound: on the order of one hundred milliseconds, though its width varies across tasks and individuals.

◦ Sensory feedback delay for online movement correction: roughly one hundred milliseconds or more, the lag the forward model exists to bridge.

◦ Saccade rate: about three to four fixations per second in active viewing.

◦ Superior colliculus integration constants at the single-neuron level: REFUSED as one number, because measured windows vary widely across cells and stimulus pairs.

• MODES.

◦ Fusion mode: signals within the spatial and temporal tolerances are merged into one percept; triggered by agreement of their tags.

◦ Segregation mode: signals outside tolerance are attributed to separate causes and kept apart; triggered by large spatial or temporal discrepancy.

◦ Feedback control mode: movement guided by incoming sensory corrections; the default for slow, precise action.

◦ Predictive control mode: movement guided mainly by the forward model when feedback is too slow; triggered by fast movements and known dynamics.

◦ Information-seeking mode: actions chosen to reduce uncertainty rather than to achieve a physical goal; triggered by high uncertainty in the current estimate.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Crossmodal illusions: the ventriloquist effect, the McGurk effect, and the sound-induced flash illusion, where fusion of conflicting inputs distorts one sense.

◦ Misbinding: signals from different events fused because they fell inside the binding window.

◦ Failed self-cancellation: breakdown of forward-model prediction, proposed to contribute to the sense that one's own actions feel externally caused in schizophrenia.

◦ Clumsiness under delayed or distorted feedback, when the estimator's inputs no longer match its model.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called visual_estimate that holds the location reported by vision.
Create a number variable called visual_reliability that holds the reliability of vision.
Create a number variable called auditory_estimate that holds the location reported by hearing.
Create a number variable called auditory_reliability that holds the reliability of hearing.
Create a number variable called binding_tolerance that holds the largest disagreement allowed for fusion.
If the absolute difference between visual_estimate and auditory_estimate is greater than binding_tolerance, do the following.
    Report the two signals as separate events and stop.
Otherwise, do the following.
    Set a number variable called visual_weight to visual_reliability divided by the sum of visual_reliability and auditory_reliability.
    Set a number variable called auditory_weight to auditory_reliability divided by the sum of visual_reliability and auditory_reliability.
    Set a number variable called fused_estimate to visual_weight multiplied by visual_estimate plus auditory_weight multiplied by auditory_estimate.
    Set a number variable called fused_reliability to the sum of visual_reliability and auditory_reliability.
    Report the fused estimate and the fused reliability as one event.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Define a function called fuse that combines two sensory estimates by reliability weighting.
def fuse(visual_estimate, visual_reliability, auditory_estimate, auditory_reliability, tolerance):
    # Set disagreement to the absolute difference between the two estimates.
    disagreement = abs(visual_estimate - auditory_estimate)
    # If the disagreement exceeds the binding tolerance, keep the events separate.
    if disagreement > tolerance:
        # Return nothing fused, signalling segregation mode.
        return None
    # Set total to the sum of the two reliabilities.
    total = visual_reliability + auditory_reliability
    # Set visual_weight to the visual reliability divided by the total.
    visual_weight = visual_reliability / total
    # Set auditory_weight to the auditory reliability divided by the total.
    auditory_weight = auditory_reliability / total
    # Set fused to the reliability-weighted average of the two estimates.
    fused = visual_weight * visual_estimate + auditory_weight * auditory_estimate
    # Return the fused location and the combined reliability, which exceeds either alone.
    return fused, total

# Set the seen location of the puppet mouth to ten degrees to the right.
seen_location = 10.0
# Set the heard location of the voice to two degrees to the right.
heard_location = 2.0
# Give vision high reliability for spatial location.
vision_reliability = 9.0
# Give hearing low reliability for spatial location.
hearing_reliability = 1.0

# Fuse the two signals with a binding tolerance of fifteen degrees.
result = fuse(seen_location, vision_reliability, heard_location, hearing_reliability, 15.0)
# If fusion happened, print the ventriloquist outcome.
if result is not None:
    # Unpack the fused location and combined reliability.
    location, reliability = result
    # Print the perceived location, which is pulled strongly toward the seen mouth.
    print("Perceived voice location:", round(location, 2), "degrees")
    # Print the combined reliability to show integration sharpened the estimate.
    print("Combined reliability:", reliability)
# Otherwise report that the signals were kept separate.
else:
    # Print that segregation mode was chosen.
    print("Signals treated as separate events")



================================================================================

PART THREE. ATTENTION: THE ALLOCATION OF LIMITED RESOURCES

================================================================================

CHAPTER 12. VARIETIES AND THEORIES OF ATTENTION (PROCESS)

This chapter opens the study of attention, one of the most familiar yet most slippery topics in the science of the mind.

Attention is, roughly, the mind's way of choosing what to process out of the flood of information available at any moment, and of concentrating its limited power on that choice.

You already know it from the inside: the way you can pick out one conversation in a noisy room, or lose track of everything else while absorbed in a book.

In systems terms, attention is the resource allocator of the cognitive architecture: it takes the full sensory stream and the current goals as input, and outputs a gain setting for every channel, amplifying a chosen few and suppressing the rest.

This chapter has two jobs, first to lay out the different kinds of attention so we do not confuse them, and second to state the founding question that makes attention necessary at all, which prepares the ground for the more detailed theories in the chapters that follow.


12.1 The varieties of attention

The first thing to learn about attention is that the single English word covers several genuinely different abilities, and much confusion comes from mixing them up.

This section sorts attention along a few useful dimensions, so that later claims can be stated precisely.

Think of it as learning the names of the parts before studying how the machine works.


12.1.1 Selective, divided, and sustained attention

These three terms sort attention by the job it is doing, and they are the most basic vocabulary of the field.

Selective attention is the ability to focus on one source of information while ignoring others, and it is the kind most people mean by the word attention.

The classic illustration is the cocktail party problem, named by the engineer Colin Cherry in 1953, which is your ability to follow one voice among many at a party, an everyday feat that turns out to be surprisingly hard to explain.

Divided attention is the attempt to attend to more than one thing at once, in other words to multitask, and studying it reveals just how limited we are, since performance on one or both tasks usually suffers when they demand the same mental resources.

The everyday lesson of divided-attention research, for example on using a phone while driving, is that true simultaneous processing of two demanding tasks is largely a myth; we mostly switch rapidly rather than genuinely do both at full strength, which in systems terms means the allocator time-shares one channel rather than running two in parallel.

Sustained attention, also called vigilance, is the ability to keep focus on something over a long stretch of time, especially when little is happening, as a lifeguard watching a calm pool or a security guard watching screens must.

Research on vigilance shows a reliable decline in performance over time, called the vigilance decrement, where people miss more and more rare signals as the task wears on, often within the first half hour, which has serious practical consequences for jobs built around watchful waiting.

Keeping these three apart matters because a person can be strong in one and weak in another, and because the theories in later chapters are usually about one variety at a time.


12.1.2 Spatial, feature-based, and object-based attention

Whereas the previous sub-section sorted attention by its job, this one sorts it by what, exactly, gets selected, and the answer turns out to be more than just places.

Spatial attention is the selection of a region of space, so that whatever falls in the attended location is processed better, and it is often pictured as a spotlight that can be aimed around the visual field independently of the eyes.

The spotlight metaphor captures the finding that things near the centre of attention are seen faster and more accurately, while things outside it are handled poorly, as though lit or left in shadow.

Feature-based attention is the selection of a particular property, such as a colour or a direction of motion, applied across the whole scene at once rather than at one spot.

For instance, if you look for your friend in a red coat, you can boost red everywhere in the crowd at the same time, which is feature-based attention doing its work, and this global boosting of a chosen feature has been confirmed in both behaviour and brain activity.

Object-based attention is the selection of a whole object, so that once you attend to any part of a thing, its other parts and properties become easier to process too, because attention spreads across the object as a unit.

Evidence for this comes from studies where people are faster to judge two features when both belong to the same object than when they belong to two different objects, even with everything else held equal, showing that the object itself, not just a location, can be the thing selected.

In systems terms these are three different indexing schemes for the same gain map: gains can be addressed by location, broadcast by feature value, or grouped by object, and the allocator chooses whichever addressing scheme fits the task.

The practical upshot is that attention is flexible about its target: depending on the task, the mind can spotlight a place, tune to a feature everywhere, or grab hold of a whole object, and a full theory of attention has to allow all three.


12.1.3 Overt and covert, exogenous and endogenous orienting

This sub-section adds two further cross-cutting distinctions about how attention is aimed, both of which are essential for reading the later research.

Orienting simply means directing attention toward something, and the first distinction concerns whether that directing is visible from the outside.

Overt orienting is shifting attention by moving the sense organ, most obviously by turning your eyes to look straight at something, so an observer could see where your attention has gone.

Covert orienting is shifting attention without moving the eyes, attending to something out of the corner of your vision while looking elsewhere, which you can prove to yourself right now by fixing your gaze ahead and yet attending to an object off to the side.

The demonstration that covert attention is real, largely due to Michael Posner in the late 1970s, was pivotal, because it showed attention can be decoupled from the eyes and studied as a mental spotlight in its own right.

The second distinction concerns what drives the shift, and it separates attention that is captured from attention that is chosen.

Exogenous orienting is attention grabbed automatically by something in the world, such as a sudden flash, a loud bang, or movement in the periphery, and it is fast, involuntary, and hard to resist, an evolutionarily sensible reflex toward possible threats or opportunities.

Endogenous orienting is attention directed on purpose, from your own goals, such as deliberately watching a doorway because you are expecting someone, and it is slower to engage, voluntary, and under your control.

In systems terms these are two control pathways writing to the same gain map: an interrupt-driven pathway triggered by salient input, engaging within roughly 100 milliseconds and fading quickly, and a goal-driven pathway set by internal instruction, taking around 300 milliseconds to engage but sustainable for as long as the goal holds.

The two can pull in different directions, which is why an unexpected notification can yank your attention away from work no matter how firmly you had chosen to concentrate, and researchers have found they even rely on partly different brain networks.

These pairs, overt versus covert and exogenous versus endogenous, combine freely with the varieties of the earlier sub-sections, giving attention research its precise, sometimes intimidating, but ultimately clarifying vocabulary.


12.2 The founding question

Having named the varieties, this section steps back to ask why attention exists at all, which is the question that gave birth to the whole field.

The answer is deceptively simple and deeply important: attention exists because the mind cannot do everything at once.

Understanding this founding logic makes every later theory easier to grasp, because they are all, in the end, proposals about how a limited system copes.


12.2.1 Attention as selection under a capacity limit

The founding idea is that attention is fundamentally about selection forced upon us by a limit on how much we can process, called a capacity limit.

Capacity here means the total amount of information the mind can handle at one time, and the claim is that this amount is far smaller than the amount the senses deliver.

At every instant your eyes, ears, skin, and other senses pour in vastly more information than the brain can fully analyse, so something has to give, and attention is the mechanism that decides what gets the limited processing and what is left out.

This is why the earliest and most influential theories, which we meet in the next chapter, were framed as questions about a bottleneck, a narrow point in the flow of information where selection happens, much as a narrow neck limits how fast liquid leaves a bottle.

Selection under a capacity limit has two sides that are worth naming: enhancing the chosen information so it is processed more fully, and suppressing or ignoring the rest so it does not interfere, and attention does both, which is why the gain-map picture needs gains that can go below one as well as above it.

Framing attention this way also tells you what a theory of attention owes you: it must say where in the stream of processing the selection happens, how much of the unattended material still gets analysed, and what sets the size of the limit, which are exactly the debates the following chapters take up.

So this small idea, that the mind must choose because it cannot do all, is the seed from which the entire science of attention grows.


12.2.2 Why a mind with unlimited capacity would need no attention

This closing sub-section drives the founding point home with a useful thought experiment, and it clarifies what attention is by imagining its absence.

Picture a mind with unlimited processing capacity, one that could fully analyse every sight, sound, and thought all at once, with no ceiling on how much it could handle.

Such a mind would have no need of attention at all, because attention is only useful when resources are scarce and must be rationed; with infinite resources there is nothing to ration and nothing to choose between.

This is a clarifying insight because it tells us that attention is not a thing added to the mind for its own sake but a direct consequence of limitation, the mind's strategy for being finite in a world that offers more than it can process.

In systems terms, an allocator only exists because demand exceeds supply; delete the capacity constraint from the design and the allocator becomes dead code with nothing to schedule.

It also explains why attention involves cost and effort and can fail, why focusing on one thing means missing others, because these are the unavoidable trade-offs of dividing a fixed and limited resource among competing demands.

The point connects attention to a broader theme that runs through the whole science of cognition, that many features of the mind are best understood as clever solutions to the problem of doing as well as possible with limited means.

Seen this way, attention is not a quirk or a weakness but a signature of any real, resource-bounded intelligence, which is precisely why a machine built to think in a humanlike way, as konnectome aims to, will need mechanisms of attention of its own, for it too cannot process everything at once.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ The full sensory stream: all channels from all senses, far exceeding processing capacity.

◦ Salience signals: automatically computed markers of sudden, intense, or novel events, feeding the exogenous pathway.

◦ Current goals and instructions: task priorities from executive systems, feeding the endogenous pathway.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A gain map: a per-channel multiplier that amplifies selected locations, features, or objects and suppresses the rest, consumed by every perceptual pipeline.

◦ Orienting commands: requests for eye, head, and body movements when covert selection is escalated to overt sampling.

◦ Selection reports: which items reached full processing, consumed by working memory and decision systems.

• STATE.

◦ The current setting of the gain map across space, features, and objects.

◦ The current priority list of goals driving endogenous control.

◦ A fatigue or depletion trace during sustained tasks, reflected in the vigilance decrement.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Total capacity: the fixed processing budget being divided.

◦ Enhancement and suppression gains: how strongly selected channels are boosted and unselected channels damped.

◦ Spotlight size: the spatial extent of the selected region, adjustable from narrow to broad.

◦ Capture threshold: how salient an event must be to trigger exogenous reorienting against current goals.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Exogenous capture: engages within roughly 100 milliseconds of a salient onset and fades within a few hundred milliseconds.

◦ Endogenous orienting: takes about 300 milliseconds to engage after a symbolic cue and can be sustained indefinitely while the goal holds.

◦ Attentional blink: about 200 to 500 milliseconds after detecting one target, during which a second target is often missed.

◦ Vigilance decrement: performance declines measurably within the first 20 to 30 minutes of continuous watch.

◦ The precise capacity limit in bits per second: REFUSED, because no agreed single-number measurement of total attentional throughput exists.

• MODES.

◦ Selective mode: one channel amplified, others suppressed; triggered by a single dominant goal.

◦ Divided mode: the budget split or rapidly time-shared across tasks; triggered by concurrent goals, at a cost to each.

◦ Sustained mode: gains held on one channel over long periods; triggered by monitoring tasks, and subject to decrement.

◦ Exogenous versus endogenous control: interrupt-driven capture versus goal-driven pointing, switched by the relative strength of salience against current priority.

◦ Overt versus covert deployment: with or without moving the sense organs, switched by whether foveal detail is needed.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Missed signals during sustained watch: the vigilance decrement.

◦ Distraction: exogenous capture by salient but irrelevant events overriding current goals.

◦ Dual-task interference: degraded performance whenever demanding tasks share resources.

◦ Failures of selection such as inattentional blindness, where unattended events go entirely unseen, treated fully in a later chapter.

◦ Clinical breakdowns of allocation, as in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and in spatial neglect after parietal injury.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called channels where each channel has a name, a signal strength, and a salience value.
Create a text variable called goal that names the channel the current task cares about.
Create a number variable called enhancement_gain with a value greater than one.
Create a number variable called suppression_gain with a value less than one.
Create a number variable called capture_threshold that sets how salient an event must be to seize attention.
Create a text variable called selected with initial value equal to goal.
For each channel in channels, do the following.
    If the channel's salience is greater than capture_threshold, set selected to that channel's name.
For each channel in channels, do the following.
    If the channel's name equals selected, set the channel's output to its signal strength multiplied by enhancement_gain.
    Otherwise, set the channel's output to its signal strength multiplied by suppression_gain.
Report each channel's name and output, showing the selected channel amplified and the rest suppressed.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a list of channels, each with a name, a signal strength, and a salience value.
channels = [
    # The lecture voice is the goal-relevant channel with modest salience.
    {"name": "lecture voice", "signal": 5.0, "salience": 0.2},
    # The hallway chatter is irrelevant background with low salience.
    {"name": "hallway chatter", "signal": 4.0, "salience": 0.1},
    # The phone notification is irrelevant but highly salient.
    {"name": "phone notification", "signal": 3.0, "salience": 0.9},
]

# Set the goal channel chosen by endogenous, voluntary control.
goal = "lecture voice"
# Set the enhancement gain applied to the selected channel.
enhancement_gain = 2.0
# Set the suppression gain applied to unselected channels.
suppression_gain = 0.3
# Set the salience level above which exogenous capture overrides the goal.
capture_threshold = 0.8

# Define a function called allocate that applies attentional gains to every channel.
def allocate(capture_on):
    # Start with the goal as the selected channel.
    selected = goal
    # If exogenous capture is enabled, check every channel for a salience spike.
    if capture_on:
        # For each channel, let a salient event seize selection.
        for channel in channels:
            # If the channel's salience exceeds the capture threshold, select it instead.
            if channel["salience"] > capture_threshold:
                # Set selected to the capturing channel's name.
                selected = channel["name"]
    # For each channel, compute the attended output by applying the appropriate gain.
    for channel in channels:
        # Choose the enhancement gain for the selected channel and the suppression gain otherwise.
        gain = enhancement_gain if channel["name"] == selected else suppression_gain
        # Print the channel name and its gain-modulated output strength.
        print(channel["name"], "output:", round(channel["signal"] * gain, 2))
    # Return the name of the channel that won selection.
    return selected

# Run allocation under pure endogenous control, with capture disabled.
print("Endogenous control, goal wins:")
allocate(False)
# Run allocation with exogenous capture enabled, so the notification seizes attention.
print("Exogenous capture, the notification wins:")
allocate(True)

CHAPTER 13. SELECTION: BOTTLENECK, LOAD, AND CAPACITY (PROCESS)

This chapter is about a simple fact of daily life: your mind cannot fully process everything that reaches your senses at once, so it must choose.

Selection is the name for that choosing, the way the mind lets some information through for full treatment while holding the rest back.

Viewed as an engineered system, selection is a throughput problem: the input stream arrives at a rate far higher than the deep processing stages can serve, so somewhere a scheduler must decide which items get service and which are dropped or delayed.

The big question in this chapter is not whether the mind selects, because clearly it does, but where in the stream of processing the selection happens, and what sets the limit that makes selection necessary.

Answering that question well matters for konnectome, because any machine that must act in a rich, noisy world faces the same problem of too much information and too little capacity to handle all of it.


13.1 The bottleneck theories

A bottleneck is the narrow neck of a bottle that lets only a little liquid through at a time, and here it is a metaphor for a narrow stage in mental processing that only a little information can pass through at once.

In systems terms, a bottleneck is a stage whose service capacity is far below the arrival rate of its inputs, which forces queueing, dropping, or both.

The first theories of attention argued about exactly where that narrow point sits, and this section lays out the three classic answers in the order they were proposed.


13.1.1 Early selection and the filter model

Early selection is the idea that the mind picks what to attend to very soon after information arrives, before it works out what the information actually means.

The idea grew out of a real-world puzzle that the psychologist Colin Cherry named in 1953, the cocktail party problem, which is the everyday ability to follow one voice in a room full of overlapping conversations.

To study this in the laboratory, researchers used a task called dichotic listening, in which a person wears headphones and hears one spoken message in the left ear and a different message in the right ear at the same time.

The listener is told to shadow one ear, meaning to repeat aloud what that ear hears, while ignoring the other ear.

Cherry found that people could do this, and that afterward they remembered almost nothing about the ignored ear, not even whether the language had changed to a foreign tongue, though they did notice crude physical facts such as whether the voice was male or female.

The British psychologist Donald Broadbent built these findings into the first full theory of attention in his 1958 book Perception and Communication, and it is called the filter model.

Broadbent proposed that all incoming signals first enter a very brief sensory store, then pass to a selective filter that lets only one channel through based on simple physical features such as which ear it came from or the pitch of the voice.

The rejected channel is blocked at this early gate, so its meaning is never analysed, which is why the ignored ear seemed to leave no trace.

Beyond the filter sits a limited-capacity channel, a narrow stage that can handle only one stream at a time, and this is the bottleneck.

As a system, the filter model is a hard gate keyed on cheap physical features: its inputs are all sensory channels held briefly in a raw buffer, its output is exactly one channel forwarded to the slow semantic stage, and the gate decision is made within a few hundred milliseconds of arrival, before any meaning is computed.

The strength of the model is that it explained the shadowing results cleanly, and it introduced the flow diagram, a boxes-and-arrows picture of the mind, which became a standard tool of the field.

Its weakness is that it turned out to be too strict, because people sometimes do notice meaningful things in the supposedly blocked ear, which a truly early gate should not allow.


13.1.2 Attenuation

Attenuation means turning something down rather than shutting it off, the way you might lower the volume on a radio without switching it silent.

The attenuation model was proposed by Anne Treisman in the early 1960s to fix a specific problem with Broadbent's strict filter.

The problem was evidence that unattended information sometimes gets through, most famously the finding that many people hear their own name spoken in the ignored ear, which is a modern echo of the cocktail party effect.

If the filter truly blocked the unattended channel before its meaning was read, hearing your own name there should be impossible.

Treisman's fix was to say the filter does not block the unattended channel but weakens it, so the unattended signal is still analysed, just at reduced strength.

She added the idea that different words have different thresholds, a threshold being the level of evidence needed before a word is recognised.

Important or personally relevant words, such as your own name or the word fire, have permanently low thresholds, so even a weakened signal is enough to trip them into awareness.

This neatly explains why most unattended words are lost but a special few break through.

In systems terms, attenuation replaces the binary gate with a gain control: every channel is forwarded, but unattended channels are multiplied by a gain below one, and downstream detectors fire only when signal strength exceeds a per-item threshold, with high-priority items assigned permanently low thresholds.

Treisman's model is often described as a middle position, softer than Broadbent's hard early gate but still placing selection relatively early, because most unattended material is attenuated and never fully processed.


13.1.3 Late selection

Late selection is the opposite bet from early selection, the claim that the mind fully analyses the meaning of everything that comes in and only then chooses what to keep for awareness and response.

This view was put forward by J. Anthony Deutsch and Diana Deutsch in 1963, and later developed by Donald Norman.

On this account there is no early filter at all, because all incoming signals, attended and unattended, are processed all the way to the level of meaning.

The selection happens near the end, at the gate to memory and response, where only the most relevant or important item is allowed through to guide behaviour and enter awareness.

This model easily explains cases where unattended meaning has an effect, since on this view meaning is always computed.

Its cost is that it seems wasteful, because it requires the brain to fully analyse a great deal of material that is then thrown away, and it struggles to explain why people remember so little of the ignored channel.

The two camps make different systems predictions: early selection predicts that unattended inputs never reach the semantic stage, so their meaning can leave no trace, while late selection predicts full semantic analysis of everything, with the capacity limit applied only at the output gate to memory and response.

For decades the early and late camps argued back and forth, and the honest summary is that neither pure position won outright, which set the stage for a theory that made the location of selection flexible rather than fixed.


13.2 Load and capacity

This section moves from the question of where selection happens to the question of what governs it and how the mind shares out its limited processing power.

The key modern idea is that selection is not always early or always late, but shifts depending on how hard the current task is, and this reframes the old debate as being about load.


13.2.1 Perceptual load theory and the movable locus of selection

Perceptual load theory, proposed by Nilli Lavie in 1995, is the idea that whether selection is early or late depends on how demanding the task in front of you is right now.

Perceptual load simply means the amount of perceptual work a task requires, for example how many items you must scan or how finely you must discriminate them.

Locus of selection is a technical phrase that just means the place in processing where the choosing occurs, and the word movable signals that this place can shift.

Lavie's central claim is that we have a fixed and limited pool of perceptual capacity that is used up automatically and involuntarily.

When a task has high perceptual load, it consumes all of that capacity, leaving nothing to spill over onto irrelevant distractors, so distractors are effectively filtered out and selection looks early.

When a task has low perceptual load, spare capacity remains after the main task is served, and because perception runs automatically that leftover capacity flows onto the distractors, so they get processed and selection looks late.

A common demonstration uses a target letter to find among either few items, which is low load, or many crowded items, which is high load, while an irrelevant distractor sits to the side.

The distractor slows people down under low load but not under high load, which is the signature the theory predicts.

As a system, load theory describes a fixed capacity budget allocated greedily: task-relevant items are served first, any remainder spills onto distractors automatically, and the observable output is the distractor interference effect, present when spare capacity exists and absent when the budget is exhausted.

Lavie's proposal is powerful because it reconciles the old early-versus-late fight by saying both camps were partly right, and which one applies depends on load.

Later work has qualified the theory, noting that the effects depend on how load is defined and that some findings are harder to reproduce, so it is influential rather than settled.


13.2.2 Limited-capacity and multiple-resource models

This sub-section asks a deeper question: is attention one single pool of mental fuel, or several separate pools.

A limited-capacity model treats attention as one general reservoir of mental effort that any task can draw on, a view associated with Daniel Kahneman's 1973 book Attention and Effort.

On this single-pool view, two tasks interfere with each other whenever their combined demand exceeds the one shared supply, no matter what kind of tasks they are.

The multiple-resource model, developed chiefly by Christopher Wickens, challenges that by proposing several separate pools rather than one.

On this view resources are divided along dimensions such as the sense used, for instance vision versus hearing, the kind of code, for instance verbal versus spatial, and the stage, for instance perceiving versus responding.

The prediction that follows is concrete and useful: two tasks clash badly when they compete for the same pool but coexist far more easily when they draw on different pools.

This is why you can often drive while listening to speech, since driving is largely visual and spatial while listening is auditory and verbal, but you struggle to read a map and read a text message at once, since both are visual and verbal.

In systems terms the debate is about the resource topology: a single-pool architecture predicts interference proportional to total demand regardless of task type, while a multiple-pool architecture predicts interference only when two tasks address the same pool, which is a directly testable difference in dual-task performance.

The multiple-resource idea is widely used in human-factors engineering, the practical science of designing tasks and machines to fit human limits, precisely because it predicts which combinations of tasks will overload a person.


13.2.3 Automaticity and controlled processing

This sub-section is about the difference between mental actions that run by themselves and mental actions that demand deliberate effort.

Controlled processing is slow, effortful, capacity-limited, and open to conscious guidance, the kind of thinking you use when doing unfamiliar arithmetic in your head.

Automatic processing is fast, effortless, hard to stop, and runs with little or no drain on capacity, the kind of processing that lets a fluent reader take in a word without trying.

The classic account comes from Richard Shiffrin and Walter Schneider in 1977, who showed that heavy, consistent practice can turn a controlled task into an automatic one.

In their studies people searched for target items among distractors, and when the targets and distractors kept swapping roles the task stayed slow and effortful, but when a fixed set of items was always the target, performance became fast and nearly automatic with practice.

A famous everyday illustration of automaticity is the Stroop effect, named after John Ridley Stroop, in which naming the ink colour of a colour word is slowed when the word spells a different colour, for example the word red printed in blue ink.

The Stroop effect shows that reading has become so automatic in a literate adult that it happens whether or not you want it to, and it then interferes with the colour-naming you are trying to do.

As a system, automatisation is a compile step: consistent practice moves a mapping from the slow, serial, capacity-consuming controlled mode into a fast parallel mode that costs almost nothing but can no longer be switched off, which is exactly the trade a compiler makes when it turns interpreted instructions into fixed machine code.

The practical lesson is that automaticity frees up limited capacity for other things, which is why skilled performance feels easy, but it also makes well-learned habits hard to suppress.


13.3 The central bottleneck in performance

Having examined selection among competing inputs, this section turns to a related limit that shows up when you try to do two response tasks at nearly the same moment.

The evidence here points to a single central stage that can only handle one decision at a time, a bottleneck not at the input but at the choosing of a response.


13.3.1 The psychological refractory period

The psychological refractory period (PRP) is the reliable delay in responding to a second task when it arrives hard on the heels of a first task.

The word refractory borrows from physiology, where it names a brief period after a nerve fires during which it cannot fire again, and here it names a stretch during which the mind seems unable to start a second decision.

The standard experiment presents two quick tasks, each needing its own speedy response, and varies the gap between them, a gap the field calls the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA), meaning the time between the start of the first stimulus and the start of the second.

The finding is that the response to the first task stays about the same, but the response to the second task gets slower as the two are squeezed closer together.

The standard explanation, developed in detail by Harold Pashler, is a central bottleneck at the stage of response selection, the moment when you decide which action goes with the stimulus you just perceived.

On this account, perception of the two stimuli can proceed in parallel, but the choosing of a response can only serve one task at a time, so the second task must wait its turn, and that forced waiting is the delay.

In systems terms this is a classic single-server queue: perception stages run in parallel and deposit jobs at a response-selection server with a service capacity of one, so when the second job arrives while the first is being served, it waits, and the waiting time falls off millisecond for millisecond as the stimulus onset asynchrony grows.

This gives a clean picture of the mind as able to sense many things at once but able to decide only one thing at a time.


13.3.2 Dual-task cost and its interpretation

Dual-task cost is simply the drop in performance you pay for doing two things at once compared with doing each alone, measured as slower responses, more errors, or both.

The interesting part is not that the cost exists but what it tells us about the mind's architecture, and here researchers disagree.

One interpretation is the structural bottleneck view described above, which says the cost comes from a fixed stage that can process only one response decision at a time, forcing the tasks into a queue.

A rival interpretation is graded capacity sharing, which says there is no strict one-at-a-time gate but a limited pool that can be split between tasks, so each task runs slower because each gets only part of the supply.

The two sides predict differently in systems terms: a strict serial server predicts that the second task waits fully idle and then runs at normal speed, while capacity sharing predicts that both tasks run simultaneously but each at a reduced rate, and distinguishing these from response-time data alone is hard because both produce interference of similar overall size.

There is also evidence that some of the bottleneck reflects strategy rather than a hard wall, because when people are told to treat both tasks as equally urgent the pattern of interference can change.

A further important finding is that extensive practice can shrink dual-task costs dramatically, and in some cases two well-practised tasks can be run together with almost no cost, which fits the earlier point that practice breeds automaticity.

The balanced conclusion is that there really is a serious limit on doing two decision-heavy tasks at once, that the limit is partly structural and partly strategic, and that training can loosen it but rarely erases it.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Parallel sensory channels: multiple simultaneous feature-coded streams (location, pitch, colour, ear of arrival) delivered from the sensory stores of Chapter 16.

◦ Task set: the current goal specification from executive control, defining which channel or feature counts as relevant.

◦ Load estimate: the current perceptual demand of the primary task, which sets how much capacity remains for spillover.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Selected stream: one channel (or a small weighted set) forwarded to semantic analysis, working memory, and response selection.

◦ Response decisions: one stimulus-to-action mapping at a time, emitted serially by the central response-selection stage to the motor system.

◦ Interference signal: measurable slowing and error when rejected material breaks through, consumed by experimenters as the distractor effect.

• STATE.

◦ The current gate setting or gain profile across channels.

◦ The queue of pending response-selection jobs at the central bottleneck.

◦ The practice-dependent automaticity level of each stimulus-to-response mapping.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Filter gain for unattended channels (attenuation factor between zero and one).

◦ Per-item recognition thresholds, lowered for high-priority items such as one's own name.

◦ Total perceptual capacity budget, and its allocation policy (single pool versus multiple pools).

◦ Central-server service time per response decision.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Central response-selection service time: on the order of 100 to 350 milliseconds per decision, inferred from psychological refractory period slopes at short stimulus onset asynchronies.

◦ Psychological refractory period range: second-task slowing is largest at stimulus onset asynchronies under about 300 milliseconds and fades by around 1 second.

◦ Attenuation gain value: REFUSED, because the literature establishes weakening of the unattended channel but no agreed numerical factor.

◦ Practice course of automatisation: hundreds to thousands of consistent-mapping trials in the Shiffrin and Schneider studies, with no single fixed constant.

• MODES.

◦ Early-selection mode: high perceptual load exhausts capacity, distractors are excluded before semantic analysis; triggered when task demand meets or exceeds the capacity budget.

◦ Late-selection mode: low perceptual load leaves spare capacity that spills onto distractors, which are then processed to meaning; triggered when task demand is below the budget.

◦ Controlled mode: serial, effortful, flexible processing of novel mappings; the default for unpractised tasks.

◦ Automatic mode: parallel, low-cost, hard-to-suppress processing; entered after extensive consistent practice.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Breakthrough of the irrelevant: salient unattended items (one's own name) capture the channel and derail the task.

◦ Distractor interference under low load: spare capacity processes what should be ignored, slowing responses.

◦ Stroop-type capture: an automatised process fires against the current goal and cannot be suppressed.

◦ Dual-task collapse: queueing at the central bottleneck delays or loses the second of two near-simultaneous decisions, a real danger in driving while conversing.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called capacity with initial value four.
Create an empty list variable called admitted.
Create an empty list variable called service_queue.
For each item in the input stream, perform the following steps.
    Calculate the priority of the item as its task relevance minus its recognition threshold.
    If the length of admitted is less than capacity, append the item to admitted.
    Otherwise, find the admitted item with the lowest priority.
        If the new item priority is greater than that lowest priority, replace the lowest item with the new item.
        Otherwise, discard the new item.
For each item in admitted, append a response job for the item to service_queue.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
While service_queue is not empty, perform the following steps.
    Remove the first job from service_queue.
    Add the central service time to clock.
    Record the completion of the job at the current clock value.
Return the list of completed jobs with their completion times.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for generating item properties.
import random

# Create a number variable called CAPACITY with initial value four.
CAPACITY = 4
# Create a number variable called SERVICE_MS with initial value one hundred fifty.
SERVICE_MS = 150

# Define a function called filter_and_serve that takes a list of items.
def filter_and_serve(items):
    # Create an empty list variable called admitted.
    admitted = []
    # For each item in the input list, perform the admission test.
    for item in items:
        # Calculate the priority as relevance minus threshold.
        priority = item["relevance"] - item["threshold"]
        # If there is spare capacity, append the item with its priority.
        if len(admitted) < CAPACITY:
            admitted.append((priority, item["name"]))
        # Otherwise, compete for the weakest occupied slot.
        else:
            # Find the lowest priority currently admitted.
            lowest = min(admitted)
            # If the new priority beats the lowest, replace it.
            if priority > lowest[0]:
                admitted.remove(lowest)
                admitted.append((priority, item["name"]))
    # Sort the admitted items from highest to lowest priority.
    admitted.sort(reverse=True)
    # Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
    clock = 0
    # Create an empty list variable called completions.
    completions = []
    # For each admitted item, serve it one at a time at the bottleneck.
    for priority, name in admitted:
        # Add the central service time to the clock.
        clock = clock + SERVICE_MS
        # Record the item name and its completion time.
        completions.append((name, clock))
    # Return the completion schedule.
    return completions

# Build a stream of ten items with random relevance and thresholds.
stream = [{"name": "item" + str(i),
           "relevance": random.uniform(0, 1),
           "threshold": random.uniform(0, 0.5)} for i in range(10)]
# Give one item a very low threshold, like hearing your own name.
stream[7]["threshold"] = -0.5
# Run the filter queue and print each served item with its finish time.
for name, t in filter_and_serve(stream):
    # Print the served item and the millisecond it cleared the bottleneck.
    print(name, "completed at", t, "ms")


CHAPTER 14. SPATIAL ATTENTION AND CONTROL NETWORKS (PROCESS)

This chapter is about attention in space, the way you can concentrate on one region of your visual world without moving your eyes, and about the brain systems that steer that concentration.

It matters because much of attention is fundamentally about location: choosing where to look, or where to prioritise, is one of the mind's most constant jobs.

In systems terms, spatial attention is a pointer with a position, a width, and a controller: the pointer's coordinates determine which region of the input map is amplified, and two control systems, one deliberate and one interrupt-driven, compete to set those coordinates.

The chapter moves from the behavioural metaphors that describe how spatial attention behaves, to the large-scale brain networks that control it, to the fine-grained neural theory of how selection changes the activity of single cells.


14.1 The mechanics of spatial attention

This section describes how spatial attention behaves as measured by experiments, using metaphors that capture its shape and its movement, and the laboratory methods that reveal it.


14.1.1 The spotlight and zoom-lens metaphors

The spotlight metaphor, associated with Michael Posner around 1980, pictures attention as a beam of light that you can move across a scene, so that whatever falls inside the beam is processed better and faster than whatever falls outside it.

A key point is that this beam can move independently of the eyes, so you can fix your gaze on one spot while secretly attending to another, which researchers call covert attention, meaning attention without an accompanying eye movement.

The zoom-lens metaphor, proposed by Charles Eriksen and colleagues in 1986, adds an important refinement, namely that the spotlight is not a fixed size but can widen or narrow like the zoom of a camera.

The trade-off built into the zoom lens is that a wide focus covers more area but processes each part less finely, while a narrow focus covers less area but processes it in sharp detail.

The systems reading is a constant-resource constraint: the product of the attended area and the processing resolution per unit area is roughly fixed, so the controller can trade coverage for detail but cannot increase both at once.

Together these metaphors capture two robust facts: attention gives a processing advantage to a chosen region, and the size of that region is adjustable at the cost of resolution.


14.1.2 Cueing, orienting, and inhibition of return

This sub-section describes the main laboratory tool for studying spatial attention and one of its most surprising discoveries.

Orienting means directing attention to a location, and the standard way to study it is the spatial cueing task devised by Michael Posner, often just called the Posner cueing task.

In this task a cue, such as a brief flash or an arrow, indicates a location, and then a target appears that the person must respond to as fast as possible.

When the target appears at the cued location the response is faster, a benefit, and when it appears elsewhere the response is slower, a cost, which shows that the cue pulled attention to its location.

There is an important distinction between two ways of being cued: exogenous orienting, which is attention grabbed automatically by a sudden event in the world such as a flash, and endogenous orienting, which is attention sent deliberately according to a meaningful signal such as an arrow you have learned to obey.

Exogenous cueing is fast and reflexive, giving a benefit within roughly a tenth of a second, while endogenous cueing is slower and voluntary, taking on the order of two to three tenths of a second to deploy.

The surprising discovery is inhibition of return (IOR), which is the finding that after attention has been drawn to a location and then moved away, responses to that same location become slower rather than faster.

This slowing appears when the delay between cue and target grows beyond about a fifth to a third of a second, reversing the earlier benefit.

Inhibition of return is thought to be useful because it biases attention toward new, unexplored locations and discourages it from returning to places already checked, which would help an animal searching its environment efficiently.

As a system, the cueing task exposes the controller's transfer function: the input is a cue event with a location and a type, the output is a reaction-time difference between cued and uncued targets, and the sign of that difference flips from benefit to cost as the cue-to-target interval passes roughly 250 milliseconds for exogenous cues, which is inhibition of return acting as a visited-locations tag with a slow decay.


14.2 The attention networks

This section moves from behaviour to biology, describing the influential proposal that attention is not one thing in the brain but a set of cooperating networks with distinct jobs.


14.2.1 Alerting, orienting, and executive control

The framework of three attention networks was proposed by Michael Posner and Steven Petersen in 1990 and updated by them in later reviews.

The alerting network maintains a general state of readiness, the difference between being drowsy and being on your toes, and it can be briefly boosted by a warning signal that tells you something is about to happen.

The orienting network selects information from among the senses and directs attention to particular locations, which is the spatial steering described earlier in this chapter.

The executive control network handles the harder supervisory work, such as resolving conflict between competing responses, detecting errors, and keeping behaviour aligned with your goals.

Researchers built a single test called the Attention Network Test to measure all three in one sitting, by combining a warning cue, a spatial cue, and a conflict task, which lets them estimate each network's efficiency separately.

In systems terms the three networks are three services with separable inputs and outputs: alerting takes warning signals and raises global gain, orienting takes location cues and moves the spatial pointer, and executive control takes conflict signals and adjudicates between competing responses, and each service can degrade independently.

The value of this framework is that it treats attention as a team of specialised systems rather than a single faculty, which fits evidence that these functions can be disturbed independently by different brain conditions.


14.2.2 The frontoparietal control of attention

Frontoparietal refers to the partnership between the frontal lobes at the front of the brain and the parietal lobes toward the top and back, and these two regions working together form the core hardware of spatial attention.

An influential model by Maurizio Corbetta and Gordon Shulman, published in 2002, divides this machinery into two cooperating systems.

The dorsal attention network, which includes a region called the frontal eye fields and part of the parietal lobe near the intraparietal sulcus, carries out voluntary, goal-driven attention, the deliberate sending of focus according to your current purpose.

The word dorsal here just means toward the upper or back part of the brain.

The ventral attention network, which includes the temporoparietal junction and part of the ventral frontal cortex, acts as a kind of alarm, breaking in when something unexpected but potentially important appears outside the current focus.

The word ventral means toward the lower part.

A helpful way to picture the pair is that the dorsal system aims the flashlight where you intend, while the ventral system taps you on the shoulder when something surprising happens elsewhere and needs to be checked.

In systems language, the dorsal network is the planned scheduler that sets the pointer from goals, and the ventral network is the hardware interrupt line that can pre-empt the scheduler when a salient, task-relevant event fires; a well-tuned system needs both, because a pure scheduler misses surprises and a pure interrupt system is captured by every flash.

This division fits patterns of brain injury, since damage to the ventral system on the right side is linked to a striking condition called spatial neglect, in which patients fail to attend to one side of space.


14.3 The neural theory of selection

This section descends to the level of individual brain cells and asks what attention actually does to neural activity, giving a mechanism beneath the metaphors and networks.


14.3.1 Biased competition

Biased competition is a theory, proposed by Robert Desimone and John Duncan in 1995, that explains attention as the tipping of a contest between brain cells.

The starting idea is that when several objects fall within the region a neuron cares about, called its receptive field, the objects compete, because the neuron cannot fully represent all of them at once.

Left alone this competition is roughly balanced, and the neuron's response is a kind of compromise between the competing stimuli.

Attention enters as a bias, an extra push that favours the neurons representing the attended object, so that they win the competition and the attended object comes to dominate the neuron's response.

Single-cell recordings in monkeys supported this directly: when two stimuli sat in a cell's receptive field the response was intermediate, but when the animal attended to one of them the response shifted toward the value that stimulus would produce on its own.

The systems reading is that selection is implemented not by a separate router but by weighting an existing winner-take-most competition: the inputs are competing stimulus drives plus a small top-down bias term, and the output is a neural response drawn toward the biased stimulus, all unfolding within tens to a few hundred milliseconds of stimulus onset.

The appeal of biased competition is that it explains selection without any separate spotlight mechanism, treating attention instead as a thumb on the scale of an ordinary neural contest.


14.3.2 Attentional modulation of neural gain

Gain is an engineering word for how strongly a system amplifies its input, like the volume knob that sets how loudly a faint signal comes through, and gain modulation means attention turning that knob.

The central finding is that attending to a stimulus increases the responses of the neurons that represent it, effectively amplifying the attended signal relative to the ignored background.

This shows up in several ways: attended stimuli produce larger neural responses, the baseline activity of relevant neurons can rise even before a stimulus appears, and the sharpness with which neurons distinguish stimuli can improve.

One useful way to summarise the effect is that attention improves the signal-to-noise ratio, meaning it makes the wanted signal stand out more clearly against random background activity.

In systems terms, gain modulation is a multiplicative control input: the attended channel's output equals its input times a gain slightly above one, the ignored channel's gain sits at or below one, and the pre-stimulus baseline shift is the controller warming up the selected channel before data arrive.

Gain modulation and biased competition are not rivals so much as two descriptions of the same underlying process, since boosting the gain of the attended neurons is one natural way to bias the competition in their favour.

Together they give the field a mechanistic account of selection, connecting the everyday experience of concentrating on something to concrete, measurable changes in how brain cells fire.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Retinotopic feature maps: location-tagged sensory activity from early visual cortex.

◦ Exogenous events: abrupt onsets and salient changes, delivered bottom-up to the ventral network.

◦ Endogenous goals: task instructions and learned cue meanings, delivered top-down from executive control to the dorsal network.

◦ Warning signals: temporal alerts that raise readiness via the alerting network.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A spatial priority pointer: the current attended location and focus width, consumed by perception, binding (Chapter 15), and the eye-movement system.

◦ Gain commands: multiplicative amplification of neurons coding the attended region, raising their signal-to-noise ratio.

◦ Reaction-time benefits and costs: faster responses at attended locations, slower at unattended ones, the behavioural signature read out in cueing tasks.

◦ Interrupt notifications: ventral-network alerts that force reorienting to unexpected relevant events.

• STATE.

◦ Current pointer coordinates and zoom width.

◦ A decaying inhibition-of-return map tagging recently visited locations.

◦ Baseline gain profile across the visual field, including pre-stimulus warm-up of the selected region.

◦ Global alertness level.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Attentional gain factor for the selected region.

◦ Zoom trade-off constant linking focus area to resolution.

◦ Interrupt threshold: how salient and how task-relevant an event must be for the ventral network to pre-empt the dorsal plan.

◦ Inhibition-of-return strength and decay rate.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Exogenous orienting: benefit peaks within roughly 100 milliseconds of an abrupt cue.

◦ Endogenous orienting: deliberate shifts take roughly 200 to 300 milliseconds to deploy.

◦ Inhibition of return onset: the cueing benefit reverses to a cost at cue-to-target intervals beyond about 200 to 300 milliseconds, and the inhibition can persist for a second or more.

◦ Magnitude of single-neuron gain change: REFUSED, because reported firing-rate increases vary widely across areas, tasks, and species, and no single canonical value is supported.

• MODES.

◦ Overt orienting: attention moves with an eye movement; triggered when the target justifies foveation.

◦ Covert orienting: attention moves while gaze stays fixed; triggered by task demands that forbid or precede eye movements.

◦ Endogenous (goal-driven) mode: the dorsal network sets the pointer from current goals; the default during purposeful tasks.

◦ Exogenous (stimulus-driven) mode: a salient event captures the pointer via the ventral network; triggered by abrupt, unexpected, potentially relevant onsets.

◦ Wide versus narrow zoom: focus width set by task precision demands, trading coverage for resolution.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Attentional capture: salient but irrelevant events hijack the pointer through the exogenous route.

◦ Spatial neglect: right-hemisphere ventral damage leaves patients failing to attend to the left side of space despite intact vision.

◦ Invalid-cue cost: misdirected expectation slows responses to targets appearing away from the cued location.

◦ Search perseveration when inhibition of return fails: attention revisits already-checked locations and search becomes inefficient.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called base_rt with initial value three hundred.
Create a number variable called cue_benefit with initial value forty.
Create a number variable called invalid_cost with initial value forty.
Create a number variable called ior_cost with initial value twenty.
Create a number variable called ior_onset with initial value two hundred fifty.
Create an empty list variable called results.
For each trial in the trial list, perform the following steps.
    Read the cue location, the target location, and the cue-to-target interval of the trial.
    Create a number variable called rt with initial value equal to base_rt.
    If the target location equals the cue location, perform the following steps.
        If the interval is less than ior_onset, subtract cue_benefit from rt.
        Otherwise, add ior_cost to rt.
    Otherwise, add invalid_cost to rt.
    Add a random noise value drawn from a normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation twenty to rt.
    Append the trial description and rt to results.
Return results.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for reaction-time noise and trial construction.
import random

# Create the baseline reaction time in milliseconds.
BASE_RT = 300
# Create the benefit for a validly cued target at short intervals.
CUE_BENEFIT = 40
# Create the cost for an invalidly cued target.
INVALID_COST = 40
# Create the inhibition-of-return cost at long intervals.
IOR_COST = 20
# Create the interval in milliseconds at which inhibition of return begins.
IOR_ONSET = 250

# Define a function that simulates one Posner cueing trial.
def cueing_trial(cue_side, target_side, interval_ms):
    # Start the reaction time at the baseline value.
    rt = BASE_RT
    # If the target appears on the cued side, apply benefit or inhibition.
    if target_side == cue_side:
        # If the interval is short, attention is still there, so subtract the benefit.
        if interval_ms < IOR_ONSET:
            rt = rt - CUE_BENEFIT
        # Otherwise, inhibition of return has set in, so add its cost.
        else:
            rt = rt + IOR_COST
    # Otherwise the cue was invalid, so add the reorienting cost.
    else:
        rt = rt + INVALID_COST
    # Add Gaussian noise with mean zero and standard deviation twenty.
    rt = rt + random.gauss(0, 20)
    # Return the simulated reaction time.
    return rt

# Define a function that averages many trials for one condition.
def mean_rt(cue, target, interval, n):
    # Calculate the mean of n simulated trials for the condition.
    return sum(cueing_trial(cue, target, interval) for _ in range(n)) / n

# For each cue-to-target interval, print valid and invalid mean reaction times.
for interval in [100, 200, 400, 800]:
    # Compute the mean reaction time when the cue is valid.
    valid = mean_rt("left", "left", interval, 2000)
    # Compute the mean reaction time when the cue is invalid.
    invalid = mean_rt("left", "right", interval, 2000)
    # Print the interval and both means rounded to whole milliseconds.
    print("interval", interval, "ms: valid", round(valid),
          "ms, invalid", round(invalid), "ms")


CHAPTER 15. ATTENTION, BINDING, AND ITS FAILURES (PROCESS)

This chapter is about one of attention's least obvious but most important jobs: gluing separate features into whole objects, and about the striking ways attention fails.

When you see a red ball, your brain processes its colour and its shape in partly different places, yet you experience one unified red ball, and the puzzle of how that unity is achieved is called the binding problem.

In systems terms the problem is one of correct address association: features are computed on separate maps, and the system must guarantee that the colour at a location gets attached to the shape at the same location and not to a neighbour.

This chapter explains the leading theory that attention is the glue, the evidence for a distinct binding step, and then the dramatic failures that reveal how much of the visual world we miss.


15.1 Attention and the binding of features

This section presents the theory that binding features into objects requires attention, and traces how that theory was tested and refined.


15.1.1 Feature integration theory and the preattentive to attentive transition

Feature integration theory (FIT), proposed by Anne Treisman and Garry Gelade in 1980, is the influential claim that separate features are combined into objects only where attention is directed.

The theory divides vision into two stages.

In the first, preattentive stage, meaning the stage before attention is applied, basic features such as colour, orientation, and motion are registered automatically, in parallel, across the whole scene at once and effortlessly.

In the second, attentive stage, attention moves to a location and binds together the features present there into a single object, and this stage is serial, meaning it handles one location at a time.

The evidence comes from visual search, the task of finding a target among distractors.

When the target differs from the distractors by a single basic feature, such as a red item among green ones, it seems to pop out instantly, and the time to find it barely changes as you add more distractors, which fits automatic parallel processing.

When the target is defined by a combination of features, such as a red vertical bar among red horizontal bars and green vertical bars, search becomes slow and the time rises steadily with each added distractor, as if attention must visit items one at a time to bind their features.

The systems signature is in the slopes: feature search shows a search time nearly flat in the number of items, while conjunction search shows a linear rise of roughly 20 to 40 milliseconds per additional item, which is the fingerprint of a parallel front end feeding a serial binding stage.

This contrast between flat and rising search times is the core support for the idea that binding needs attention.


15.1.2 Illusory conjunctions as evidence of a binding step

An illusory conjunction is a perceptual mistake in which features from different objects are wrongly combined, so that you might report seeing a red X when the display actually contained a red O and a green X.

Treisman and colleagues demonstrated these errors by showing people displays very briefly, or by loading their attention elsewhere, so that attention could not be properly directed to each item.

Under those conditions people reliably reported these wrong combinations, mixing up which colour went with which shape.

The importance of this finding is that it is exactly what feature integration theory predicts: if attention is the glue that binds features to the right object, then removing attention should let features float free and recombine incorrectly.

In systems terms, an illusory conjunction is an address-association fault: the feature values are read correctly, but with the binding process starved of its attention input, the pointers linking values to locations are assigned wrongly, and the system outputs a well-formed object description that corresponds to nothing in the input.

Illusory conjunctions therefore provide positive evidence that binding is a real, separable step in perception rather than something that happens automatically for free.

They also gently unsettle our confidence in perception, showing that without attention the visual system can assemble an object that was never actually there.


15.1.3 Guided search as a refinement

Guided search is a revision of feature integration theory, developed chiefly by Jeremy Wolfe from the late 1980s onward, that keeps the two-stage idea but makes the search smarter.

The problem with the original theory was that it implied combination searches were essentially blind, with attention wandering from item to item at random until it stumbled on the target.

Real search is more efficient than that, so guided search proposes that the fast preattentive stage does more than just register features: it also builds a rough map of where the promising items are and steers attention toward them.

For example, when looking for a red vertical bar, the preattentive stage can flag all the red things and all the vertical things, and attention is then guided to locations that score high on both, which are the likely targets.

This means attention is not random but biased toward candidates that share features with the target, which explains why combination search, though slower than pop-out, is far more efficient than pure item-by-item checking would be.

As a system, guided search inserts a priority map between the two stages: the parallel front end outputs an activation score per location, summing bottom-up salience and top-down feature matches, and the serial binder visits locations in descending score order rather than at random, cutting expected search time sharply.

Guided search is now one of the most developed and well-tested models of visual search, and it is best seen as an extension that preserves the core of feature integration theory while making it realistic.


15.2 The failures of attention

This section turns to what happens when attention is absent or overloaded, and the results are surprising demonstrations of how much of the world goes unnoticed.


15.2.1 Inattentional and change blindness

Inattentional blindness is the failure to see a fully visible object simply because your attention was occupied elsewhere.

The most famous demonstration is the invisible gorilla study by Daniel Simons and Christopher Chabris in 1999, which built on earlier work by Ulric Neisser.

Viewers watched a video and counted how many times players in white shirts passed a basketball, and while they were absorbed in counting, a person in a gorilla suit walked into the scene, faced the camera, thumped its chest, and walked off.

About half of the viewers, deeply focused on counting, never saw the gorilla at all.

Change blindness is a related failure: the difficulty people have noticing large changes to a scene when the change happens during some interruption such as a brief blank, a cut in a film, or a blink.

In striking demonstrations, people fail to notice that a conversation partner has been swapped for a different person during a momentary interruption.

The systems reading of both failures is that conscious scene representation is sparse and demand-driven: the input is the full scene, but the output to awareness contains only what the attentional binder has actually visited, and the interruption in change blindness deletes the transient signal that would otherwise flag the changed location for a visit.

Both phenomena carry the same lesson: we feel as though we take in the whole rich scene before us, but in truth we consciously register far less than we think, and attention is required to notice even obvious things.

This is humbling and practically important, for example in eyewitness reports and in the danger of distracted driving.


15.2.2 The attentional blink

The attentional blink is a brief lapse in attention that follows the successful detection of one target, during which a second target is likely to be missed.

It is studied with a method called rapid serial visual presentation, in which a stream of items, such as letters, is flashed one after another at the same spot very quickly, roughly ten per second.

The viewer must spot two targets embedded in the stream, for example two letters of a particular colour among other letters.

The finding is that if the second target appears very soon after the first, within about half a second, it is often missed entirely, as if attention had briefly blinked.

Curiously, if the second target comes immediately after the first, with no gap at all, it is usually caught, and if it comes after a longer delay it is also caught, so the failure is worst at an intermediate lag.

The blink is not a failure of the eyes, since they are open the whole time, but a limit of central processing: consolidating the first target into a form that can be reported ties up attention for a moment, leaving the second target vulnerable.

In systems terms the blink is a busy period on the consolidation server: encoding the first target into reportable working-memory format occupies the server for roughly 200 to 500 milliseconds, and any second target arriving in that window is overwritten by the ongoing stream before it can be served, while a target arriving in the same batch as the first rides through on the first target's service.

The attentional blink is valuable to researchers because it exposes the timing of the bottleneck between merely perceiving something and turning it into a reportable, conscious item.


15.3 The binding problem in general

This section widens the lens from perception to a problem that runs through all of cognition and through artificial intelligence: how a system represents which things go with which.


15.3.1 Feature binding and the unity of the percept

Feature binding is the specific problem of how the separately processed features of an object become tied together into a single unified perception.

The puzzle is real because the brain analyses different attributes in partly different regions, for instance colour and motion are handled by distinct areas, yet we never experience a scene as a loose soup of free-floating colours and motions.

Instead we see whole, coherent objects, each with its colour, shape, and motion correctly assigned, and something must be doing the assigning.

One leading proposal is temporal synchrony, an idea developed by Christoph von der Malsburg and others, that neurons representing features of the same object fire in time with one another, while neurons for different objects fire out of step, so that being in sync marks features as belonging together.

In systems terms synchrony is a time-multiplexed tagging scheme: instead of a dedicated wire announcing which features go together, co-membership is signalled by shared firing phase, which requires no extra hardware but limits how many objects can be kept apart at once by the number of distinguishable phases.

This idea is elegant and has some experimental support, but it remains debated, and there is no consensus that synchrony is the brain's actual solution.

The honest state of the science is that feature binding is a recognised, deep problem with several candidate answers, of which attention and neural synchrony are the most discussed, and none is settled.


15.3.2 The variable-binding problem for symbolic and connectionist systems

Variable binding is the more abstract cousin of feature binding, and it is the problem of temporarily tying a role to a filler, for instance binding the role agent to the filler John in the thought that John chased the dog.

The word variable here is borrowed from mathematics and computing, where a variable is a slot that can hold different values at different times.

Symbolic systems, meaning the classical approach to artificial intelligence that manipulates language-like symbols according to rules, handle variable binding naturally, because assigning a value to a named slot is exactly what such systems are built to do.

This is often cited as a strength of the symbolic approach, since it makes structured, compositional thought, such as understanding who did what to whom, straightforward.

Connectionist systems, meaning neural networks that represent information as patterns of activity spread across many simple units, find variable binding much harder, because there is no obvious built-in way to keep track of which pattern is currently filling which role.

This difficulty was a central point in a long-running debate, sparked by a 1988 critique from Jerry Fodor and Zenon Pylyshyn, over whether neural networks can support the systematic, structured character of human thought.

The two sides predict differently in systems terms: a symbolic architecture predicts effortless, error-free re-use of a structure with new fillers, since binding is a pointer assignment, while a plain connectionist architecture predicts degraded or interference-prone generalisation to novel role-filler combinations unless a dedicated binding mechanism is added.

Researchers have proposed various fixes, including the temporal synchrony idea mentioned above and specialised network designs, and modern deep-learning systems address related challenges with mechanisms such as attention layers.

The broad lesson for konnectome is that binding, whether of visual features or of abstract roles, is one of the genuine hard problems that any complete architecture of mind, natural or artificial, must solve, and it is not yet fully solved by anyone.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Parallel feature maps: location-indexed maps of colour, orientation, motion, and other basic features from early vision.

◦ The spatial attention pointer: the current attended location from the orienting system of Chapter 14, which selects where binding occurs.

◦ Target template: the sought feature combination from working memory, used to weight the priority map in guided search.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Bound object files: unified object descriptions with features correctly assigned, forwarded to recognition, working memory, and report.

◦ Search decisions: target present or absent judgements with reaction times whose slope over set size reveals the search mode.

◦ Consolidated targets: reportable items handed to working memory, one at a time, through the consolidation stage exposed by the attentional blink.

• STATE.

◦ The priority map: per-location activation combining bottom-up salience and top-down template matches.

◦ The set of currently open object files and their feature assignments.

◦ Consolidation-stage occupancy: whether the binder is busy encoding a just-found target.

◦ A record of locations already visited in the current search.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Per-item inspection time of the serial binder.

◦ Weights on each feature dimension in the priority map.

◦ Consolidation duration for a detected target.

◦ Guidance quality: how sharply the priority map separates targets from distractors.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Serial inspection rate: conjunction search costs roughly 20 to 40 milliseconds per additional item, versus a near-zero slope for feature pop-out.

◦ Attentional blink window: a second target is missed most often 200 to 500 milliseconds after the first.

◦ Rapid serial visual presentation rate in blink studies: roughly ten items per second, about 100 milliseconds per item.

◦ Duration of the preattentive stage as a separate interval: REFUSED, because the parallel feature stage runs continuously rather than for a fixed measurable period, and the literature supports no single value.

• MODES.

◦ Preattentive parallel mode: features registered across the whole field at once; always on, no trigger needed.

◦ Attentive serial mode: one location bound at a time; triggered whenever the task requires feature conjunctions or object identity.

◦ Guided mode: serial visits ordered by the priority map; engaged whenever a target template is available to weight the map.

◦ Blink (busy) mode: new targets refused while consolidation of a previous target is in progress; triggered by successful target detection, released after consolidation completes.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Illusory conjunctions: features from different objects wrongly combined when attention is diluted or displays are too brief.

◦ Inattentional blindness: fully visible objects never reach awareness because the binder never visits them.

◦ Change blindness: large scene changes missed when the transient cue is masked by an interruption.

◦ The attentional blink: the second of two rapid targets lost during consolidation of the first.

◦ Balint syndrome: bilateral parietal damage producing severe binding failure, with patients able to see only one object at a time.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called per_item_time with initial value thirty.
Create an empty list variable called display.
For each item to be displayed, append its colour, its orientation, and its location to display.
Read the target colour and the target orientation from the task instructions.
Create an empty list variable called priority_map.
For each item in display, perform the following steps.
    Create a number variable called score with initial value zero.
    If the item colour equals the target colour, add one to score.
    If the item orientation equals the target orientation, add one to score.
    Add a random guidance noise value between zero and one point five to score.
    Append the item and its score to priority_map.
Sort priority_map from highest score to lowest score.
Create a number variable called elapsed with initial value zero.
For each entry in priority_map, perform the following steps.
    Add per_item_time to elapsed.
    If the entry colour equals the target colour and the entry orientation equals the target orientation, return target found and elapsed.
Return target absent and elapsed.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for building random search displays.
import random

# Create the serial inspection time per item in milliseconds.
PER_ITEM_MS = 30

# Define a function that runs one guided conjunction search.
def guided_search(display, t_colour, t_orient):
    # Create an empty list variable called priority_map.
    priority_map = []
    # For each item, score it by how many target features it shares.
    for item in display:
        # Start the score at zero.
        score = 0
        # If the item colour matches the target colour, add one.
        if item["colour"] == t_colour:
            score = score + 1
        # If the item orientation matches the target orientation, add one.
        if item["orient"] == t_orient:
            score = score + 1
        # Add guidance noise between zero and one point five to the score.
        score = score + random.uniform(0, 1.5)
        # Append the score and the item to the priority map.
        priority_map.append((score, random.random(), item))
    # Sort the map from highest score to lowest, breaking ties randomly.
    priority_map.sort(reverse=True)
    # Create a number variable called elapsed with initial value zero.
    elapsed = 0
    # Visit items in priority order, binding one at a time.
    for score, tiebreak, item in priority_map:
        # Add the per-item inspection time to the elapsed clock.
        elapsed = elapsed + PER_ITEM_MS
        # If both features match, the conjunction is bound and found.
        if item["colour"] == t_colour and item["orient"] == t_orient:
            return "found", elapsed
    # If no item matched, report the target absent with the total time.
    return "absent", elapsed

# Define a function that builds a display with one target and many distractors.
def make_display(n):
    # Build distractors sharing exactly one feature with the target.
    items = []
    # For each distractor slot, choose red horizontal or green vertical.
    for i in range(n - 1):
        if random.random() < 0.5:
            items.append({"colour": "red", "orient": "horizontal"})
        else:
            items.append({"colour": "green", "orient": "vertical"})
    # Append the red vertical target itself.
    items.append({"colour": "red", "orient": "vertical"})
    # Return the completed display.
    return items

# For increasing set sizes, print the mean search time over many runs.
for n in [4, 8, 16, 32]:
    # Average the elapsed time across five hundred simulated searches.
    times = [guided_search(make_display(n), "red", "vertical")[1]
             for _ in range(500)]
    # Print the set size and the mean search time in milliseconds.
    print("set size", n, ": mean search time", round(sum(times) / len(times)), "ms")




================================================================================

PART FOUR. MEMORY: RETAINING AND RECONSTRUCTING

================================================================================

CHAPTER 16. SENSORY AND SHORT-TERM STORES (PROCESS)

This chapter begins the study of memory, and it starts at the front door, with the very brief and very short stores that hold information for moments rather than for a lifetime.

Memory is not a single thing but a set of systems that operate over different time scales, and this chapter covers the fastest of them.

In systems terms these front-end stores are buffers: high-capacity but rapidly decaying holding areas whose job is to keep raw input alive just long enough for slower stages to read what they need.

Understanding these early stores matters because everything that ends up in lasting memory has to pass through them first, so they set the terms on which the rest of memory operates.


16.1 The modal model

This section describes the classic overall picture of memory as a flow of information through a series of stores, a picture so widely adopted that it earned the name modal, meaning the standard or most common model.


16.1.1 The sensory, short-term, and long-term stores

The modal model, laid out by Richard Atkinson and Richard Shiffrin in 1968, pictures memory as three stores arranged in sequence, through which information passes.

The first is sensory memory, a very brief, high-capacity hold that keeps a faithful sensory copy of what just hit the senses for a fraction of a second.

The second is short-term memory, a limited store that holds a small amount of information for a matter of seconds, roughly what you are consciously thinking about right now.

The third is long-term memory, a vast and durable store that can hold information for years or a lifetime.

Information flows from sensory memory into short-term memory if it is attended to, and from short-term into long-term memory if it is processed enough, often through rehearsal, meaning the repeating or working-over of material to keep it alive and pass it along.

The model is called a structural account because it proposes distinct storage boxes, and it also describes control processes, the strategies such as rehearsal that the person uses to move information between the boxes.

As a system, the modal model is a three-tier cache hierarchy: a huge, sub-second front buffer, a small, seconds-long working tier, and a vast, slow-writing archive, with attention as the read policy from tier one to tier two and rehearsal as the write policy from tier two to tier three.

This three-store framework has been revised heavily over the decades, but it remains the shared starting point for almost all later theories of memory, which is why it is worth learning first.


16.1.2 The transfer between stores and its controversies

This sub-section examines the arrows in the model, the claimed movement of information between stores, which turned out to be more contentious than the boxes themselves.

The original model leaned heavily on rehearsal as the engine of transfer, proposing that the longer an item sat in short-term memory being rehearsed, the more likely it was to enter long-term memory.

This simple idea ran into trouble.

Fergus Craik and Robert Lockhart argued in 1972 that sheer repetition is a poor predictor of lasting memory, and that what matters instead is the depth of processing, meaning whether you engage with the meaning of material rather than just its surface.

Merely repeating a word over and over, which they called maintenance rehearsal, does surprisingly little to build long-term memory, while thinking about its meaning, called elaborative rehearsal, does far more.

A further controversy concerns whether short-term and long-term memory are genuinely separate stores at all, since some theorists argue that short-term memory is simply the currently activated portion of long-term memory rather than a separate box.

The evidence usually cited for a real separation includes patients whose long-term memory is devastated while their short-term memory is spared, and the opposite pattern in other patients, a double pattern that suggests two distinct systems.

In systems terms the debate is between two architectures with different predictions: separate stores predict that damage can knock out one tier while sparing the other, exactly the double pattern seen in patients, while an activation account predicts that short-term failures should always track the state of the underlying long-term representations.

The reasonable modern position is that the distinction between short-term and long-term memory is real and useful, but that the neat one-way flow of the original diagram is too simple, and the systems interact richly in both directions.


16.2 Sensory memory

This section zooms in on the first and briefest store, the fleeting sensory trace that holds a rich copy of the world for a moment before it fades.


16.2.1 Iconic memory and the partial-report advantage

Iconic memory is the visual form of sensory memory, a brief snapshot-like store that holds a large amount of visual detail for roughly a quarter to a half of a second.

The word icon here just means a visual image, and the store is named for that fleeting image.

The classic evidence comes from George Sperling's experiments in 1960, which cleverly measured a store that vanishes too fast to report in full.

Sperling flashed a grid of letters, for example three rows of four, for a fraction of a second, and when he asked people to report as many as they could, the whole-report condition, they managed only about four or five.

The trick was the partial-report condition, in which a tone sounded just after the grid disappeared, high, medium, or low, telling the person to report only the top, middle, or bottom row.

Because the tone came after the grid was gone, people could only succeed by reading the answer off a lingering mental image, and they did well on whichever row was cued, showing that nearly the whole grid was briefly available.

This gap, between the many letters momentarily available and the few that survive long enough to report, is called the partial-report advantage, and it proves that iconic memory briefly holds far more than we can report before it fades.

Sperling further showed that the advantage shrinks as the tone is delayed, disappearing after about a second, which measures how fast the icon decays.

The systems reading of Sperling's method is a race between decay and readout: the buffer holds the full grid but its contents decay in well under a second, the readout channel into short-term memory transfers only a few items in that window, and the delayed cue measures the buffer's decay curve directly by moving the readout start time.


16.2.2 Echoic memory

Echoic memory is the auditory form of sensory memory, the brief store that holds a trace of what you just heard, and it is the reason a sound seems to linger for a moment after it stops.

The word echoic comes from echo, capturing the way the sound seems to persist.

Echoic memory lasts noticeably longer than iconic memory, on the order of a few seconds rather than a fraction of a second, which makes sense because sound unfolds over time and must be held long enough to be interpreted.

A familiar everyday sign of echoic memory is the experience of not quite catching what someone said, asking what, and then finding you can suddenly replay and understand the words after all, because the trace was still available.

Laboratory studies use methods analogous to Sperling's partial-report technique but with sounds presented to different locations, and they find a similar brief, high-capacity auditory store that fades over a few seconds.

In systems terms echoic memory is a rolling audio buffer holding the last few seconds of input: its input is the raw auditory stream, its output is replayable material for speech and music interpretation, and its longer time constant matches the temporal structure of the signal it serves.

Echoic memory is especially important for understanding speech and music, because both require holding recent sounds in mind long enough to relate them to what comes next.


16.3 Short-term memory

This section covers the second store, the small workspace that holds the handful of items you are actively aware of, and the questions of how much it holds, how its contents are ordered, and why they are lost.


16.3.1 Capacity, the magical number, and chunking

This sub-section is about how much short-term memory can hold, one of the most famous questions in all of psychology.

In 1956 George Miller wrote a celebrated paper titled The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two, observing that people can typically hold about seven items in short-term memory, give or take a couple.

Miller himself treated the number partly with humour and did not mean it as an exact law, but it became one of the best-known figures in the field.

The crucial refinement is that the limit is measured not in raw items but in chunks, a chunk being a meaningful unit that groups several pieces of information into one.

For example, the string of letters F B I C I A can be held as six separate letters or, if you recognise them, as two familiar chunks, FBI and CIA, which is far easier.

Chunking is powerful because it lets long-term knowledge repackage information into fewer, denser units, which is a large part of why experts can seem to hold so much in mind within their field.

More recent work, especially by Nelson Cowan in 2001, argues that when chunking and rehearsal are prevented so that pure capacity is measured, the real limit is closer to about four chunks rather than seven.

In systems terms the capacity limit counts slots, not bits: the store holds roughly three to five chunk pointers, each pointer referencing an arbitrarily rich structure in long-term memory, so chunking is a compression scheme that raises effective throughput without changing slot count.

The reasonable summary is that the honest number is smaller than Miller's famous seven, roughly three to five chunks under strict conditions, and that chunking is the trick by which people seem to exceed it.


16.3.2 Serial position, primacy, and recency

This sub-section is about a reliable pattern in how well we remember a list depending on where an item sat in it.

When people try to recall a list of items in any order, their success depends strongly on position, and plotting accuracy against position gives a U-shaped curve called the serial position curve.

The primacy effect is the better memory for items at the beginning of the list, thought to arise because those early items received more rehearsal and had a better chance of entering long-term memory.

The recency effect is the better memory for items at the end of the list, thought to arise because those last items are still sitting in short-term memory, freshly available, when recall begins.

A classic piece of evidence that these two effects have different causes is that delaying recall by a filled interval, such as counting backward for half a minute, wipes out the recency effect while leaving the primacy effect intact.

This makes sense because the delay lets the fragile short-term contents fade, removing recency, while the durably stored early items survive, preserving primacy.

The systems reading is that recall draws on two stores with different time constants: the recency portion is read from the fast, decaying buffer and vanishes after roughly 30 seconds of distraction, while the primacy portion is read from the durable archive that the early items reached through extra rehearsal.

The serial position curve is important because it offers behavioural support for the distinction between a short-term and a long-term store, since the two ends of the curve seem to draw on different systems.


16.3.3 Decay against interference as the cause of loss

This sub-section addresses a basic question: when something slips out of short-term memory, why does it go.

There are two classic answers, and they have competed for decades.

The decay account says that memory traces simply fade with the passage of time if they are not refreshed, so forgetting is caused by time itself, like a footprint smoothed away.

The interference account says that time as such is not the culprit, and that items are lost because other items crowd them out or overwrite them, so forgetting is caused by competition, not by the clock.

Interference comes in two directions: proactive interference, where older material disrupts memory for newer material, and retroactive interference, where newer material disrupts memory for older material.

The two accounts predict differently in systems terms: pure decay predicts loss that grows with elapsed time even in an empty channel, while pure interference predicts no loss in a silent delay and loss proportional to the amount of competing material, whatever the clock says.

Distinguishing decay from interference is genuinely hard, because in ordinary situations time and competing material go together, so a delay during which more items arrive could hurt memory for either reason.

The debate is not fully resolved, and honest reviews note that the evidence is mixed, but many researchers lean toward interference, and some influential accounts argue that pure time-based decay plays little or no role once interference is controlled.

For a builder of cognitive systems the practical point stands regardless of which side is right: a small, fast store loses its contents quickly unless they are actively maintained or protected from competing information.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Raw sensory streams: the full visual and auditory input, written automatically into the iconic and echoic buffers.

◦ Attention selections: the pointer from Chapters 13 to 15 choosing which buffered items are read into short-term memory.

◦ Long-term knowledge: chunk definitions that let incoming material be recoded into fewer, denser units.

◦ Rehearsal commands: control-process instructions to refresh or elaborate held items.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ The current short-term contents: the handful of active chunks available to thought, report, and response.

◦ Transfer candidates: items forwarded toward long-term memory, with success governed more by depth of processing than by repetition count.

◦ Recall output: reported items whose accuracy by list position traces the serial position curve.

• STATE.

◦ The decaying iconic and echoic traces with their onset times.

◦ The occupied short-term slots and the identity of each held chunk.

◦ The rehearsal loop's current refresh order.

◦ Accumulated interference from prior and subsequent material.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Sensory buffer capacity (large: essentially the whole display for the icon's brief life).

◦ Short-term capacity in chunks (roughly three to five under strict measurement).

◦ Rehearsal refresh rate and its type, maintenance versus elaborative.

◦ Interference weights for proactive and retroactive competition.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Iconic memory decay: the partial-report advantage fades within roughly 250 to 500 milliseconds and is gone by about 1 second.

◦ Echoic memory persistence: on the order of 2 to 4 seconds.

◦ Unrehearsed short-term retention: severe loss within roughly 15 to 30 seconds of filled delay, as in counting-backward studies.

◦ A pure time-based decay rate for short-term memory: REFUSED, because the field has not separated decay from interference cleanly enough to certify a rate for time alone.

• MODES.

◦ Passive registration: sensory buffers fill automatically from input; always on, no trigger.

◦ Whole-report readout: unguided transfer that salvages only about four items before the icon fades.

◦ Partial-report readout: cue-guided transfer that reads any requested subset while the trace survives; triggered by a selection cue arriving before decay completes.

◦ Maintenance rehearsal: cyclic refresh that keeps items alive without deepening them; triggered by the goal of holding material briefly.

◦ Elaborative rehearsal: meaning-based processing that builds durable long-term traces; triggered by the goal of lasting retention.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Buffer expiry: unattended sensory detail is lost within a second, the everyday miss of what was just seen.

◦ Overflow displacement: new items push out old ones once the three to five chunk slots are full.

◦ Interference corruption: proactive and retroactive competition overwrite held items.

◦ Recency wipe-out: a filled delay before recall erases the short-term tail of a list.

◦ Rehearsal futility: maintenance rehearsal gives an illusion of learning while building little durable memory.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called icon_half_life with initial value zero point three.
Create a number variable called span with initial value four.
Create an empty list variable called iconic_buffer.
For each element on the display, append the element and the current time to iconic_buffer.
Create an empty list variable called short_term.
For each time step in the simulation, perform the following steps.
    For each element in iconic_buffer, calculate its surviving strength as one half raised to the power of its age divided by icon_half_life.
        If the surviving strength is less than a random number between zero and one, remove the element from iconic_buffer.
    If an attention cue is present, perform the following steps.
        Select the cued element from iconic_buffer if it still survives.
        If short_term already holds span items, remove the oldest item from short_term.
        Append the selected element to short_term.
    If rehearsal is active, move the oldest item in short_term to the newest position, refreshing it.
    Otherwise, remove each item in short_term with a small random probability, representing loss.
Return the final contents of short_term.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for exponential decay and the random module for chance.
import math
import random

# Create the iconic half life in seconds.
ICON_HALF_LIFE = 0.3
# Create the short-term span in chunks.
SPAN = 4
# Create the per-step loss probability when rehearsal is off.
LOSS_P = 0.08

# Define a function that simulates the icon, readout, and rehearsal.
def run_buffer(display, cue_times, rehearse):
    # Stamp every displayed element into the iconic buffer at time zero.
    iconic = [(element, 0.0) for element in display]
    # Create an empty list for the short-term store.
    short_term = []
    # Step the clock forward in ticks of one tenth of a second.
    for step in range(1, 21):
        # Calculate the current time in seconds.
        now = step * 0.1
        # Create an empty list of surviving iconic elements.
        survivors = []
        # For each buffered element, test whether its trace survives this tick.
        for element, onset in iconic:
            # Calculate survival probability from exponential decay over the tick.
            p = math.exp(-math.log(2) * 0.1 / ICON_HALF_LIFE)
            # Keep the element only if a random draw falls under that probability.
            if random.random() < p:
                survivors.append((element, onset))
        # Replace the iconic buffer with the survivors.
        iconic = survivors
        # If attention cues a readout at this tick, transfer one element.
        if step in cue_times and iconic:
            # Take the first surviving element from the icon.
            element, onset = iconic.pop(0)
            # If the store is full, evict the oldest chunk.
            if len(short_term) >= SPAN:
                short_term.pop(0)
            # Append the element to the short-term store.
            short_term.append(element)
        # If rehearsal is on, refresh the oldest item by moving it to the end.
        if rehearse and short_term:
            short_term.append(short_term.pop(0))
        # Otherwise, each held item risks loss this tick.
        elif short_term:
            short_term = [x for x in short_term if random.random() > LOSS_P]
    # Return what remains in the short-term store.
    return short_term

# Build a twelve-letter display like Sperling's grid.
letters = list("KLBYNXFDJSRT")
# Cue readouts on the first six ticks, while the icon is still alive.
cues = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
# Print what survives after two seconds with rehearsal on and off.
print("with rehearsal:", run_buffer(letters, cues, True))
print("without rehearsal:", run_buffer(letters, cues, False))

CHAPTER 17. WORKING MEMORY (PROCESS)

This chapter is about the small mental workspace you use to hold and juggle information for the few seconds you are actually using it.

Working memory is the name for the system that keeps a phone number alive in your head while you dial it, or holds the first half of a sentence while you read the second half.

It matters because almost everything else the mind does, from understanding speech to solving a puzzle, depends on being able to keep a few things in mind and work on them at the same time.

The older term for this idea was short-term memory, which mostly meant simple storage, and working memory is the richer modern idea that adds the active manipulation of what is stored.

Seen as an engineered system, working memory is a small, fast, volatile buffer: it accepts inputs from perception and from long-term memory, holds a handful of active representations as its state, refreshes them against loss, and publishes their contents to reasoning, language, and action systems on demand.


17.1 The multicomponent model

The most influential picture of working memory says it is not one thing but a team of parts that each do a different job.

This picture was proposed by Alan Baddeley and Graham Hitch in 1974, and it is usually called the multicomponent model.

In systems terms, it is a modular architecture: two specialised storage buffers, a later-added binding buffer, and a controller that allocates a limited attentional resource among them.

The following sub-sections walk through each member of that team in turn.


17.1.1 The central executive

The central executive is the boss of the working memory system, the part that decides what to pay attention to and how to coordinate the other parts.

In plain terms, it is the mental manager that directs your limited attention, chooses which task to work on, and switches between jobs.

Baddeley described it as a control system with limited attentional capacity, meaning it can only supervise so much at once before it becomes overloaded.

It does not store information itself in the original model; instead it steers the storage parts and shares out attention among them.

As a mechanism, its inputs are current task goals and the states of the storage buffers, its outputs are allocation and switching commands, and its characteristic timescale is the task-switch cost of a few hundred milliseconds that appears whenever it must reconfigure from one job to another.

Because it was defined mostly by what it does rather than by a clear mechanism, critics complained that the central executive was a bit like a homunculus, which means a little person inside the head doing all the clever work without being explained.

In response, later versions broke the executive down into more specific abilities, such as focusing attention, dividing attention between tasks, and switching between tasks.

Researchers today often link these executive abilities to what are called executive functions, a set of control skills covered in a later chapter, and this connection is one of the model's most fruitful legacies.


17.1.2 The phonological loop and its behavioural signatures

The phonological loop is the part of working memory that holds sound-based and speech-based information for a short time.

You can think of it as an inner voice combined with an inner ear that lets you silently repeat and briefly store words and numbers.

Baddeley proposed that it has two pieces, a store that holds speech sounds for a couple of seconds before they fade, and a rehearsal process that refreshes those sounds by silently repeating them, which is often called subvocal rehearsal.

The systems reading is a decaying buffer plus a refresh loop: input is speech-coded material from hearing or from reading recoded into sound, output is ordered verbal content for recall or language processes, and the critical time constant is a trace lifetime of roughly two seconds unless rehearsal rewrites the trace first.

A behavioural signature means a reliable pattern in people's performance that reveals a hidden mechanism at work, and the phonological loop has several famous ones.

The first is the word-length effect, which is the finding that people remember fewer long words than short words, because long words take longer to rehearse and so more of them fade before they can be refreshed.

The second is the phonological similarity effect, which is the finding that lists of words that sound alike, such as cat, cap, and mat, are harder to recall in order than words that sound different, because the sound-based store confuses similar sounds.

The third is articulatory suppression, which is what happens when you force a person to say something irrelevant out loud, such as repeating the word the again and again, and this blocks rehearsal and wipes out the other effects, showing that the inner voice really is doing the rehearsing.

The fourth is the irrelevant speech effect, where unattended background speech disrupts recall because it intrudes into the same sound-based store.

Together these findings are strong evidence that verbal short-term memory really does rely on a sound-based code kept alive by silent rehearsal.


17.1.3 The visuospatial sketchpad

The visuospatial sketchpad is the part of working memory that holds visual and spatial information, such as what things look like and where they are.

In everyday terms, it is the mental scratch pad you use to picture a route, imagine how furniture would fit in a room, or keep track of where a moving object is.

Baddeley and later colleagues suggested it can be divided into a visual part, which handles form and colour, and a spatial part, which handles location and movement, though the exact split is still debated.

As a mechanism, its inputs are visual features and locations from perception or from imagery generation, its outputs are object and position estimates consumed by navigation, mental rotation, and action planning, and its capacity limit of about three or four objects is reached within a few hundred milliseconds of display onset.

The evidence that this system is separate from the phonological loop comes from the finding that a visual or spatial task and a verbal task interfere with each other far less than two visual tasks do, which suggests they draw on different stores.

For example, you can often repeat a string of numbers out loud while also tracking a moving dot, because each task uses a different subsystem, but tracking two moving dots at once is much harder.

This subsystem is important for navigation, for mechanical reasoning, and for mental imagery, which is the ability to picture things in the mind's eye.


17.1.4 The episodic buffer

The episodic buffer is a part that Baddeley added to the model much later, in the year 2000, to fix two gaps the original three parts could not fill.

The first gap was that the sound-based store and the picture-based store use different codes with no shared format, so nothing in the old model explained how a single united experience, such as remembering a person's face together with their name, could be held at once.

The second gap was that the old model did not explain how working memory talks to long-term memory, which is your vast permanent store of knowledge.

The episodic buffer is described as a limited store that binds information from the different subsystems, and from long-term memory, into single integrated chunks, called episodes, that you can be consciously aware of.

You can picture it as a mental meeting room where sounds, images, and stored knowledge are brought together into one combined scene.

In systems terms it is a multiplexing buffer: inputs arrive in incompatible codes from the loop, the sketchpad, and long-term memory, and the output is a small number of bound, multimodal chunks in a common format that consciousness and the central executive can read.

It is thought to be controlled by the central executive and to be the workspace where conscious, unified experience in working memory is assembled.

Fifty years on, the multicomponent model remains one of the field's most cited frameworks, and its authors continue to refine it, though as the next section shows it is not the only way to think about working memory.


17.2 The alternative frameworks

The multicomponent model treats working memory as a set of dedicated boxes, but other researchers describe it quite differently, and it is honest to say there is no single agreed theory.

Several major alternatives see working memory not as separate stores but as a special state of attention or of long-term memory.

In systems language, the debate is whether working memory is dedicated hardware, separate buffers with their own storage, or a privileged access mode over the long-term store, the same memory addressed with elevated activation.

The following sub-sections lay out the main rivals so you can see where they agree and disagree.


17.2.1 Working memory as activated long-term memory and the focus of attention

One influential alternative says there is no separate short-term store at all, and that working memory is simply the currently activated portion of your long-term memory.

On this view, associated most closely with Nelson Cowan and with earlier ideas from theorists such as James Nairne and Anders Ericsson, remembering something for a moment is just a matter of that stored knowledge being switched on and made temporarily more active.

Cowan added an important refinement called the focus of attention, which is a very narrow spotlight that holds only a handful of items in a state of direct, immediate access.

Inside this framework, items in the broader activated store are quickly available, but only the few items inside the focus of attention are being directly used right now.

The systems reading is a two-ring cache: a wide outer ring of activated long-term representations with fast but indirect access, and an inner focus holding about four items with immediate access, with attention deciding which items are promoted inward or demoted outward from moment to moment.

This picture is attractive because it explains neatly how working memory and long-term knowledge are connected, since they are, in effect, the same store seen in two states.

It also gives a natural home for the well-supported estimate, discussed later, that the focus of attention holds only about four items at once.


17.2.2 Working memory as executive attention and its link to fluid intelligence

A closely related framework, developed by Randall Engle, Michael Kane, and their colleagues, argues that the heart of working memory is executive attention, meaning the ability to control attention and keep a goal in mind despite distraction.

On this account, what really varies between people is not the size of a storage box but how well they can hold information in an active state while resisting interference and intrusion.

The striking finding that drove this view is that measures of working memory capacity correlate strongly with measures of fluid intelligence, which is the ability to reason and solve new problems that do not depend on prior knowledge.

In plain terms, people who are better at holding and protecting information in mind also tend to score higher on tests of on-the-spot reasoning.

Because this sub-section describes a theoretical position rather than a distinct mechanism, the systems statement of the difference is this: a pure storage account predicts that individual differences should appear only when item count is high, while the executive attention account predicts that they should appear whenever distraction must be resisted, even at low loads, and the data favour the second prediction.

The proposed explanation is that both abilities lean on the same underlying skill of controlling attention, especially the skill of keeping a relevant goal active while pushing away distractions and unwanted thoughts.

This is one of the most robust and important results in the study of individual differences, though researchers still debate exactly which ingredient of attention control does the work.


17.2.3 Time-based resource sharing and interference accounts

A third family of theories asks a more basic question, which is why the contents of working memory are lost at all, and the answers split into two camps.

The time-based resource sharing model, developed by Pierre Barrouillet and Valerie Camos, proposes that memory traces fade with time unless attention is used to refresh them, and that attention must be shared between refreshing old items and processing new ones.

On this view, the more of your time is taken up by other processing, the less time is left to refresh the fading memories, and so more is lost, which is why the pace and difficulty of a task matters so much.

The rival interference account argues that time itself is not the enemy, and that forgetting instead comes from items overwriting, blurring, or competing with one another.

In an interference account, a memory is lost not because it faded on the clock but because other similar items degraded it or crowded it out.

The two camps make different systems predictions: a decay-plus-refresh system predicts that loss should scale with the fraction of time attention is occupied elsewhere, regardless of what the distracting material is, while an interference system predicts that loss should scale with the similarity between old and new material, regardless of elapsed time.

This debate between decay-with-time and interference is genuinely unsettled, and careful experiments have been used to support each side, so the current honest position is that both processes may contribute.


17.3 The nature of the capacity limit

Everyone agrees that working memory can hold only a little at once, but there is real disagreement about what form that limit takes.

This section looks at how much fits, and at whether the limit is best described as a fixed number of slots or a shared pool that can be spread thin.

In systems terms, the question is whether the buffer is quantised, a fixed count of discrete slots, or continuous, a fixed budget of representational resource that can be divided ever more thinly.


17.3.1 The slots against continuous-resource debate

The oldest famous claim about capacity came from George Miller in 1956, who suggested the limit was about seven items, plus or minus two, a figure he half-jokingly called the magical number seven.

Later work by Nelson Cowan, published in 2001, argued that once you strip away tricks like rehearsal and grouping, the true limit is smaller, roughly four chunks of information, a figure sometimes called the magical number four.

Beyond the exact number lies a deeper argument about the very shape of the limit, and this is the slots against continuous-resource debate, most sharply studied in visual working memory.

The slot theory says working memory has a fixed, small number of discrete slots, so it can hold about three or four items with good detail, and anything beyond that is simply not stored and must be guessed.

The continuous-resource theory says instead that working memory is a shared pool of a limited resource that can be spread across any number of items, so that the more items you try to hold, the less precisely each one is remembered.

The practical difference is testable, because slot models predict some items are remembered sharply and the rest not at all, while resource models predict that everything gets fuzzier as the load grows.

Stated as system behaviour, a slot store fails by dropping items when demand exceeds the slot count, while a resource store fails by degrading precision on every item as demand rises, and measured error distributions show elements of both.

Neither pure version fits all the data perfectly, and many current researchers favour hybrid models, in which there is both a limit on the number of items and a graded loss of precision, so this remains an active and unresolved question.


17.3.2 Compression, chunking, and expertise

If capacity is so small, the natural question is how anyone manages to hold complex material in mind, and the answer is that the mind repackages information to make each unit count for more.

Chunking is the process of grouping separate items into a single meaningful unit, so that a chunk, rather than a raw item, is what fills a slot.

For example, the letters F, B, and I are three items, but for someone who knows the agency, FBI is a single familiar chunk, and the digit sequence one, seven, seven, six can become one date for someone who recognises it.

Chunking works by drawing on long-term knowledge, which is why the same string is easier to hold for a person who finds meaning in it, and this directly links capacity to what you already know.

Compression is a broader term for any way the mind recodes information into a more efficient form, squeezing out redundancy so that more fits within the same limit.

In systems terms, chunking is a compression codec that runs at encoding: input is a raw item stream, the codebook is the pattern library in long-term memory, and the output is a shorter stream of pointers to known patterns, so effective capacity is the slot count multiplied by the average chunk size the codebook affords.

This is why expertise matters so much, because an expert has a large store of learned patterns and can package incoming information into a few large, meaningful chunks that a novice would have to hold as many small ones.

The classic demonstration is that chess masters can glance at a real game position and reproduce it almost perfectly, far outperforming novices, but this advantage vanishes when the pieces are placed at random, showing that the skill is meaningful chunking rather than raw memory power.


17.4 The neural basis

Working memory is not just a psychological idea; it corresponds to real activity in the brain, and studying that activity has both confirmed and complicated the psychological picture.

This section looks at how the brain seems to hold information over short delays, and at a lively recent debate about the mechanism.

In systems terms, the question is how a volatile buffer is physically implemented: by keeping a signal actively cycling, or by briefly rewriting the hardware itself.


17.4.1 Persistent activity in prefrontal cortex

The classic neural account of working memory is that certain neurons keep firing steadily during the delay while information is being held, and this steady firing is called persistent activity.

The prefrontal cortex, which is the front part of the brain just behind the forehead and is heavily involved in control and planning, is the region where this was first and most famously observed.

In pioneering studies with monkeys, researchers such as Joaquin Fuster and Patricia Goldman-Rakic found neurons that fired continuously during the gap between seeing a cue and having to respond, as though the cell were holding the memory alive by its own ongoing activity.

The natural interpretation is that a memory is kept in mind by a self-sustaining loop of neural firing, sometimes described using the mathematics of attractor networks, which are stable patterns of activity that maintain themselves.

The systems reading is dynamic storage that must be continuously refreshed, like a memory chip that loses its contents the moment power is interrupted: input is a transient cue, state is the ongoing firing pattern sustained across delays of seconds, and output is the reinstated code at response time.

This view dominated for decades and fits nicely with the idea of an active, effortful workspace, since holding the activity going takes continuous energy and can be disrupted by distraction.


17.4.2 Activity-silent and synaptic accounts

More recent work has challenged the assumption that a memory must be held by continuous firing, and has proposed that information can be stored in a hidden, activity-silent form.

The activity-silent idea, developed prominently by Mark Stokes and colleagues from around 2013, is that during a delay the relevant neurons can fall quiet, yet the memory survives in temporary changes to the connections between neurons.

The proposed storage mechanism is short-term synaptic plasticity, which means rapid, brief changes in the strength of synapses, the junctions where neurons pass signals to one another.

In this account a memory can rest silently in briefly strengthened synapses, perhaps through leftover calcium building up at the connections, and can be read back out later by a pulse of activity, rather than needing to be held aloud the whole time.

As a system, this is passive storage with an explicit read operation: the write briefly reconfigures connection weights, the state persists for seconds without any signal on the wires, and a nonspecific ping of activity reads the pattern back out.

Evidence for this comes from findings that the pattern of brain activity holding a memory is often dynamic and can even disappear and then be revived, which is hard to square with a simple steady loop.

The current consensus is not that one account is right and the other wrong, but that both persistent activity and activity-silent synaptic storage occur, and the brain may use whichever suits the moment, so the two mechanisms are best seen as complementary rather than rivals.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Perceptual codes: speech-coded verbal material from audition and reading, and visual object and location codes from vision, delivered as the outputs of the short-term sensory stores of Chapter 16.

◦ Retrieved content: chunks and pattern codes pulled up from long-term memory when needed for the current task.

◦ Task goals: the current goal and priority signals from executive control, which determine what is admitted, refreshed, and dropped.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ The active contents: a small set of bound chunks in a common format, readable by reasoning, language comprehension and production, planning, and action systems.

◦ Rehearsal traffic: refreshed verbal codes recycled internally through the phonological loop.

◦ Encoding candidates: active items handed to long-term memory for possible storage.

• STATE.

◦ About four active chunks, each with its current activation level and its binding of features into a unit.

◦ The current allocation of attention across items and subsystems, including which item sits in the focus of attention.

◦ The rehearsal queue order for verbal material.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Capacity: about 4 chunks in the focus of attention; about 7 plus or minus 2 when rehearsal and grouping are allowed.

◦ Refresh rate: how often attention revisits each stored item, set by the free time the concurrent task leaves.

◦ Chunk size: how much raw material each chunk compresses, set by expertise and the long-term pattern library.

◦ Displacement policy: which item is dropped when a new item arrives at full capacity, typically the least recently refreshed.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Phonological trace lifetime: about 2 seconds without rehearsal.

◦ Focus of attention shift and task switch: on the order of a few hundred milliseconds.

◦ Maintenance duration: seconds to tens of seconds with active refresh, after which content must be re-encoded or handed to long-term memory.

◦ Decay rate of a single unrefreshed trace as an exact exponential constant: REFUSED, because the decay against interference debate means no agreed pure decay constant exists.

• MODES.

◦ Maintenance mode: attention is devoted to refreshing stored items, triggered when the concurrent task leaves free time.

◦ Processing mode: attention is captured by ongoing computation and refreshing pauses, triggered by task demands, at the cost of stored items fading or suffering interference.

◦ Manipulation mode: stored items are actively transformed, reordered, or combined rather than merely held, triggered by task instructions that require updating.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Overload: items beyond capacity are displaced or degraded, producing omissions and guesses.

◦ Similarity confusion: sound-alike or look-alike items swap or blur, as in the phonological similarity effect.

◦ Distraction loss: interruption of rehearsal or attention capture wipes fragile content, as in articulatory suppression and the irrelevant speech effect.

◦ Clinical breakdowns: reduced span after prefrontal or parietal damage, and the working memory deficits seen in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and schizophrenia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called capacity with initial value four.
Create an empty list variable called store.
Define a procedure called encode that takes an item.
    If the item is already in the store, move the item to the end of the store and stop.
    If the length of the store equals the capacity, remove the first item from the store.
    Add the item to the end of the store.
Define a procedure called rehearse that takes an item.
    If the item is in the store, move the item to the end of the store.
Define a procedure called recall that takes a probe item.
    If the probe item is in the store, return true.
    Otherwise, return false.
For each incoming item in the input stream, call encode with the incoming item.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a number variable called CAPACITY with initial value four.
CAPACITY = 4

# Define a class called SlotStore to model a slot-limited working memory.
class SlotStore:
    # Define the initialiser, which takes no arguments beyond the store itself.
    def __init__(self):
        # Create an empty list attribute called slots, ordered oldest first.
        self.slots = []

    # Define a method called encode that takes an item.
    def encode(self, item):
        # If the item is already held, refresh it by moving it to the newest position, then stop.
        if item in self.slots:
            # Remove the item from its old position.
            self.slots.remove(item)
            # Add the item at the newest position.
            self.slots.append(item)
            # Return from the method.
            return
        # If the store is full, displace the least recently refreshed item.
        if len(self.slots) == CAPACITY:
            # Remove the oldest item and remember it as the displaced item.
            displaced = self.slots.pop(0)
            # Print a message naming the displaced item.
            print("displaced:", displaced)
        # Add the new item at the newest position.
        self.slots.append(item)

    # Define a method called recall that takes a probe and returns whether it is held.
    def recall(self, probe):
        # Return true when the probe is among the slots, and false otherwise.
        return probe in self.slots

# Create a SlotStore instance called wm.
wm = SlotStore()

# Create a list of nine digit strings to present, more than the store can hold.
digits = ["3", "1", "4", "1", "5", "9", "2", "6", "5"]

# For each digit in the list, encode the digit into working memory.
for d in digits:
    # Call encode with the digit.
    wm.encode(d)

# Print the final contents of the store, oldest first.
print("held:", wm.slots)

# For each digit from the original list, print the digit and whether recall succeeds.
for d in digits:
    # Print the digit and the recall result.
    print(d, wm.recall(d))


CHAPTER 18. LONG-TERM MEMORY SYSTEMS (PROCESS)

This chapter is about the mind's vast and lasting store, the memory that holds your knowledge, your past, and your skills for days, years, or a lifetime.

Long-term memory is not a single warehouse but a set of different systems that store different kinds of information in different ways.

Understanding that it comes in distinct kinds matters because damage or disease can knock out one kind while leaving another untouched, which tells us the systems are genuinely separate.

In systems terms, long-term memory is a family of persistent stores with different write paths, different read interfaces, and different hardware, some readable by consciousness and some readable only through behaviour.

This chapter maps those systems, then looks at two special corners of memory, the memory of your own life and the memory for things you still intend to do, and finally at the surprising discovery that remembering the past and imagining the future share the same machinery.


18.1 The taxonomy of long-term memory

A taxonomy is simply an organised classification, a way of sorting things into named groups, and long-term memory has a well-developed one.

The main division separates memory you can consciously bring to mind and put into words from memory that shows up only in behaviour, and the sub-sections below unpack that scheme.

The engineering criterion behind the taxonomy is the read interface: declarative stores support explicit query and verbal report, while non-declarative stores are write-only from the point of view of consciousness and expose their contents only as changed performance.


18.1.1 Declarative against non-declarative memory

The broadest split in long-term memory is between declarative memory and non-declarative memory, a distinction associated especially with Larry Squire.

Declarative memory is memory for facts and events that you can consciously recall and, as the name suggests, declare or state in words, such as knowing that Paris is a city or recalling what you ate this morning.

Non-declarative memory, also called implicit memory, is memory that shapes your behaviour without conscious recollection, such as knowing how to ride a bicycle or being unconsciously influenced by something you saw earlier.

As mechanisms, the two differ in every interface property: declarative memory takes a single experience as input and can be written in one exposure, while most non-declarative learning takes many repetitions as input and its output is a gradual change in speed, accuracy, or response tendency rather than a reportable fact.

The reason to believe these are truly different systems comes largely from patients with amnesia, which is severe memory loss usually from brain damage.

The most famous case is a patient known for decades by his initials H. M., later revealed as Henry Molaison, who after surgery to his medial temporal lobes could no longer form new declarative memories, yet could still learn new motor skills while having no conscious memory of the practice sessions.

This double pattern, a devastated declarative memory alongside a preserved skill-learning ability, is powerful evidence that the two kinds of memory rely on different brain systems.

Declarative memory depends heavily on the hippocampus and nearby structures in the medial temporal lobe, while various non-declarative forms depend on other regions such as the basal ganglia and cerebellum.


18.1.2 Episodic against semantic memory

Within declarative memory there is a further important split, proposed by Endel Tulving in 1972, between episodic memory and semantic memory.

Episodic memory is memory for specific personal experiences tied to a particular time and place, such as remembering your last birthday or where you left your keys.

Semantic memory is memory for general facts and knowledge about the world that is not tied to any particular occasion of learning, such as knowing that water is made of hydrogen and oxygen, or that a dog is an animal.

In systems terms, an episodic record carries a spatiotemporal index, a stamp of when and where, and is retrieved by reconstructing that context, while a semantic record has had its index stripped away and is retrieved by content alone, which makes it faster to query but impossible to trace to its source.

Tulving argued that episodic memory involves a special kind of conscious re-experiencing, a mental time travel back into the remembered event, which he called autonoetic awareness, meaning a self-knowing awareness that this happened to you.

Semantic memory, by contrast, feels more like simply knowing something, without any sense of reliving the moment you learned it.

The two are connected, since repeated episodes can feed into general knowledge, and much of what you know began as specific experiences whose individual details have faded.

Evidence for the split again comes from patients, since some people with brain damage lose the ability to recall personal events while keeping their general knowledge relatively intact, and the reverse pattern also occurs.


18.1.3 Procedural memory, priming, and conditioning

Non-declarative memory is not one thing either, and it includes at least three important kinds worth naming.

Procedural memory is the memory for skills and habits, the knowing-how that lets you perform actions such as typing, swimming, or reading fluently without consciously recalling the rules.

A hallmark of procedural memory is that it is hard to put into words, since a skilled cyclist cannot easily explain the fine adjustments that keep them upright, yet their body performs them reliably.

As a mechanism, procedural memory takes repeated practice as input, stores compiled sensorimotor routines, and outputs faster and smoother performance over a timescale of many sessions, which is the learning curve treated in Chapter 33.

Priming is a subtler form, in which recent exposure to something makes you faster or more likely to recognise or produce it later, even when you have no conscious memory of the exposure.

For example, if you have just seen the word doctor, you will complete the fragment nur followed by a blank and an e as nurse more readily, without realising why, which is priming at work.

In systems terms priming is a short-lived bias written into perceptual and lexical pathways by a single exposure, raising the readiness of the exposed representation for minutes to days.

Conditioning is the third kind, and it refers to simple learned associations of the sort studied by Ivan Pavlov, in which a neutral signal that reliably precedes an important event comes to trigger a response on its own.

The classic example is a dog that learns to salivate at a bell that has repeatedly preceded food, an association that forms and operates without any need for conscious, declarative recollection.

These non-declarative forms are evolutionarily ancient and widely shared across animals, and they run quietly beneath awareness, which is exactly why they survive when conscious memory is destroyed.


18.2 Autobiographical and prospective memory

Beyond the basic taxonomy, two kinds of memory are especially close to daily life and deserve their own treatment.

One is the memory of your own life story, and the other is memory for the future, the ability to remember to carry out plans, and the sub-sections take each in turn.


18.2.1 The self across time in autobiographical memory

Autobiographical memory is the memory for the events and facts of your own life, and it is what gives you a continuous sense of who you are across time.

It is a blend of episodic and semantic memory, combining specific remembered episodes, such as a particular family holiday, with general personal facts, such as which town you grew up in.

Researchers describe it as organised in layers, from broad lifetime periods, such as your school years, down through general events, down to specific single episodes, and recall usually works top down through these layers.

In systems terms it is a hierarchical index: a query enters at the lifetime-period level, narrows through general events, and resolves to a specific episode, which is why retrieving a particular memory often takes several seconds of deliberate search rather than the instant pop-out of a semantic fact.

One robust finding is the reminiscence bump, which is the tendency of older adults to recall a disproportionate number of memories from roughly their teens to their late twenties, perhaps because this is a formative period rich in novel, identity-defining experiences.

Another is that autobiographical memory is not a neutral record but is shaped by your current self, since your present beliefs, mood, and goals colour which events come to mind and how they are remembered.

Because it links memory to identity, damage to autobiographical memory can be deeply disorienting, robbing a person not just of facts but of the felt story of their own life.


18.2.2 Remembering to act in prospective memory

Prospective memory is the memory for actions you intend to carry out in the future, such as remembering to take medicine at night or to pass on a message when you see a friend.

It is different from ordinary memory because the challenge is not to recall a fact when asked, but to remember, at the right moment and without any prompt, that there was something you meant to do.

Researchers distinguish two types, event-based prospective memory, where a cue in the world reminds you, such as seeing the friend, and time-based prospective memory, where you must act at a certain time with no external cue, which is generally harder.

Prospective memory has two ingredients, a prospective part, which is remembering that there is an intention at all, and a retrospective part, which is remembering what the intended action actually was.

As a mechanism, it is a deferred trigger system: the input is a stored intention paired with a trigger condition, the system must match ongoing perception or elapsed time against that condition over minutes to days, and the output is an interrupt that injects the intended action into current behaviour.

There is an ongoing debate about how the right moment is caught, between accounts that say it takes continuous effortful monitoring of the environment and accounts that say a suitable cue can trigger the intention more automatically, and in systems terms the first predicts a measurable cost on the ongoing task while an intention is pending and the second predicts no cost, with evidence for a situation-dependent mixture of both.

Failures of prospective memory are among the most common and consequential everyday memory lapses, ranging from the harmless, such as forgetting to post a letter, to the tragic, such as forgetting a child in a car.


18.3 The convergence with imagination

One of the most striking discoveries in memory science is that memory is not only about the past, and this section explains why.

It turns out that recalling what happened and imagining what might happen draw on much the same mental and neural machinery.


18.3.1 The shared machinery of remembering the past and simulating the future

For a long time memory was pictured as a kind of recording of the past, but evidence now shows that the very same brain network is active whether you remember a past event or imagine a future one.

Brain imaging studies, along with observations of patients, revealed that a common core network, including the hippocampus and connected midline regions, lights up both when people recall autobiographical events and when they imagine plausible personal futures.

Tellingly, some amnesic patients who cannot recall their past also cannot construct vivid imagined future scenes, which suggests the two abilities depend on one shared system rather than two separate ones.

Daniel Schacter and Donna Rose Addis captured this in what they called the constructive episodic simulation hypothesis, proposed in 2007.

The core idea is that episodic memory is not a faithful playback but a flexible process of pulling apart and recombining stored details, and that this same recombining ability is exactly what is needed to build a novel imagined future.

In systems terms, one generative engine serves two calls: given a query about the past it retrieves and reassembles stored fragments into a remembered scene, and given a query about the future it recombines the same fragments into a simulated scene, so the input differs only in the direction of the request while the assembly machinery is identical.

In this view, remembering and imagining are two uses of a single constructive system, one aimed backward in time and one aimed forward.


18.3.2 Memory as a tool for prospection rather than a record

This convergence leads to a deeper rethinking of what memory is for, and the proposal is that memory evolved less to preserve the past than to help us prepare for the future.

Prospection is the general term for thinking about and mentally simulating the future, and the argument is that the adaptive payoff of memory lies here.

An animal that can recombine fragments of past experience into simulations of what might happen can rehearse plans, weigh options, and anticipate outcomes without having to try them out in the risky real world.

On this account the flexible, reconstructive nature of memory is not a design flaw but the very feature that makes future simulation possible, since a rigid, tape-like record could not be freely recombined into new scenarios.

Stated in systems terms, the design trade is explicit: a lossless append-only log maximises fidelity but supports no recombination, while a fragment store with a constructive assembler supports planning and simulation at the cost of occasional wrong reassembly.

The same flexibility, however, comes at a price, because a system that recombines details can also stitch them together wrongly, which is one root of the memory errors covered in Chapter 20.

So the honest summary is that memory's usefulness for imagining the future and its vulnerability to distortion are two sides of the same coin.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Encoding candidates: bound chunks and episodes handed over from working memory, tagged with context.

◦ Practice traffic: repeated sensorimotor and perceptual exposures that drive procedural learning, priming, and conditioning without explicit hand-over.

◦ Retrieval queries: cues from working memory, perception, and ongoing thought that request stored content.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Retrieved declarative content: facts and reconstructed episodes delivered back into working memory for report and reasoning.

◦ Performance changes: faster, smoother, or biased responding that expresses procedural memory, priming, and conditioned associations.

◦ Simulations: recombined episodic fragments assembled into imagined future or hypothetical scenes for planning.

• STATE.

◦ The semantic knowledge base: content-addressed facts and concepts with no source stamp.

◦ The episodic store: context-stamped event records indexed by the hippocampus.

◦ Compiled skill routines, primed pathway biases, and learned signal-outcome associations in their separate substrates.

◦ Pending intentions with their trigger conditions, for prospective memory.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Write threshold: how much attention, depth, and emotional weight an experience needs before a durable declarative trace is laid down.

◦ Activation decay rate: how fast an unused declarative trace loses retrievability, the parameter d in activation models.

◦ Association strength gain per pairing, for conditioning and priming.

◦ Monitoring allocation: how much attention is spent checking for prospective memory triggers.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Declarative write: a single exposure of seconds can create a lasting episodic trace.

◦ Procedural learning: improvement accrues over many sessions spanning days to years.

◦ Priming persistence: minutes to days depending on the task.

◦ Retention span: hours to decades for consolidated declarative content.

◦ A single universal decay constant for all long-term forgetting: REFUSED, because measured retention depends on material, cueing, and interference, and no one constant fits.

• MODES.

◦ Explicit retrieval mode: a deliberate query reconstructs declarative content, triggered by a question or a goal.

◦ Implicit expression mode: stored learning shapes behaviour without any query, the default for non-declarative forms.

◦ Simulation mode: the episodic machinery runs forward to imagine futures, triggered by planning and prospection demands.

◦ Prospective watch mode: stored intentions are matched against ongoing events and time, triggered by holding an uncompleted intention.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Anterograde amnesia: loss of the declarative write path after medial temporal damage, with non-declarative learning spared, as in patient H. M.

◦ Retrograde amnesia: loss of access to already stored declarative content, typically worst for the most recent memories.

◦ Dissociations: episodic loss with semantic sparing or the reverse, and semantic dementia eroding the knowledge base itself.

◦ Prospective lapses: intentions whose triggers are never matched, from missed medicine doses to catastrophic omissions.

◦ Recombination errors: the constructive engine stitching fragments into scenes that never occurred, the seed of the false memories of Chapter 20.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called decay with initial value point five.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value negative one.
Create an empty dictionary variable called traces, mapping each fact name to a list of its encoding times.
Define a procedure called study that takes a fact name and a time.
    If the fact name is not in traces, add the fact name to traces with an empty list.
    Add the time to the list for the fact name.
Define a procedure called activation that takes a fact name and a current time.
    Create a number variable called total with initial value zero.
    For each encoding time in the list for the fact name, calculate the age as the current time minus the encoding time, raise the age to the power of the negative of decay, and add the result to total.
    Return the natural logarithm of total.
Define a procedure called retrieve that takes a fact name and a current time.
    Calculate the activation of the fact name at the current time.
    If the activation is greater than the threshold, return true.
    Otherwise, return false.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for the logarithm function.
import math

# Create a number variable called DECAY with initial value 0.5, the standard base-level decay parameter.
DECAY = 0.5

# Create a number variable called THRESHOLD with initial value negative one, the retrieval threshold.
THRESHOLD = -1.0

# Create an empty dictionary called traces, mapping each fact name to a list of its encoding times in seconds.
traces = {}

# Define a procedure called study that takes a fact name and a time.
def study(fact, time):
    # If the fact is not yet in traces, add it with an empty list of encoding times.
    if fact not in traces:
        # Create the empty list for this fact.
        traces[fact] = []
    # Add the time to the list of encoding times for this fact.
    traces[fact].append(time)

# Define a procedure called activation that returns the base-level activation of a fact at the current time.
def activation(fact, now):
    # Create a number variable called total with initial value zero.
    total = 0.0
    # For each encoding time of the fact, add the age raised to the power of negative DECAY to the total.
    for t in traces[fact]:
        # Calculate the age of this trace as the current time minus the encoding time.
        age = now - t
        # Add the age raised to the power of negative DECAY to the total.
        total = total + age ** (-DECAY)
    # Return the natural logarithm of the total, the ACT-R base-level activation equation.
    return math.log(total)

# Define a procedure called retrieve that reports whether a fact can be retrieved at the current time.
def retrieve(fact, now):
    # Calculate the activation of the fact at the current time.
    a = activation(fact, now)
    # Return the fact name, the activation, and whether it exceeds the threshold.
    return fact, round(a, 3), a > THRESHOLD

# Study the fact "capital of France" three times, at 0, 60, and 120 seconds.
for moment in [0, 60, 120]:
    # Call study with the fact and the moment.
    study("capital of France", moment)

# Study the fact "capital of Mongolia" once, at 120 seconds.
study("capital of Mongolia", 120)

# For each probe delay after learning, print the retrieval outcome for both facts.
for delay in [130, 600, 3600, 86400]:
    # Print the retrieval result for the well-practised fact at this delay.
    print(retrieve("capital of France", delay))
    # Print the retrieval result for the once-seen fact at this delay.
    print(retrieve("capital of Mongolia", delay))


CHAPTER 19. ENCODING, CONSOLIDATION, AND RETRIEVAL (PROCESS)

This chapter follows a memory through its life, from the moment it is formed, through the slow process by which it is made durable, to the act of bringing it back.

These three stages have names, encoding for getting information in, consolidation for making it stable, and retrieval for getting it back out.

In systems terms they are the write operation, the background commit process that migrates and hardens the written record, and the read operation, and each stage has its own inputs, parameters, and failure points.

Understanding them matters because most memory successes and failures happen at one of these stages, and knowing which one is at fault points to how to remember better.

The chapter takes each stage in order and shows that memory is an active process at every step, not a passive recording.


19.1 Encoding

Encoding is the first stage, the process of taking in information and turning it into a memory trace that the brain can store.

How you encode something, and not just how long you stare at it, largely decides how well you will remember it, as the following sub-sections show.

As a system, encoding takes attended content from working memory as input, produces a candidate trace whose durability depends on depth, connection, and timing of processing, and completes within the seconds the material is held.


19.1.1 Levels of processing and elaboration

The levels of processing idea, proposed by Fergus Craik and Robert Lockhart in 1972, says that how deeply you think about something at the moment of learning determines how well it sticks.

Shallow processing means attending only to surface features, such as what a word looks like or sounds like, and it tends to produce weak, quickly fading memories.

Deep processing means attending to meaning, thinking about what something signifies and how it relates to what you already know, and it produces stronger, longer-lasting memories.

The classic demonstration asks people questions about words, some about appearance, such as is it in capital letters, and some about meaning, such as does it fit in this sentence, and later memory is far better for the meaning-based items even though people were not told to memorise anything.

Elaboration is the key to why depth helps, and it means enriching new information by connecting it to other knowledge, forming many links that later serve as routes back to the memory.

In systems terms, depth is the number and quality of links written alongside the trace: shallow encoding stores an item with few pointers into the knowledge base, while deep encoding stores it with many, and each pointer is a retrieval path that raises the later probability of read success.

The more meaningful connections you build at encoding, the more handles you create for retrieval, which is why explaining an idea in your own words beats simply rereading it.

One caution is that the theory can be slightly circular, since deep processing is partly defined by producing good memory, but the practical lesson that meaningful engagement aids memory is very well supported.


19.1.2 Encoding specificity and transfer-appropriate processing

Memory does not depend on encoding alone but on the match between how you encoded something and how you later try to retrieve it.

The encoding specificity principle, formulated by Endel Tulving and Donald Thomson, states that retrieval works best when the cues present at recall match the conditions present when the memory was formed.

In plain terms, the way you first learned something, including the surrounding context, becomes part of the memory, and reinstating that context later helps you find it.

A related idea, transfer-appropriate processing, states that a way of studying is good not in the abstract but insofar as it matches the kind of test you will face.

For example, if a test will require recognising sounds, studying the sounds helps more than studying meanings, even though studying meanings is usually the deeper and generally better strategy.

The systems statement is that a trace is stored under a compound key of content plus context, and read success is a function of the overlap between the stored key and the query key, so no encoding operation has a quality independent of the reads it must later serve.

Together these principles shift the focus from asking how strong a memory is to asking how well the conditions of learning and remembering line up, which is a subtler and more accurate way to think about memory.


19.1.3 The generation, spacing, and testing effects

Decades of research have produced several reliable techniques that strengthen encoding, and three of the best established are worth knowing by name.

The generation effect is the finding that you remember information better if you produce it yourself rather than simply reading it, so filling in a blank beats being handed the answer.

The spacing effect is the finding that learning spread out over time, with gaps between study sessions, produces far more durable memory than the same amount of study crammed into one block, an effect first noted by Hermann Ebbinghaus and confirmed thousands of times since.

The reason spacing helps is debated, but it seems that letting a memory partly fade and then retrieving it again forces more effortful processing than reviewing it while it is still fresh.

In systems terms the spacing effect is a diminishing-returns rule on the write operation: a repetition arriving while the trace is still highly retrievable adds little strength, while a repetition arriving after partial fading adds much more, so the same number of writes buys more durability when they are spread out.

The testing effect, also called retrieval practice, is the finding that testing yourself on material, actively trying to recall it, strengthens memory more than restudying it for the same time.

This is initially surprising, because a test feels like a mere measurement of memory rather than a way of building it, yet the act of retrieving reshapes and reinforces the memory each time.

These three effects converge on a single practical message, that memory is built by effortful, active, spaced engagement rather than by passive, massed exposure, which is why rereading a textbook feels productive but works poorly.


19.2 Consolidation

Encoding creates a fragile memory, and consolidation is the set of processes that slowly turn that fragile trace into a stable, lasting one.

Consolidation happens on two very different scales, at individual synapses over hours and across whole brain systems over months and years, and sleep plays a special part in it.

In systems terms consolidation is a background commit: it runs without conscious involvement, hardens recent writes against loss, and migrates content from a fast temporary index to slow permanent storage.


19.2.1 Synaptic consolidation and reconsolidation

Synaptic consolidation is the fast form, the process over minutes to hours by which a newly formed memory becomes physically stabilised in strengthened connections between neurons.

Right after learning, a memory is vulnerable and can be wiped out by a blow, a drug, or a distraction, but as the synapses that carry it are strengthened through the building of new proteins, it becomes far more resistant.

This is why events just before a concussion are often lost, since the memory had not yet been consolidated when the injury struck.

As a mechanism, the input is a fresh, labile trace, the process is protein synthesis at the tagged synapses over minutes to hours, and the output is a stabilised trace that survives interruptions that would have erased it earlier.

Reconsolidation is a more surprising discovery, the finding that when an old, consolidated memory is reactivated by recall, it can briefly return to a fragile state and must be stabilised again.

This means remembering is not a neutral readout, because each time a memory is brought back it can be updated, strengthened, or even altered before it is restored.

In systems terms every read reopens the record for writing during a brief window, which makes the store updatable but also corruptible at exactly the moment of access.

Reconsolidation has raised the intriguing possibility of weakening painful memories, such as those in trauma, by reactivating them and then interfering with their restabilisation, though this remains an area of active and unfinished research.


19.2.2 Systems consolidation and the hippocampal-neocortical dialogue

Systems consolidation is the slow form, the process over weeks to years by which a memory's dependence gradually shifts from one part of the brain to another.

The standard model holds that new declarative memories at first depend on the hippocampus, a seahorse-shaped structure deep in the brain that is crucial for forming new memories, and that over time they are gradually transferred to the neocortex, the brain's outer sheet where long-term knowledge resides.

The proposed mechanism is a repeated dialogue, in which the hippocampus replays recent experiences and gradually trains the slower-learning cortex to hold them on its own, after which the memory no longer needs the hippocampus.

This idea is captured in the complementary learning systems framework, which pairs a fast-learning hippocampus with a slow-learning cortex so the brain can learn new things quickly without overwriting old knowledge.

The systems reading is a two-store design with a staged migration: a fast store that writes in one shot, a slow store that learns by many small interleaved updates, and a replay channel that copies content across during offline periods, a design that solves the engineering problem of learning quickly without catastrophic overwriting.

There is a genuine scientific dispute here, because the multiple trace theory of Lynn Nadel and Morris Moscovitch argues that vivid episodic memories always keep the hippocampus involved, no matter how old they are, and that only the drier semantic gist is fully handed to the cortex.

In systems terms the two sides differ on what the migration transfers: the standard model predicts full hand-over so old detailed memories survive hippocampal loss, while multiple trace theory predicts that only gist migrates, so old detailed memories should still fail when the hippocampus fails.

Neuroimaging evidence tends to favour a continuing hippocampal role for detailed autobiographical memories, so the exact division of labour between hippocampus and cortex over time is still being worked out.


19.2.3 Sleep and the reorganisation of memory

Sleep is not merely rest for the memory system but appears to be an active period during which memories are strengthened and reorganised.

A large body of evidence shows that people remember material better after a night of sleep, or even a nap, than after an equal period of wakefulness, and that sleep protects memories against later interference.

During deep, non-dreaming sleep, the brain shows coordinated rhythms, including slow waves and brief bursts called sleep spindles, that are thought to orchestrate the transfer of memories from hippocampus to cortex.

A central piece of evidence is replay, the finding first seen in rats that patterns of neural firing from a recent experience are played back during sleep, as though the brain were rehearsing and filing the day's events.

In systems terms sleep is the scheduled maintenance window: input traffic is gated off, the replay channel runs the day's writes through the slow store in compressed batches, and the pass also deduplicates and abstracts, extracting shared structure from separate episodes.

Sleep also seems to do more than strengthen, since it can extract general rules and gist from specific experiences and can promote creative insight, suggesting it reorganises knowledge rather than merely preserving it.

The details of which sleep stages serve which functions are still debated, but the broad conclusion that sleep is essential for turning experiences into durable, well-organised memory is now widely accepted.


19.3 Retrieval

Retrieval is the final stage, the act of bringing a stored memory back into mind, and it is far more active and constructive than it feels.

This section covers the forms retrieval takes, the powerful role of context, the two feelings that can accompany recognition, and the surprising fact that the act of retrieval changes memory itself.

As a system, retrieval takes a cue as input, matches it against stored compound keys, reconstructs a candidate memory as output within a few hundred milliseconds to several seconds, and writes back a modified trace as a side effect.


19.3.1 Recall and recognition

Retrieval comes in two broad forms that differ in how much help you are given.

Recall is bringing information back with few or no cues, as when an essay question asks you to produce an answer from scratch, and it is generally the harder form.

Recognition is identifying something as familiar when it is put in front of you, as in a multiple-choice question, and it is generally easier because the item itself acts as a strong cue.

In systems terms recall is a generation query, in which the system must construct the target from a sparse cue, while recognition is a match query, in which the presented item supplies almost the whole key and only a familiarity check remains.

The gap between them explains a common experience, that you may be unable to recall a name yet instantly recognise it when someone says it.

This difference has practical consequences, since recognition can succeed on weaker memories than recall can, which is why recognising a face is easier than producing the matching name.

The two forms are also thought to lean on somewhat different processes, a theme developed in the sub-section on dual-process accounts below.


19.3.2 Context-dependent and state-dependent retrieval

Following from the encoding specificity principle, retrieval is strongly helped when the surrounding conditions at recall match those at learning.

Context-dependent memory refers to the finding that external surroundings act as cues, so you remember material better in the place where you learned it.

A famous demonstration had divers learn lists of words either on land or underwater, and they recalled each list best in the same environment where they had learned it.

State-dependent memory refers to the parallel finding that your internal state acts as a cue, so material learned in a particular bodily or emotional state is best recalled in that same state.

For instance, information learned while in a certain mood tends to be recalled more easily when that mood returns, an effect called mood-dependent memory.

The systems reading is that environment and internal state are silent extra fields in the stored key, so a query issued from a matching place or mood overlaps the key more fully and raises read success without the rememberer doing anything different.

The practical upshot is that a poor memory is often not truly absent but merely inaccessible for lack of the right cue, and reinstating the original context, even mentally, can bring it back.


19.3.3 The dual-process account of recognition: recollection and familiarity

When you recognise something, the experience can take two quite different forms, and the dual-process account explains recognition as the blend of these two.

Familiarity is a fast, vague sense that you have encountered something before, without any accompanying details of when or where, like knowing a face is familiar but having no idea from where.

Recollection is a slower, richer retrieval that brings back the specific context of the earlier encounter, so you not only know the face is familiar but recall the party where you met them.

Researchers such as Andrew Yonelinas have modelled these as distinct processes, with familiarity behaving like a graded signal of memory strength and recollection behaving more like an all-or-none recovery of details.

In systems terms familiarity is a cheap strength readout, a single scalar available quickly, while recollection is a full record fetch that returns the context fields and takes longer, and a recognition decision can be served by either.

One common laboratory method, the remember-know procedure, asks people to report whether they actually remember the details of encountering an item or merely know it is familiar, in order to separate the two.

There is debate about whether recollection and familiarity are truly two different processes or two points along a single continuum of memory strength, and the two positions predict differently in systems terms, since two processes should be separately damageable and separately speeded, while one continuum should always move them together.

Even so, the distinction is useful and maps roughly onto different brain regions within the medial temporal lobe, with the hippocampus more tied to recollection and nearby cortex more tied to familiarity.


19.3.4 Retrieval as a cause of both strengthening and forgetting

The final and most counterintuitive point is that retrieving a memory is not a passive readout but an event that changes the memory itself.

On the one hand, as the testing effect showed, successfully retrieving a memory strengthens it, making it easier to retrieve again in future, so every act of recall is also an act of learning.

On the other hand, retrieval can also cause forgetting of related material, an effect called retrieval-induced forgetting.

Retrieval-induced forgetting is the finding that recalling some items from a set makes other, related but unretrieved items harder to recall later, as though pulling one memory forward pushes its competitors down.

The proposed explanation is that retrieving a target requires suppressing competitors that would otherwise interfere, and this suppression leaves those competitors weakened.

In systems terms every read is also a write: the fetched record gains strength, and the competing records that shared its cue are inhibited and lose accessibility, so the read operation reshapes the index it queries.

So retrieval is a double-edged process, sharpening the memories you practise while quietly weakening their neighbours, which means the very act of remembering actively reshapes the landscape of what you will be able to remember next.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Study material: attended content held in working memory, together with its processing depth and its surrounding external and internal context.

◦ Repetition schedule: the timing of study and practice events, which sets how much each write adds.

◦ Retrieval cues: partial content, context, and state information used as query keys.

◦ Offline periods: sleep and rest, which open the consolidation window.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Stored traces: durable records written into the long-term stores of Chapter 18.

◦ Reconstructed memories: retrieved content delivered to working memory, with an accompanying familiarity or recollection signal.

◦ Trace updates: strengthened targets, inhibited competitors, and reconsolidated records written back after each retrieval.

• STATE.

◦ Per-trace strength and retrievability, which govern read success and the gain from the next repetition.

◦ The consolidation status of each trace: labile, synaptically stabilised, or systems-consolidated.

◦ The stored compound keys binding content to context and internal state.

◦ The queue of recent experiences awaiting replay during sleep.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Depth of processing at encoding, which sets the number of retrieval links written.

◦ Spacing gain: the diminishing-returns factor by which a repetition on a still-fresh trace adds less than one on a partly faded trace.

◦ Testing gain: the extra strengthening a successful retrieval adds over a restudy.

◦ Cue-key overlap threshold: how much match a query needs before a record is returned.

◦ Consolidation rate: how fast a fresh trace hardens, modifiable by sleep, stress, and drugs.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Encoding: completed within the seconds the material is attended.

◦ Synaptic consolidation: minutes to hours.

◦ Systems consolidation: weeks to years.

◦ Reconsolidation window after reactivation: open on the order of minutes to hours in animal studies.

◦ Retrieval latency: a few hundred milliseconds for familiarity, up to several seconds for effortful recall.

◦ A single fixed duration for the human reconsolidation window: REFUSED, because human estimates vary widely across procedures and no consensus value exists.

• MODES.

◦ Encoding mode: attention is on new input and writes dominate, triggered by novel task-relevant material.

◦ Consolidation mode: offline replay and stabilisation dominate, triggered by sleep and rest.

◦ Retrieval mode: cue-driven search and reconstruction dominate, triggered by a query or a matching context.

◦ Reconsolidation mode: a reactivated trace is temporarily writable, triggered by retrieval of a consolidated memory.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Encoding failure: shallow or divided-attention processing writes a trace too weak to read back.

◦ Consolidation failure: concussion, sleep deprivation, or protein synthesis blockade erases or weakens recent writes.

◦ Cue failure: intact traces that cannot be read because the query key does not overlap the stored key, felt as tip-of-the-tongue blocking.

◦ Retrieval side effects: retrieval-induced forgetting of competitors and reconsolidation-based distortion of the retrieved trace itself.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called strength with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called decay rate with initial value point zero five.
Create a number variable called learning gain with initial value one.
Define a procedure called retrievability that takes an elapsed time since the last study event.
    Return the exponential of the negative of the product of the decay rate and the elapsed time, scaled by the strength.
Define a procedure called study that takes the current retrievability.
    Calculate the room to grow as one minus the current retrievability.
    Multiply the room to grow by the learning gain, and add the result to the strength.
Define a procedure called simulate that takes a list of study times and a test time.
    Set the strength to zero.
    Create a number variable called last time with initial value of the first study time.
    For each study time in the list, calculate the current retrievability from the time since the last study event, call study with the current retrievability, and set the last time to the study time.
    Return the retrievability at the test time.
Simulate a massed schedule with all sessions close together, and print the result.
Simulate a spaced schedule with the same number of sessions spread out, and print the result.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for the exponential function.
import math

# Create a number variable called DECAY_RATE with initial value 0.05 per hour.
DECAY_RATE = 0.05

# Create a number variable called LEARNING_GAIN with initial value 1.0.
LEARNING_GAIN = 1.0

# Define a procedure called retrievability that takes a strength and the hours since the last study event.
def retrievability(strength, hours_since):
    # Return the strength scaled by exponential decay over the elapsed hours, capped at one.
    return min(1.0, strength * math.exp(-DECAY_RATE * hours_since))

# Define a procedure called simulate that takes a list of study times in hours and a test time in hours.
def simulate(study_times, test_time):
    # Create a number variable called strength with initial value zero.
    strength = 0.0
    # Create a variable called last_time holding the first study time.
    last_time = study_times[0]
    # For each study time in the schedule, update the strength by the spacing rule.
    for t in study_times:
        # Calculate the current retrievability from the time since the last study event.
        r = retrievability(strength, t - last_time)
        # Calculate the room to grow as one minus the current retrievability.
        room = 1.0 - r
        # Add the room to grow times the learning gain to the strength.
        strength = strength + room * LEARNING_GAIN
        # Set the last time to this study time.
        last_time = t
    # Return the retrievability at the test time, measured from the final study event.
    return retrievability(strength, test_time - last_time)

# Create a massed schedule of four sessions within one hour, starting at hour zero.
massed = [0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75]

# Create a spaced schedule of four sessions one day apart, in hours.
spaced = [0.0, 24.0, 48.0, 72.0]

# Create a number variable called test_time set to one day after the last spaced session, in hours.
test_time = 72.0 + 24.0

# Print the retention of the massed schedule at the common test time.
print("massed retention:", round(simulate(massed, test_time), 4))

# Print the retention of the spaced schedule at the common test time.
print("spaced retention:", round(simulate(spaced, test_time), 4))


CHAPTER 20. FORGETTING, RECONSTRUCTION, AND MEMORY ERROR (PROCESS)

This chapter is about the ways memory fails and distorts, which turn out to be as revealing as the ways it succeeds.

Forgetting is not simply the decay of a perfect recording, and remembering is not a faithful playback, so the failures of memory expose what memory really is.

In systems terms, the failure modes of a machine reveal its architecture, and memory's characteristic errors reveal a constructive, cue-driven, interference-prone store rather than a tape recorder.

This matters both scientifically, because errors reveal the machinery, and practically, because misplaced faith in memory, especially eyewitness memory, can ruin lives.

The chapter covers why we forget, why remembering is an act of reconstruction, and the characteristic errors that reconstruction produces.


20.1 Forgetting

Forgetting is the loss of access to information that was once stored, and there is more than one reason it happens.

This section distinguishes the main causes of forgetting, describes the classic shape of forgetting over time, and looks at whether we can forget on purpose.

As a system property, forgetting is a read failure with three possible causes: the record weakened, the record was crowded by competing records, or the query key no longer matches.


20.1.1 Decay, interference, and cue-dependent forgetting

There are three main explanations for why memories become hard to reach, and they are not mutually exclusive.

Decay theory says memories simply fade with the passage of time if they are not used, weakening like a footprint slowly erased by wind.

Interference theory says forgetting is caused not by time itself but by other memories getting in the way, and it comes in two directions.

Proactive interference is when older memories disrupt the learning or recall of newer ones, such as when a previous phone number keeps intruding when you try to recall your new one.

Retroactive interference is the reverse, when newer learning disrupts the recall of older memories, such as when this year's parking spot makes last year's hard to recall.

Cue-dependent forgetting says the memory is not lost at all but merely inaccessible because the right retrieval cue is missing, and providing the cue restores it.

The three accounts make different systems predictions: decay predicts loss that grows with elapsed time regardless of what else is learned, interference predicts loss that grows with the similarity and amount of competing material regardless of time, and cue dependence predicts full recovery the moment the right key is supplied.

Evidence favours the view that much everyday forgetting is cue-dependent and interference-based rather than pure decay, because information that seemed forgotten often reappears the moment a suitable cue is supplied.


20.1.2 The forgetting curve and the relearning saving

The single most famous fact about forgetting comes from Hermann Ebbinghaus, who in the 1880s studied his own memory with painstaking rigour.

To avoid the influence of prior knowledge, he memorised long lists of nonsense syllables, meaningless three-letter combinations, and measured how much he retained over time.

The result was the forgetting curve, which shows that forgetting is rapid at first, with much lost within hours, and then levels off, so that what survives the first day tends to last much longer.

In systems terms the curve is the retention function of the store: read success falls steeply over the first hours and then flattens, which is the signature of a trace whose accessibility loss decelerates rather than a record deleted at a fixed expiry time.

Ebbinghaus measured retention with a clever method called savings, which asks how much time or effort is saved when relearning a list compared with learning it fresh.

The savings method revealed that even material that could not be consciously recalled at all still left a trace, because it was relearned faster than brand-new material, showing that forgetting is often incomplete.

The systems reading of savings is that a failed explicit read does not prove an empty store, since residual trace strength still speeds the next write, so relearning time is a more sensitive probe of the store than recall.

Ebbinghaus also documented the spacing effect and the benefits of overlearning, and his careful, quantitative approach essentially founded the experimental study of memory, so his curve remains a touchstone more than a century later.


20.1.3 Motivated and directed forgetting

A natural question is whether people can forget things on purpose, and the evidence suggests that intentional forgetting is real, though limited.

Directed forgetting is studied by explicitly instructing people to forget certain material, and such instructions do measurably reduce later memory for the to-be-forgotten items.

Two mechanisms are proposed, one in which people simply stop rehearsing and encoding the unwanted items, and another in which an active process inhibits or suppresses the memory at retrieval.

In systems terms the first mechanism is a withheld write, starving the item of encoding resources, and the second is an access control operation, an inhibitory signal applied at read time, and the two predict differently, since a withheld write should leave no trace to recover while inhibition should be reversible when the right cue bypasses it.

Motivated forgetting is the broader and more contested idea that people can push distressing memories out of mind because they want to, an idea with roots in the notion of repression associated with Sigmund Freud.

The scientific status of deep repression of traumatic memories is genuinely disputed, and many memory researchers are sceptical of it, while accepting that ordinary suppression and avoidance can reduce the accessibility of unwanted memories.

The honest summary is that some intentional control over memory is well demonstrated in the laboratory, but strong claims about wholesale burial and later perfect recovery of traumatic memories remain controversial and should be treated with caution.


20.2 Memory as reconstruction

The central lesson of modern memory research is that remembering is not replaying but rebuilding, and this section explains what that means.

We reconstruct memories using general knowledge structures, and this is both what makes memory efficient and what makes it prone to error.

In systems terms recall is generative decompression: the store keeps fragments plus a pointer to general knowledge, and the output is assembled at read time by filling gaps from the general model.


20.2.1 Schemas and scripts as the scaffolding of recall

A schema is an organised packet of general knowledge about a type of thing or situation, built up from experience, such as your general idea of what a kitchen contains or how a restaurant works.

Schemas are useful because they let you fill in gaps, make sense of new situations quickly, and remember the gist of things without recording every detail.

A script is a particular kind of schema for a familiar sequence of events, such as the standard steps of eating at a restaurant, being seated, ordering, eating, and paying.

The idea traces to Frederic Bartlett, who in the 1930s had people recall an unfamiliar folk tale and found that they unconsciously altered it to fit their own cultural expectations, dropping strange details and adding familiar ones.

As a mechanism, a schema takes a partial episodic record as input, supplies default values for every missing field, and outputs a completed scene, which compresses storage enormously at the price of substituting the typical for the actual whenever the record is silent.

Schemas shape memory at every stage, guiding what you notice, how you store it, and how you later reconstruct it, so that when a detail is missing you tend to supply what your schema says should have been there.

This scaffolding is helpful most of the time, but it is exactly why memory can insert plausible things that never actually happened, which the next sub-section develops.


20.2.2 The reconstructive nature of remembering

Following Bartlett, the modern view is that each act of recall is an act of reconstruction, in which the mind assembles a memory from fragments plus general knowledge and expectation.

This is very different from the intuitive feeling that memory is like a video recording that we simply play back, a feeling that is compelling but mistaken.

Because reconstruction fills gaps with what is likely rather than what actually occurred, memories can be confidently held yet contain details that were never experienced.

Reconstruction also means memories can shift over time as your knowledge, mood, and later experiences change, so the same event may be remembered differently on different occasions.

In systems terms the read operation is not deterministic: the same query run at different times, against a general model that has itself changed, can return different assembled outputs, and the system attaches no flag distinguishing stored fragments from filled-in defaults.

This is not a rare malfunction but the normal way memory works, and it is the same flexibility that, as Chapter 18 noted, allows us to imagine the future by recombining stored pieces.

Recognising memory as reconstructive is the foundation for understanding the specific, systematic errors that follow.


20.3 The errors of memory

If memory is reconstructive, then certain kinds of error are predictable rather than random, and researchers have catalogued them.

This section presents a well-known taxonomy of memory failures, the laboratory methods that reliably create false memories, and the real-world stakes for eyewitness testimony.


20.3.1 The seven sins of memory as a taxonomy of failure

Daniel Schacter organised the ways memory goes wrong into a memorable list he called the seven sins of memory, published in 2001.

The first three are sins of omission, failures to bring something to mind.

Transience is the weakening or loss of memory over time, the ordinary fading captured by the forgetting curve.

Absent-mindedness is a failure at the meeting point of attention and memory, such as forgetting where you put your keys because you were not attending when you set them down.

Blocking is the temporary inability to retrieve something that is stored, most vividly the tip-of-the-tongue state where a word feels just out of reach.

The remaining four are sins of commission, distortions in what is remembered.

Misattribution is remembering something correctly but assigning it to the wrong source, such as recalling a fact but crediting the wrong person, or thinking an imagined event really happened.

Suggestibility is the incorporation of information from outside, such as a leading question, into your own memory of an event.

Bias is the distorting influence of your present knowledge, beliefs, and feelings on your memory of the past, so that you misremember the past as more consistent with your current self than it was.

Persistence is the unwanted, intrusive recall of memories you would rather forget, such as the repeated replaying of a distressing event.

Read as a systems fault catalogue, the omission sins are read failures, weak trace, missed write, and blocked access, while the commission sins are integrity failures, a corrupted source field, an unauthorised external write, a biased reconstruction, and a read that cannot be stopped.

Schacter's key insight is that these are not random defects but the by-products of a memory system that is otherwise well designed, so each sin is the flip side of a useful feature.


20.3.2 False memory and the laboratory paradigms that produce it

A false memory is a recollection of an event, or of details of an event, that did not actually happen, and researchers can reliably create them in the laboratory.

The most controlled method is the Deese-Roediger-McDermott paradigm, usually shortened to the DRM paradigm, which shows how easily the mind manufactures memories of things never presented.

In it, people study a list of words that are all associated with one missing word, for example bed, rest, tired, and dream, all linked to sleep, and afterwards a large proportion confidently remember having seen the word sleep, which was never on the list.

This happens because studying the related words activates the theme word, and the mind later cannot distinguish the internally generated theme from the actually presented items, a clear case of misattribution.

The systems reading is that spreading activation writes an internal entry for the theme word with no source stamp marking it as self-generated, so at test the source check fails and the internal entry passes as external input.

More dramatic are studies that implant whole false autobiographical memories, the best known being the lost in the mall study associated with Elizabeth Loftus, in which suggestion led a portion of participants to remember being lost in a shopping mall as a child, an event that never occurred.

Such studies show that entire, detailed, emotionally felt memories of nonexistent events can be created through suggestion, and that people often cannot tell these apart from real ones.

The general lesson is that vividness and confidence are not reliable guarantees that a memory is true, because false memories can be just as vivid and confidently held as accurate ones.


20.3.3 The misinformation effect and the fallibility of eyewitness memory

The misinformation effect is the finding that exposure to misleading information after an event can alter a person's memory of that event, and it is one of the most important results in memory science.

It was established through decades of work by Elizabeth Loftus and colleagues, beginning with a classic study by Loftus and John Palmer in 1974.

In that study, people watched a film of a car accident and were then asked how fast the cars were going, but the verb was varied, so some were asked how fast the cars were going when they smashed and others when they hit.

Those asked with the word smashed gave higher speed estimates, and a week later were more likely to falsely remember seeing broken glass that was never in the film, showing that the wording of a single question had reshaped their memory.

In systems terms the misinformation effect is a post-event write into an open record: information arriving after the event, during questioning, is merged into the original trace without a timestamp separating it from the witnessed input, so the read that follows cannot tell the two sources apart.

The practical stakes are enormous for eyewitness testimony, since a confident eyewitness is highly persuasive to juries, yet this research shows that eyewitness memory can be sincerely and completely mistaken.

Suggestive police procedures, such as leading questions or poorly conducted lineups, can inadvertently manufacture the very confident errors that lead to wrongful convictions, a link confirmed by later analyses of cases overturned by deoxyribonucleic acid, usually shortened to DNA, evidence.

The scientific response has been to develop safer interviewing and lineup methods and to educate courts that the confidence of a witness is not a reliable measure of accuracy, which is now a broad consensus among memory researchers.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Stored traces: the records written by the encoding and consolidation processes of Chapter 19, with their strengths and compound keys.

◦ Competing material: earlier and later learning that shares cues with a target trace, the source of proactive and retroactive interference.

◦ Post-event information: questions, suggestions, and retellings that arrive after an event and can be merged into its record.

◦ Schemas and scripts: general knowledge structures consulted to fill gaps at reconstruction.

◦ Control signals: intentions to forget or suppress particular content.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Reconstructed reports: assembled memories delivered to working memory and to speech, mixing stored fragments with schema defaults.

◦ Confidence signals: felt vividness and certainty, which consumers such as juries treat as accuracy indicators although they are not.

◦ Savings: reduced relearning time for material that can no longer be explicitly recalled.

• STATE.

◦ Per-trace accessibility, jointly set by trace strength, cue overlap, and the strength of competitors sharing the same cues.

◦ Source stamps on records, marking origin as perceived, imagined, or told, and their degree of degradation.

◦ Inhibition tags on suppressed or to-be-forgotten items.

◦ The current schemas and beliefs that will supply defaults at the next reconstruction.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Interference load: the number and similarity of competing associations per cue.

◦ Schema fill rate: how readily missing fields are completed with defaults rather than left blank.

◦ Suggestibility gain: how strongly post-event information overwrites or supplements the original record.

◦ Suppression strength: how much an intentional inhibition signal lowers an item's accessibility.

◦ Source monitoring criterion: how strict the check is that separates perceived from generated content.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Forgetting curve shape: steep loss over the first hours to a day, then a long slow flattening, per Ebbinghaus.

◦ Tip-of-the-tongue blocking: resolution ranges from seconds to hours or days when the blocker releases.

◦ Misinformation vulnerability window: distortion effects grow as the delay between event and misleading input lengthens, because the fading original resists the overwrite less.

◦ A universal percentage of material lost per unit time: REFUSED, because retention depends on material, cueing, practice, and interference, so no single figure is honest.

• MODES.

◦ Veridical reconstruction mode: strong fragments dominate and schema fill is minor, triggered by rich cues and a recent, well-encoded trace.

◦ Schema-driven fill mode: defaults dominate a sparse record, triggered by weak traces, long delays, and strong expectations.

◦ Suppression mode: access to targeted content is actively inhibited, triggered by an intention to forget.

◦ Contaminated mode: post-event information has merged into the record, triggered by suggestion during the reconsolidation and questioning window.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ The seven sins: transience, absent-mindedness, and blocking as omission failures, and misattribution, suggestibility, bias, and persistence as commission failures.

◦ False memory creation: DRM theme intrusions and implanted autobiographical events, with confidence uncoupled from accuracy.

◦ Eyewitness error: misinformation-reshaped testimony leading to wrongful conviction.

◦ Clinical extremes: confabulation, in which reconstruction runs unchecked, and intrusive persistence in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called learning increment with initial value one.
Create an empty dictionary variable called associations, mapping each cue to a dictionary of responses and their strengths.
Define a procedure called learn that takes a cue and a response.
    If the cue is not in associations, add the cue with an empty response dictionary.
    If the response is not in the response dictionary for the cue, add the response with strength zero.
    Add the learning increment to the strength of the response for the cue.
Define a procedure called recall that takes a cue.
    If the cue is not in associations, return nothing.
    Find the response with the highest strength for the cue.
    Return that response.
For each pair in list one, call learn with the pair's cue and the pair's first response.
Test recall of list one and record the accuracy.
For each pair in list two, call learn with the pair's cue and the pair's second response.
Test recall of list one again and record the accuracy, which falls because the new responses compete, showing retroactive interference.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a number variable called INCREMENT with initial value 1.0.
INCREMENT = 1.0

# Create an empty dictionary called associations, mapping each cue to a dictionary of responses and strengths.
associations = {}

# Define a procedure called learn that takes a cue, a response, and a number of repetitions.
def learn(cue, response, reps):
    # If the cue is not yet known, add it with an empty response dictionary.
    if cue not in associations:
        # Create the empty response dictionary for this cue.
        associations[cue] = {}
    # If the response is not yet linked to this cue, add it with strength zero.
    if response not in associations[cue]:
        # Create the response entry with strength zero.
        associations[cue][response] = 0.0
    # Add the increment times the repetitions to the strength of this response.
    associations[cue][response] = associations[cue][response] + INCREMENT * reps

# Define a procedure called recall that takes a cue and returns the strongest response.
def recall(cue):
    # Get the response dictionary for the cue.
    responses = associations[cue]
    # Return the response whose strength is highest.
    return max(responses, key=responses.get)

# Define a procedure called test that takes a list of cue and target pairs and returns the accuracy.
def test(pairs):
    # Create a number variable called correct with initial value zero.
    correct = 0
    # For each cue and target in the pairs, add one to correct when recall matches the target.
    for cue, target in pairs:
        # If the recalled response equals the target, add one to correct.
        if recall(cue) == target:
            # Add one to the correct count.
            correct = correct + 1
    # Return the proportion correct.
    return correct / len(pairs)

# Create list one as pairs of cues and their first responses, studied three times each.
list_one = [("river", "stone"), ("candle", "horse"), ("garden", "cloud")]

# For each pair in list one, learn the pair with three repetitions.
for cue, response in list_one:
    # Call learn with the cue, the response, and three repetitions.
    learn(cue, response, 3)

# Print the accuracy for list one before any interfering learning.
print("list one before interference:", test(list_one))

# Create list two reusing the same cues with new responses, studied five times each.
list_two = [("river", "paper"), ("candle", "train"), ("garden", "shoe")]

# For each pair in list two, learn the pair with five repetitions.
for cue, response in list_two:
    # Call learn with the cue, the response, and five repetitions.
    learn(cue, response, 5)

# Print the accuracy for list one after the interfering learning, showing retroactive interference.
print("list one after interference:", test(list_one))


================================================================================

PART FIVE. KNOWLEDGE AND CONCEPTS

================================================================================

CHAPTER 21. CONCEPTS AND CATEGORISATION (PROCESS)

This chapter is about one of the quietest but most important things your mind does: it sorts the world into kinds.

A concept is a mental idea of a kind of thing, such as "dog" or "chair" or "justice", and categorisation is the act of deciding that some particular thing you meet is an example of that kind.

You do this constantly, thousands of times a day, almost always without noticing.

When you glance at a new animal and instantly think "that is a dog", you have just categorised, and that single act lets you predict that it might bark, that it can be petted, and that it will not read your mail.

That is why categories matter so much: a category is a bundle of useful expectations, and putting a new thing into a category lets you treat the unknown as if it were familiar.

Viewed as an engineered system, the categoriser is a classifier module: it subscribes to a feature description of a stimulus arriving from perception, consults stored category knowledge, and publishes a category label plus a bundle of predictions to reasoning, language, and action, typically within a few hundred milliseconds of seeing the object.

This chapter asks three plain questions: what is a concept made of inside the mind, how are categories arranged relative to one another, and how do we learn new categories in the first place.


21.1 The theories of conceptual structure

This section asks what a concept actually is, considered as something stored in the mind.

In systems terms, the question is a question about the data structure: is the stored representation a checklist, a summary point, a set of remembered instances, or a node in a causal model.

Over the last century researchers have offered several very different answers, and the story is a good example of science improving by discovering that its first neat idea was wrong.

We will walk through the main proposals in the order they arose, because each one was largely a reaction to the failures of the one before it.


21.1.1 The classical definitional view and its failure

The oldest idea, going back to Aristotle and taken for granted for over two thousand years, is that a concept is a definition.

On this view, to have the concept "bird" is to hold a checklist of features that something must have to count as a bird, for example "has feathers, has wings, lays eggs, has a beak".

These required features are called necessary and sufficient conditions, which is just a technical way of saying "each feature must be present, and having all of them together is enough to make something a member".

On this account category membership is all-or-nothing: a thing either ticks every box and is fully in, or misses a box and is fully out, with no in-between.

As a system, the definitional view predicts a rule engine: input a feature list, run a logical conjunction test, output a binary yes or no, with no reason for typical members to be verified faster than atypical ones.

The trouble is that when psychologists actually looked, real everyday concepts almost never behave like this.

The philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein pointed out in the mid twentieth century that you cannot write a clean definition even for a simple word like "game": some games have winners and losers, some do not; some use a ball, some do not; some are competitive, some are just for fun.

Wittgenstein suggested that the members of a category are held together not by one shared essence but by "family resemblance", meaning they overlap in a criss-crossing web of features the way the members of a human family share a nose here and a chin there without any single feature running through them all.

There is also the problem of unclear cases: is a tomato a fruit or a vegetable, is a rug a piece of furniture, is a hot dog a sandwich.

If concepts were strict definitions, such questions would have crisp answers, but people hesitate and disagree, which suggests the underlying representation is not a strict definition at all.

Because of these failures, the definitional view is now generally regarded as inadequate as a description of ordinary human concepts, and the theories that follow were built to do better.


21.1.2 Prototype theory and graded typicality

Prototype theory, developed above all by the psychologist Eleanor Rosch in the 1970s, says that a concept is organised around a best example rather than a strict definition.

A prototype is an average or ideal member of the category, a kind of summary that captures the features most typical of the category even if no single real member has all of them.

For "bird" the prototype is something small that flies and sings and perches, close to a robin or a sparrow, and things are judged to be birds by how closely they resemble this prototype.

The key idea is graded typicality, which means membership comes in degrees: a robin is a very good example of a bird, a chicken is a poorer one, and a penguin is poorer still, even though all three really are birds.

In systems terms the prototype module takes a feature vector as input, computes its distance to one stored summary point per category, and outputs a graded similarity score; storage cost is tiny, one summary per category, and the decision is made in the few hundred milliseconds of a speeded verification response.

This is not just armchair speculation.

Rosch showed in the 1970s that when you ask people to rate how good an example each item is, their ratings are consistent and predictable, and those ratings then forecast behaviour in other tasks.

For instance, in a sentence-verification task where people press a button to confirm statements like "a robin is a bird", they respond faster to typical members such as robin than to atypical members such as penguin, an effect called the typicality effect.

People also list typical members first when asked to name examples of a category, and children tend to learn typical members earlier.

The strength of prototype theory is that it naturally explains fuzzy boundaries and disagreement about odd cases, because if membership is a matter of degree there is no sharp line to defend.

Its main weakness is that a single averaged prototype throws away information about the actual variety within a category, and it can struggle to explain how people remember specific unusual members, which is where the next theory comes in.


21.1.3 Exemplar theory and instance-based categorisation

Exemplar theory offers a strikingly economical alternative: perhaps the mind does not form any summary or average at all.

On this view, put forward by Douglas Medin and Marguerite Schaffer in 1978 and developed in detail by Robert Nosofsky, a concept is simply the collection of specific remembered examples, called exemplars, that you have personally encountered.

You do not store an abstract idea of "dog"; you store memories of many individual dogs you have met.

To categorise a new animal you compare it, quickly and unconsciously, to all those stored examples at once, and you assign it to whichever category its remembered members most resemble.

If a new furry creature is very similar to many dogs you have seen and few cats, you call it a dog.

As a system, the exemplar module trades memory for flexibility: its input is the same feature vector, but its state is the entire training set, and its output is a summed similarity to every stored instance of each category, which lets it track the spread and the oddities of a category that a single averaged point must lose.

Nosofsky's well-known mathematical version of this idea is the Generalised Context Model (GCM), which grew out of the earlier context model of Medin and Schaffer.

The Generalised Context Model adds a clever ingredient called attention weights, which let the learner emphasise whichever features happen to matter for telling the current categories apart, for example paying attention to size but ignoring colour.

Exemplar theory explains some things prototypes cannot, such as our sensitivity to specific unusual members and to how spread out or variable a category is.

The honest current picture, supported by decades of comparison studies, is that neither prototype nor exemplar theory wins outright; people seem to use exemplar-like memory in many laboratory tasks, but prototype-like summaries appear in others, and the mind probably has more than one way of representing categories.


21.1.4 The theory-theory and psychological essentialism

The theories so far all lean on surface similarity, on how much things look or feel alike, but a moment's reflection shows that similarity cannot be the whole story.

A toy dog can look more like a real dog than a hairless real dog does, yet you know which one is truly a dog, so your concept must rest on more than appearance.

The theory-theory, an idea associated with researchers such as Douglas Medin, Susan Gelman, and Frank Keil, proposes that concepts are embedded in intuitive theories, that is, informal everyday beliefs about how the world works and why things are the way they are.

The awkward name "theory-theory" simply means "the theory that concepts are like little theories".

On this view you categorise partly by explanation: you group things by the causes and functions you believe they have, not only by how they look.

In systems terms this adds a second input channel to the classifier: alongside the perceptual feature vector it consumes causal and functional beliefs from the knowledge base, and when the two channels conflict, as with the toy dog, the causal channel can override the perceptual one.

A close companion idea is psychological essentialism, which is the tendency people show, from early childhood on, to assume that members of a natural category share a hidden inner "essence" that makes them what they are and causes their visible features.

For example, children and adults tend to believe that what makes a tiger a tiger is some deep inner tiger-nature, so that a tiger surgically altered to look like a lion is still, underneath, a tiger.

Susan Gelman's research with young children showed that they will insist on this hidden essence even when they cannot say what it is, treating the essence as a kind of placeholder to be filled in later by knowledge.

Essentialism seems to fit living kinds and natural substances better than it fits human-made objects, and it can be socially harmful when people wrongly apply essentialist thinking to human groups, imagining fixed inner essences behind race or gender where none exist.

The lasting contribution of the theory-theory is the reminder that a concept is not an isolated snapshot but a node in a web of causal belief.


21.2 The structure of categories

Concepts do not float about as an unordered heap; they are arranged, and one of the most robust findings in the field is that this arrangement is not flat.

This section looks at two facts about that arrangement: that categories come in layers with one layer being psychologically special, and that people can also invent brand-new categories on the spot to suit a goal.


21.2.1 The basic level of categorisation

Any single object can be named at several levels of generality at once.

The creature asleep on the sofa is, all at the same time, an "animal", a "dog", and a "Labrador".

Eleanor Rosch and her colleagues in the 1970s called these three layers the superordinate level (the broad one, "animal"), the basic level (the middle one, "dog"), and the subordinate level (the narrow one, "Labrador").

Their central discovery is that the middle layer, the basic level, is psychologically privileged: it is the level at which the mind prefers to work.

The evidence is consistent and varied.

People name objects at the basic level fastest and most often, so shown a picture you are far more likely to blurt out "dog" than either "animal" or "Labrador".

Children learn basic-level words earliest, adults verify basic-level membership most quickly, and the basic level is where the words tend to be short and common across the world's languages.

Rosch explained this with a trade-off she called cognitive economy: the basic level is the sweet spot where a category is still informative, because its members share a lot and even have a common shape you could draw, yet it is not so narrow that you drown in fine distinctions.

Go up to "animal" and the members share too little to be useful; go down to "Labrador" and you gain little over "dog" for most purposes.

In systems terms the basic level is a default output setting: given an object as input, the naming system publishes the label at the level that maximises information gained per unit of discrimination cost, and naming latency is measurably shortest, typically by tens to a few hundred milliseconds, at that level.

One important qualification is that the special level shifts with expertise: a dog breeder or a bird-watcher becomes so fluent that the subordinate level ("Labrador", "chaffinch") starts to behave like the basic level for them, which shows the basic level reflects knowledge and use rather than a fixed fact about the world.


21.2.2 Ad hoc and goal-derived categories

Not every category is a settled, well-worn kind like "dog" or "furniture".

The psychologist Lawrence Barsalou showed that people can also build categories instantly to serve a momentary goal, and he called these ad hoc categories, the Latin phrase "ad hoc" meaning "for this particular purpose".

His famous example is the category "things to take out of your house in a fire".

Think about what belongs in it: your children, your pets, your passport, your laptop, a treasured photograph, perhaps some cash.

These items look nothing alike and would never sit together in an ordinary category, yet they form a perfectly sensible group the moment the goal of escaping a fire is in mind, united by the shared feature of being irreplaceable and worth saving.

Other everyday ad hoc categories include "foods to eat on a diet", "ways to get to the airport", and "things to pack for a holiday".

Barsalou's studies in the 1980s found something revealing about how these goal-derived categories are organised.

For ordinary categories, the best examples are the ones most similar to an average member, but for goal-derived categories the best examples are the ones closest to an ideal set by the goal.

For "foods to eat on a diet", the best example is not the average diet food but the one with the fewest calories, the ideal the goal points towards.

In systems terms, an ad hoc category is a query run at retrieval time rather than a table stored in advance: the current goal is an extra input that constructs a temporary category and ranks members by distance to an ideal, all within the seconds it takes to think of examples.

This matters for the bigger picture because it shows that categorisation is not only a matter of stored, permanent knowledge; it is a flexible, on-the-fly construction shaped by what you are trying to do right now.


21.3 Category learning

The previous sections described what categories are and how they are arranged; this section asks how a person comes to have a new category in the first place.

How does a radiologist learn to see a tumour on a scan, or a child learn to tell dogs from cats, when nobody hands them a definition.

Studying this in the laboratory has produced both precise mathematical models and an important discovery that the brain has more than one way of learning categories.


21.3.1 The computational models of category learning

To study category learning rigorously, researchers invent artificial categories, for example families of made-up cartoon creatures or blurry blobs, so they can control exactly what defines membership and watch a person learn it from scratch through trial and error with feedback.

A computational model, in this setting, is a precise mathematical recipe that tries to predict a learner's choices trial by trial, so that different theories can be tested against real behaviour rather than argued about in words.

The prototype and exemplar theories met earlier both have such model forms.

A prototype model assumes the learner gradually distils the training items into one summary per category and then judges new items by nearness to that summary.

An exemplar model, such as Nosofsky's Generalised Context Model, assumes the learner stores the individual training items and judges new items by their combined similarity to all of them.

In systems terms both models share an interface, feature vector in, category probability out, and differ only in state: one summary point per category against the full training set, which is exactly why they can be pitted against each other on identical data.

These models are valued because they make numerical predictions that can be checked, and much of the field's progress has come from pitting them against each other on the same data.

A broader survey groups the many proposals into a handful of families, including rule-based, prototype-based, exemplar-based, and boundary-based models, and the present consensus is that no single model captures all human category learning; the best account depends on the task.


21.3.2 Rule-based against similarity-based learning

One of the clearest lessons from this research is that the mind appears to have two rather different ways of learning categories, and they seem to rest on different brain systems.

The first is rule-based learning: you work out an explicit rule you could say out loud, such as "if the line is wider than the gap, it belongs in category A".

This kind of learning is deliberate and effortful, it leans on working memory and reasoning, that is, on the mind's ability to hold and juggle information consciously, and you can usually explain what you did.

The second is similarity-based or, more precisely, information-integration learning: here the correct category depends on blending several features together in a way no simple spoken rule can capture, and learners improve gradually through feedback without being able to say how they do it, much like learning to recognise a friend's face.

The psychologist Gregory Ashby and colleagues built an influential theory of this split called COVIS, which stands for Competition between Verbal and Implicit Systems.

COVIS proposes an explicit, verbal, rule-seeking system that competes with an implicit, procedural system that learns slowly from reward and is tied to a brain circuit involving the basal ganglia, structures deep in the brain long known for habit learning.

In systems terms these are two operating modes of one learning service: the explicit mode tests candidate rules in working memory and can update after a single trial, while the implicit mode adjusts feature weights incrementally over many trials and requires feedback to arrive promptly, within roughly a second, to assign credit correctly.

The strong evidence for two systems comes from dissociations: manipulations that hurt one kind of learning often leave the other untouched.

For example, a delay between a response and its feedback badly disrupts the implicit information-integration learning, which needs prompt reward, but barely affects rule-based learning.

Not everyone accepts that there are two truly separate systems, and some argue a single flexible model can mimic the results, so the debate is not fully closed, but the idea that explicit rules and implicit similarity are at least partly distinct routes to a category is widely influential.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ A feature description of the current stimulus, formatted as a vector of perceptual attribute values, arriving from the perceptual object-recognition pipeline.

◦ The current goal state, from executive control, which can trigger construction of ad hoc categories and shift attention weights.

◦ Causal and functional background beliefs about kinds, from semantic memory, used by theory-based categorisation.

◦ Corrective feedback signals, from the environment or a teacher, consumed by the category-learning subsystems.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A category label at a chosen level of generality, formatted as a symbolic token, consumed by language production and naming.

◦ A graded typicality or membership confidence score, consumed by reasoning and by response-time behaviour.

◦ A bundle of inferred properties and predictions about the categorised object, consumed by planning, action, and inference.

• STATE.

◦ Stored category representations: prototype summaries, remembered exemplars, explicit rules, and causal-theory links, plus current attention weights over features.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Attention weights over feature dimensions; a similarity gradient parameter controlling how sharply similarity falls off with distance; a decision criterion or bias between categories; a learning rate for updating representations from feedback.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Speeded categorisation and verification decisions complete in roughly 500 to 1000 milliseconds, with typical members verified tens to a few hundred milliseconds faster than atypical members.

◦ Implicit information-integration learning is disrupted when feedback is delayed by more than about 1 to 2.5 seconds after the response, indicating a credit-assignment window of roughly a second.

◦ A precise mental comparison rate for exemplar retrieval: REFUSED, because the literature models similarity computation as effectively parallel and does not support a single per-exemplar time value.

• MODES.

◦ Explicit rule mode against implicit similarity mode, with the switch driven by whether a verbalisable rule fits the category structure and by competition between the two systems as feedback accumulates.

◦ Stored-category mode against ad hoc construction mode, with the switch triggered by an active goal that no stored category serves.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Overgeneralisation and stereotyping, in which category-level predictions are wrongly applied to atypical members; essentialist thinking wrongly applied to human social groups; boundary disputes and unstable judgements for borderline cases; and, clinically, degraded categorisation when the memory and frontal systems supporting exemplars and rules are damaged.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called category names containing the known category labels.
For each category, create a list variable called stored exemplars containing the feature vectors of its remembered members.
For each category, calculate the average of its stored exemplars and store the result in a variable called prototype.
Receive a feature vector called new item as input.
Create a number variable called sensitivity with initial value two.
For each category in category names:
    Calculate the distance between new item and the category prototype.
    Calculate the exponential of the negative of the product of sensitivity and the distance, and store the result as the prototype similarity for the category.
    Create a number variable called total exemplar similarity with initial value zero.
    For each exemplar in the category's stored exemplars:
        Calculate the distance between new item and the exemplar.
        Calculate the exponential of the negative of the product of sensitivity and the distance, and add the result to total exemplar similarity.
For the prototype strategy, choose the category with the highest prototype similarity.
For the exemplar strategy, choose the category with the highest total exemplar similarity.
Return both chosen labels so the two strategies can be compared.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for the exponential function
import math

# Define a function that returns the distance between two feature vectors
def distance(a, b):
    # Return the square root of the sum of squared differences between paired values
    return math.sqrt(sum((x - y) ** 2 for x, y in zip(a, b)))

# Create a dictionary of categories, each holding a list of stored exemplar feature vectors
exemplars = {
    # Store the remembered dog exemplars as size and tameness feature pairs
    "dog": [(0.8, 0.9), (0.7, 0.8), (0.9, 0.7), (0.6, 0.9)],
    # Store the remembered cat exemplars as size and tameness feature pairs
    "cat": [(0.3, 0.5), (0.2, 0.6), (0.4, 0.4), (0.3, 0.7)],
}

# Create a dictionary of prototypes by averaging each category's exemplars
prototypes = {}
# For each category name and its exemplar list in the exemplar store
for name, items in exemplars.items():
    # Calculate the average value on each feature dimension and store it as the prototype
    prototypes[name] = tuple(sum(v) / len(items) for v in zip(*items))

# Define a function that categorises a new item under both strategies
def categorise(new_item, sensitivity=2.0):
    # Create empty dictionaries for the prototype scores and the exemplar scores
    proto_scores, exem_scores = {}, {}
    # For each category name in the store
    for name in exemplars:
        # Calculate similarity to the prototype as a decaying function of distance
        proto_scores[name] = math.exp(-sensitivity * distance(new_item, prototypes[name]))
        # Calculate the summed similarity of the new item to every stored exemplar
        exem_scores[name] = sum(math.exp(-sensitivity * distance(new_item, e))
                                for e in exemplars[name])
    # Choose the category with the highest prototype similarity
    proto_choice = max(proto_scores, key=proto_scores.get)
    # Choose the category with the highest total exemplar similarity
    exem_choice = max(exem_scores, key=exem_scores.get)
    # Return both chosen labels
    return proto_choice, exem_choice

# Create a new item that is medium sized and fairly tame
new_animal = (0.5, 0.75)
# Categorise the new item under both strategies
p, e = categorise(new_animal)
# Print the decision of each strategy
print("prototype strategy says:", p, "; exemplar strategy says:", e)


CHAPTER 22. SEMANTIC MEMORY AND ITS ORGANISATION (PROCESS)

This chapter is about your storehouse of general knowledge about the world, which psychologists call semantic memory.

Semantic memory is your knowledge of facts and meanings that are not tied to any particular moment in your life: that Paris is a city, that dogs are animals, that lemons are sour.

It is different from episodic memory, which is memory for specific events you lived through, such as the lemon tart you ate last Tuesday.

The great puzzle of this chapter is one of organisation: you hold an enormous amount of general knowledge, yet you can reach almost any piece of it in a fraction of a second, so how is it all arranged so that retrieval is so fast.

Viewed as a system, semantic memory is a very large read-mostly knowledge base with a retrieval interface: queries arrive from language and thought, and answers are published back within a few hundred milliseconds, so the storage layout must be optimised for that access speed.

We will look at three families of answer: that meaning is a network of linked ideas, that meaning is a set of features or a position in a space, and that meaning is held in the brain by a hub drawing together many senses.


22.1 The network models

The oldest and most intuitive idea is that knowledge is a network, a web of concepts joined by links, rather like a mind map or the way pages on the internet link to one another.

This section covers the first serious network model and the more flexible one that replaced it.


22.1.1 Hierarchical semantic networks

The first influential network model was built by Allan Collins and Ross Quillian in 1969, and it grew out of an attempt to store knowledge efficiently in a computer.

In their hierarchical model, each concept is a node, a point in the network, and nodes are connected in a branching tree from general at the top to specific at the bottom: "animal" sits above "bird", which sits above "canary".

Facts are stored at the highest level where they apply, a trick called cognitive economy that saves space.

So "can breathe" is stored just once, up at "animal", rather than being copied onto every creature below it, and "canary" only stores what is special to canaries, such as "is yellow" and "can sing".

To check a fact you travel through the network, and this leads to a clean, testable prediction: facts that require more travel should take longer to confirm.

In systems terms this is a tree traversal with a measurable per-hop cost: input a queried fact, walk upward link by link, output a confirmation, with each extra level adding on the order of 75 milliseconds for category steps and about 225 milliseconds for property lookups in the original data.

Confirming "a canary is a bird" means climbing one level, but confirming "a canary is an animal" means climbing two levels, and confirming "a canary can breathe" means climbing two levels and then fetching a stored fact.

Collins and Quillian found in sentence-verification experiments that people were indeed reliably slower for the statements requiring more steps, which was striking early support.

But the model soon ran into trouble.

It could not explain the typicality effect, that people confirm "a robin is a bird" faster than "a penguin is a bird" even though both are one step away.

It also mispredicted some distances, since people verify "a dog is an animal" surprisingly fast, and its strict tree could not easily hold the messy, criss-crossing associations of real knowledge.


22.1.2 Spreading activation

To fix these problems Collins, now working with Elizabeth Loftus, published a revised model in 1975 based on spreading activation.

The picture is still a network of concept nodes joined by links, but the tidy hierarchy is abandoned in favour of a web organised by relatedness, where the length of a link reflects how closely two ideas are associated in your experience.

Closely related ideas such as "red" and "fire" sit on short links; loosely related ones sit on long links.

Spreading activation is the core mechanism: when you think of a concept, that node lights up, and the activation flows outward along its links to neighbouring nodes, lighting them up too, more strongly for near neighbours than for distant ones.

As a system, this is a graph with a numeric activation level held at every node: the input is a probe that injects activation at one node, the process is iterative propagation along weighted links with decay at each step, and the output is a pattern of raised activations that makes related concepts faster to retrieve for the next second or so before the boost fades.

This elegantly explains typicality, because a strong short link runs from "bird" to the well-connected "robin" and a weaker one to "penguin".

It also explains a famous laboratory finding called semantic priming: people recognise the word "nurse" faster if they have just seen the related word "doctor", because seeing "doctor" has already sent activation flowing to "nurse", giving it a head start.

The cost of this flexibility is that a network you can reshape at will is harder to prove wrong, but spreading activation remains one of the most durable and widely used ideas in the psychology of memory.


22.2 The feature and space models

A different tradition sets aside the picture of nodes and links and asks instead what a meaning is made of.

Perhaps the meaning of a word is a bundle of smaller features, or perhaps it is a location in a vast mental space.

This section covers both, ending with the modern computational version that now powers much of artificial intelligence.


22.2.1 Semantic feature comparison

In 1974 Edward Smith, Edward Shoben, and Lance Rips proposed that a concept is not a point in a network but a list of features, and that categorising works by comparing the features of two things.

They drew a useful distinction between two kinds of feature.

Defining features are the ones essential to a category, the ones every member must have, such as "has feathers" for birds.

Characteristic features are ones that are merely typical, common but not required, such as "can fly", which most birds have but ostriches and penguins do not.

To judge a statement like "a robin is a bird", the model runs in two stages: first a quick, rough comparison of all features of both kinds, and if that gives a clear yes or a clear no the person answers at once.

Only if the first stage is ambiguous does a slower second stage kick in that checks the defining features alone.

In systems terms this is a two-stage pipeline with an early exit: stage one computes overall feature overlap and answers fast when the overlap is clearly high or clearly low, and only intermediate overlap values trigger the slower stage-two check, which is what adds the extra response time for atypical members.

This two-stage design neatly explains the typicality effect: a robin shares both defining and characteristic features with birds, so it passes the fast first stage and gets a quick "yes", while a penguin lacks characteristic features like flying, fails the fast stage, and forces the slow careful check, producing the observed delay.

The feature-comparison model faded as a standalone theory, partly because it is hard to say which features are truly "defining" for everyday concepts, the very problem that sank the classical definitional view, but its idea that meaning is built from features lives on.


22.2.2 Distributional semantics and vector-space meaning

Distributional semantics is a powerful modern idea about meaning that turned out to be the engine behind much of today's artificial intelligence, and its slogan is memorably simple.

The linguist John Rupert Firth put it in 1957 as "you shall know a word by the company it keeps", meaning you can learn what a word means just by watching which other words it tends to appear near.

The word "dog" keeps company with "bark", "leash", "tail", and "vet", and that pattern of company is, on this view, most of what "dog" means.

The method turns each word into a vector, which is just a long list of numbers recording how often the word co-occurs with every other word, so that a word becomes a point in a space with hundreds of dimensions.

Words used in similar contexts end up as nearby points, so "dog" and "cat" sit close together while "dog" and "democracy" sit far apart, and closeness in the space captures similarity of meaning.

In systems terms the pipeline is clear: the input is a large body of text, the process is counting co-occurrences and compressing the counts, the state is one vector per word, and the output for any query pair of words is a similarity score, usually the cosine of the angle between their vectors.

An early version was Latent Semantic Analysis in the 1990s, which used linear algebra to compress large bodies of text into such a space.

A famous later version was word2vec, introduced by Tomas Mikolov and colleagues at Google in 2013, which used a neural network and could even do rough analogies by arithmetic on the vectors, so that the vector for "king" minus "man" plus "woman" lands near "queen".

The great strength of this approach is that meaning is learned automatically from ordinary text with no human hand-labelling, and it is the direct ancestor of the word representations inside modern large language models.

Its much-debated weakness returns us to a theme of the next chapter: a system that has only ever seen words next to other words, and never touched a dog or seen the sky, may capture how words relate to each other without capturing what they are actually about.


22.3 The neural organisation of meaning

The models so far are about the mind's software; this section turns to the brain's hardware and asks where and how meaning is physically stored.

The evidence comes largely from what happens to knowledge when specific parts of the brain are damaged, which offers rare, if sad, natural experiments.


22.3.1 The hub-and-spoke model and the semantic hub

A central question about the brain is whether meaning lives in one place or is scattered.

The hub-and-spoke model, developed by Karalyn Patterson, Matthew Lambon Ralph, and colleagues, offers a "both" answer that has become the leading account.

The spokes are the scattered, modality-specific brain regions that hold the different kinds of sensory and motor knowledge about a thing: what a banana looks like sits near the visual areas, what it tastes like near the taste areas, how you peel it near the movement areas.

The term modality just means a channel of experience, such as sight, sound, or touch.

But scattered features are not enough, because knowing a banana means pulling all those strands into a single unified concept, and that is the job of the hub.

The hub is a region in the anterior temporal lobe, the front part of the temporal lobes which sit low on each side of the brain roughly behind the ears, and it draws the spokes together into a general, sense-independent meaning that captures the deep similarities between things.

In systems terms the hub is an integration layer: it subscribes to feature signals from every modality-specific spoke, computes a shared cross-modal code, and publishes that unified concept back out so that any single cue, a smell, a word, a picture, can retrieve the whole.

The strongest evidence comes from a condition called semantic dementia, in which the anterior temporal lobes gradually waste away.

Patients with semantic dementia lose meaning itself in a broad, even way across all categories and all senses, which is exactly what you would expect if the shared hub, rather than any single spoke, were breaking down; they come to sort things by shallow appearance rather than deep meaning, for instance grouping all four-legged animals together.


22.3.2 Category-specific semantic deficits as evidence of structure

One of the most surprising discoveries in this field is that brain damage can rob a person of knowledge about one category of things while leaving other categories almost intact.

Elizabeth Warrington and Tim Shallice reported the landmark cases in 1984.

Some patients could recognise and name non-living objects like tools and furniture perfectly well, yet were badly impaired at living things such as animals and fruits, and, more rarely, other patients showed the opposite pattern.

When two patients show opposite patterns like this, researchers call it a double dissociation, and it is powerful evidence that the two abilities rest on at least partly separate machinery rather than one lumped-together store.

Warrington and Shallice offered an explanation called the sensory-functional theory.

Their idea was that we tell living things apart mainly by their sensory features, that is, by fine differences in shape, colour, and texture, whereas we identify non-living tools mainly by what they are for and how we act with them, their functional features.

In systems terms the two accounts predict different fault maps: a single undivided store predicts uniform degradation under damage, while a store partitioned by feature type predicts exactly the category-selective outages that were observed.

If sensory knowledge and functional knowledge live in different parts of the brain, then damage to the sensory part would hit living things hardest, and damage to the functional part would hit tools hardest, which is roughly the observed pattern.

The theory is not the last word, and rival accounts stress other factors such as how familiar or how visually crowded the categories are, but the basic finding stands: the fact that knowledge can fracture along the seam between living and non-living things tells us semantic memory has real internal structure rather than being one undivided mass.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Retrieval probes: words, images, or thoughts that name or cue a concept, arriving from perception, language comprehension, and ongoing reasoning.

◦ New facts and associations to be stored, arriving from episodic memory through consolidation.

◦ Contextual priming input: recently active concepts whose residual activation biases what is retrieved next.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Retrieved facts, properties, and associations, formatted as activated concept representations, consumed by language, reasoning, and imagery.

◦ Graded activation levels over related concepts, consumed as priming by word recognition and by fluency of thought.

◦ Verification signals, yes or no with a confidence level, for queried statements, consumed by decision and response systems.

• STATE.

◦ The long-term knowledge graph itself: concept nodes, weighted links, feature lists, and distributed vector-like codes, plus the short-lived pattern of current activation across the network.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Link strengths between concepts; an activation decay rate; a spreading fraction governing how much activation passes to neighbours; a retrieval threshold a node must exceed to enter awareness.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Sentence verification of familiar facts completes in roughly 1 second, with each extra hierarchical step adding on the order of 75 milliseconds for category statements and about 225 milliseconds for property statements in the Collins and Quillian data.

◦ Automatic semantic priming is strongest when the related word appears within roughly 200 to 500 milliseconds before the target and largely dissipates over the following seconds.

◦ A universal decay half-life for spreading activation: REFUSED, because published estimates vary widely with task and model and no single agreed value exists.

• MODES.

◦ Automatic retrieval mode, fast spreading of activation without effort, against strategic search mode, deliberate cue-generation when automatic retrieval fails, with the switch triggered by a retrieval failure such as a tip-of-the-tongue state.

◦ Read mode against write mode, with writing gated by consolidation processes that slowly add new links to the store.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Tip-of-the-tongue states and retrieval blocks; false confirmations of plausible but wrong facts through overlapping associations; semantic dementia, a broad cross-modal loss of meaning when the anterior temporal hub degenerates; and category-specific deficits when particular feature regions are damaged.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a dictionary variable called network where each concept name maps to a list of pairs of a neighbouring concept name and a link strength between zero and one.
Create a dictionary variable called activation where every concept name maps to the number zero.
Receive a concept name called probe as input.
Set the activation of probe to one.
Create a number variable called decay with value zero point six.
Create a list variable called frontier containing only the probe.
Repeat three times:
    Create an empty list called next frontier.
    For each concept in frontier:
        For each pair of neighbour and strength linked to the concept:
            Calculate the product of the concept's activation, the strength, and decay.
            If the result is greater than the neighbour's current activation:
                Set the neighbour's activation to the result.
                Add the neighbour to next frontier.
    Set frontier to next frontier.
Sort the concepts by activation from highest to lowest.
Return the sorted list as the pattern of primed concepts.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a dictionary mapping each concept to its neighbours and link strengths
network = {
    # Link the concept doctor to its associates
    "doctor": [("nurse", 0.9), ("hospital", 0.8), ("stethoscope", 0.6)],
    # Link the concept nurse to its associates
    "nurse": [("doctor", 0.9), ("hospital", 0.8), ("uniform", 0.5)],
    # Link the concept hospital to its associates
    "hospital": [("doctor", 0.8), ("nurse", 0.8), ("ambulance", 0.7)],
    # Link the concept ambulance to its associates
    "ambulance": [("hospital", 0.7), ("siren", 0.8)],
    # Link the concept siren to its associates
    "siren": [("ambulance", 0.8), ("fire", 0.4)],
    # Link the concept stethoscope to its associates
    "stethoscope": [("doctor", 0.6)],
    # Link the concept uniform to its associates
    "uniform": [("nurse", 0.5)],
    # Link the concept fire to its associates
    "fire": [("siren", 0.4), ("red", 0.7)],
    # Link the concept red to its associates
    "red": [("fire", 0.7)],
}

# Define a function that spreads activation outward from a probe concept
def spread(probe, steps=3, decay=0.6):
    # Create an activation dictionary with every concept set to zero
    activation = {name: 0.0 for name in network}
    # Set the activation of the probe concept to one
    activation[probe] = 1.0
    # Create a frontier list containing only the probe
    frontier = [probe]
    # Repeat the propagation for the requested number of steps
    for _ in range(steps):
        # Create an empty list for the next frontier
        next_frontier = []
        # For each active concept in the current frontier
        for concept in frontier:
            # For each neighbour and link strength of the concept
            for neighbour, strength in network[concept]:
                # Calculate the activation passed along the link with decay
                passed = activation[concept] * strength * decay
                # If the passed activation exceeds the neighbour's current level
                if passed > activation[neighbour]:
                    # Set the neighbour's activation to the passed value
                    activation[neighbour] = passed
                    # Add the neighbour to the next frontier
                    next_frontier.append(neighbour)
        # Replace the frontier with the next frontier
        frontier = next_frontier
    # Return the concepts sorted from most to least activated
    return sorted(activation.items(), key=lambda pair: -pair[1])

# Spread activation from the concept doctor and print the primed concepts
for concept, level in spread("doctor"):
    # Print each concept with its activation level rounded to three places
    print(concept, round(level, 3))


CHAPTER 23. GROUNDED, EMBODIED, AND DISTRIBUTED MEANING (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter steps back from the machinery of memory to ask a deep and stubborn question: what makes a thought about something actually be about that thing.

It is tagged as a framework because it supplies ideas and arguments that sharpen and constrain the process chapters around it, rather than describing a single mental capacity.

The question sounds abstract but it has become urgent in the age of artificial intelligence, because a chatbot can produce fluent sentences about apples without ever having seen, held, or tasted one.

The worry running through this chapter is whether meaning can live purely inside a system of symbols, or whether it must somehow be anchored, or grounded, in real experience of the world, in a real body acting in a real environment.

In systems terms the question is about the interface between the symbol store and the world: a purely symbolic system has inputs and outputs only in symbol format, while a grounded system also subscribes to sensor streams and publishes motor commands, and the debate is over whether the first kind of interface can ever carry meaning on its own.


23.1 The symbol grounding problem

This section sets out the core problem plainly and traces it to the two thinkers who framed it, then surveys the main proposed escape routes.


23.1.1 Harnad's formulation and the Chinese Room

The symbol grounding problem was named and sharpened by the cognitive scientist Stevan Harnad in 1990.

The problem is this: if the meaning of a symbol in your head is given only by other symbols, the way a dictionary defines each word using more words, then the whole system seems to spin in a closed circle, with meaning never touching the world at all.

Harnad's own image is of trying to learn Chinese from a Chinese-to-Chinese dictionary alone: every definition sends you to more Chinese words you also do not know, and you could circle forever without ever learning what a single word means.

So the question is how any symbol inside a mind or a machine gets to be about a real thing out in the world, rather than just pointing at yet more symbols.

Harnad built directly on a famous earlier thought experiment by the philosopher John Searle in 1980, called the Chinese Room.

Searle imagined himself locked in a room with a huge rulebook, receiving slips of paper covered in Chinese characters and using the rulebook to send back other Chinese characters.

To the Chinese speakers outside, the room gives perfect answers and seems to understand Chinese, yet Searle inside understands nothing; he is just shuffling shapes by their form according to rules.

Searle's point was that manipulating symbols by their shape, which is what he argued a computer does, can never by itself add up to genuine understanding of what the symbols mean.

In systems terms the room is a pure input-output transducer over symbol strings, and the two sides predict differently: Searle predicts that no amount of internal symbol shuffling changes what the system is about, while his critics predict that aboutness can emerge from the right functional organisation regardless of the medium.

Harnad accepted the force of this and turned it into a constructive challenge: rather than just denying that machines understand, he asked how symbols could be given real meaning, and he suggested the answer must involve connecting symbols to the world through the senses.


23.1.2 Grounding by sensorimotor experience and by multimodal learning

Harnad's proposed way out of the circle is to tie at least some symbols directly to the world through sensory and motor experience, so that they are not defined by other words but by contact with the things themselves.

Sensorimotor means having to do with sensing and moving, that is, with perceiving the world and acting on it with a body.

The idea is that a basic word like "red" or "cup" gets its meaning grounded because the system can pick out red things and cups by seeing and handling them, and richer words can then be built on top of these grounded basics.

Harnad specifically proposed a hybrid system, one that joins a symbol-manipulating part to a pattern-learning neural network that connects those symbols to sensory images of the world, so you get the best of both.

In systems terms grounding is an added input channel: the base symbols subscribe directly to perceptual classifiers trained on sensor data, and every higher symbol inherits its connection to the world through composition over those grounded bases.

A modern echo of this idea is multimodal learning in artificial intelligence, where "multimodal" means using several channels of input at once, such as pictures and text together rather than text alone.

Recent artificial intelligence systems that are trained on images paired with their captions learn to connect the word "dog" to actual pictures of dogs, which many researchers see as a partial, practical form of grounding that a text-only system lacks.

Whether this truly solves Harnad's problem or merely connects one set of symbols, words, to another, patterns of pixels, is still genuinely debated, and reasonable experts disagree, so it is fair to call this an open question rather than a settled one.


23.2 Grounded and perceptual symbol systems

This section presents the strongest positive theory in this area, the claim that concepts are not abstract at all but are re-enactments of experience, and then weighs the evidence honestly.


23.2.1 Concepts as simulations rather than amodal symbols

The traditional view in cognitive science held that concepts are amodal symbols.

Amodal means stripped of any particular sense, an abstract code standing for "dog" that is no more visual than it is auditory, like a word written in an internal language of thought.

The psychologist Lawrence Barsalou challenged this head-on in 1999 with his theory of perceptual symbol systems, part of a broader movement called grounded or embodied cognition.

Barsalou's proposal is that concepts are not abstract codes but simulations, partial re-enactments of the very brain states that occur when you actually perceive or act.

On this view, to think about a hammer you unconsciously and partly reactivate the visual experience of seeing a hammer and the motor experience of swinging one; the concept is a rehearsal of the experience rather than a description of it.

Barsalou calls the full stored capacity to run such re-enactments for a category a simulator, and any single running instance a simulation, so your "car" simulator can generate a simulation of a specific red sports car when needed.

In systems terms a simulator is a stored generative model whose input is a conceptual query and whose output is a partial replay of sensory and motor activity, so that thinking reuses the perception and action hardware rather than a separate symbol processor.

The appeal of this theory is that it dissolves the grounding problem at a stroke: if concepts just are reactivated perception and action, they are grounded in the world automatically, with no gap to bridge.


23.2.2 The evidence for and against grounding

The evidence for grounded cognition is real but has been contested, so it is worth laying out both sides plainly.

On the supporting side, many experiments show that understanding language stirs up sensory and motor brain systems.

For example, reading action words like "kick", "pick", and "lick" activates the very regions of the motor cortex that control the foot, hand, and mouth, as if you faintly simulate the action to understand the word.

In behavioural studies, people are faster to judge a sentence sensible when the hand movement they must make to respond matches the movement the sentence describes, a result known as the action-sentence compatibility effect.

On the sceptical side, critics raise two main points.

First, activation is not the same as necessity: the fact that motor areas light up when you read "kick" does not prove that you need those areas to understand the word, since the activation might be a side effect that follows understanding rather than causing it.

Second, grounded theories struggle to explain abstract concepts like "justice", "seven", or "tomorrow", which have no obvious look, sound, or feel to simulate.

In systems terms the two camps predict differently under intervention: if simulation is load-bearing, disabling the motor channel should slow or impair understanding of action words, while if it is a side effect, understanding should proceed unchanged when the channel is removed.

The current balanced view among many researchers is a middle position: sensory and motor simulation genuinely contributes to meaning, especially for concrete words, but it probably works alongside more abstract, language-based, and word-co-occurrence knowledge rather than replacing it entirely.

In short, the mind may be neither purely grounded nor purely abstract, but a blend, and pinning down that blend is active research.


23.3 Schemas, frames, and mental models

The final section of this chapter turns from single concepts to larger packages of structured knowledge, the ready-made mental frameworks that let you make sense of whole situations quickly.


23.3.1 Frames and scripts as structured knowledge

Much of the knowledge you use is not about lone objects but about how things typically hang together in familiar situations, and researchers proposed structured packages to capture this.

The artificial-intelligence pioneer Marvin Minsky introduced the idea of a frame in 1974.

A frame is a data structure for a stereotyped situation, made of slots that expect certain kinds of filler, with sensible default values ready when the details are missing.

Your "kitchen" frame has slots for a stove, a sink, and cupboards, and if someone mentions a kitchen you have not seen, you automatically assume it has these things unless told otherwise; that is a default value at work.

Closely related is the script, an idea from Roger Schank and Robert Abelson in 1977, which is a frame for a routine sequence of events.

Their famous example is the restaurant script: you know without being told that you enter, are seated, read a menu, order, eat, pay, and leave, in that order, with roles for the waiter and the cook.

In systems terms a frame is a record with typed slots and defaults and a script is the same structure ordered in time: the input is a mention of the situation, the process is slot filling from evidence with defaults for the gaps, and the output is a complete situation model produced within the second or two it takes to read a sentence.

Scripts explain why stories can leave so much unsaid, since if a tale says "she ate at the cafe and left a big tip", you effortlessly fill in the ordering and the eating from your script, and they also explain a memory quirk: people often misremember a story as having included typical script events that were never actually mentioned, because the script quietly supplied them.

Frames and scripts are important both as theories of human knowledge and as early blueprints for getting machines to reason about ordinary situations.


23.3.2 Mental models as manipulable internal representations

A mental model is a small working replica of some part of the world that you build in your head and can then run or manipulate to figure things out, rather than a static store of facts.

The idea was developed in depth by the psychologist Philip Johnson-Laird, building on an older insight from Kenneth Craik in 1943 that the mind works by carrying a small-scale model of reality that it can use to try out actions in imagination before committing to them in the flesh.

The key feature is that a mental model has a structure that mirrors the structure of the thing it represents, so relationships in the model line up with relationships in the world, which is what lets you "read off" new conclusions by inspecting the model.

In systems terms a mental model is a runnable simulation: its inputs are premises or observations, its state is a structural replica whose parts map to parts of the world, and its output is whatever new relation becomes visible when the model is inspected or stepped forward in time.

Johnson-Laird applied this powerfully to reasoning: he argued that when people work through a logic problem they do not follow formal rules of logic but instead imagine concrete example situations, that is, build mental models of the possibilities, and then check what holds across them.

This theory neatly predicts why people make certain reasoning errors, because they tend to build only one or a few models and overlook other possibilities that a fuller search would reveal, so the errors come from limited model-building rather than from broken logic.

Mental models also explain everyday understanding, such as how you predict what a set of gears will do by mentally turning them, and the idea connects outward to the broader theme of Chapter One, that a mind works largely by building and running internal models of its world.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Symbol streams: words and sentences arriving from language comprehension, whose meanings are the thing to be grounded.

◦ Sensor streams: visual, auditory, tactile, taste, and smell input from perception, plus proprioceptive feedback from the body.

◦ Motor efference copies: records of one's own actions, which tie words like "grasp" to the experience of grasping.

◦ Situation cues that trigger frames, scripts, and mental-model construction.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Grounded concept representations: symbols bound to perceptual classifiers and motor routines, consumed by semantic memory and reasoning.

◦ Running simulations: partial re-enactments of sensory and motor states, consumed by imagery, comprehension, and planning.

◦ Filled situation models: frames and scripts with slots resolved, consumed by discourse comprehension and memory encoding.

◦ Predictions read off from mental models, consumed by decision and action systems.

• STATE.

◦ The learned mappings from symbols to sensorimotor patterns; the library of frames, scripts, and simulators; and the currently constructed mental model of the situation at hand.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ The blend weight between grounded simulation and distributional word-co-occurrence knowledge; the strength of frame default values; the number of alternative mental models a reasoner will build before answering.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Motor-cortex activation by action words appears within roughly 200 milliseconds of word onset in electrophysiological studies, fast enough to be part of comprehension rather than an afterthought.

◦ Script-based inference completes within normal reading time, on the order of a few hundred milliseconds to a couple of seconds per sentence.

◦ A characteristic time constant for constructing or updating a full mental model: REFUSED, because construction time varies with model complexity and the literature reports no single standard value.

• MODES.

◦ Grounded simulation mode against symbolic shortcut mode, with concrete familiar content favouring simulation and abstract or highly practised content favouring language-based association, the depth demanded by the task switching between them.

◦ Default mode against evidence mode within a frame, with each slot switching from its default value to an observed value the moment the input specifies it.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Ungrounded fluency, producing well-formed talk with no anchoring in experience, as critics allege of text-only artificial intelligence; script-driven false memory, recalling typical events that never occurred; default-value errors when a situation silently violates the frame; and reasoning errors from building too few mental models of the possibilities.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a dictionary variable called word vectors where each word maps to a list of numbers describing the contexts the word appears in.
Receive two words called word a and word b as input.
Look up the vector for word a and the vector for word b.
Create a number variable called dot product with initial value zero.
For each position in the vectors, calculate the product of the paired values and add the result to dot product.
Create a number variable called norm a with initial value zero.
For each value in the vector of word a, calculate the square of the value and add the result to norm a.
Set norm a to the square root of norm a.
Create a number variable called norm b with initial value zero.
For each value in the vector of word b, calculate the square of the value and add the result to norm b.
Set norm b to the square root of norm b.
Calculate the quotient of dot product divided by the product of norm a and norm b, and store the result in a variable called cosine similarity.
Return cosine similarity as the closeness of meaning between the two words, noting that it measures only the company the words keep, not contact with the world.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for the square root function
import math

# Create a dictionary of word vectors built from counts of context company kept
word_vectors = {
    # Record how often dog co-occurs with the contexts bark, leash, purr, vote, and law
    "dog": [8.0, 7.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0],
    # Record the same context counts for cat
    "cat": [2.0, 1.0, 9.0, 0.0, 0.0],
    # Record the same context counts for puppy
    "puppy": [7.0, 6.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0],
    # Record the same context counts for democracy
    "democracy": [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 8.0, 9.0],
    # Record the same context counts for election
    "election": [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 9.0, 7.0],
}

# Define a function that returns the cosine similarity of two words
def cosine(word_a, word_b):
    # Look up the vector for each word
    a, b = word_vectors[word_a], word_vectors[word_b]
    # Calculate the dot product by summing the products of paired values
    dot = sum(x * y for x, y in zip(a, b))
    # Calculate the length of the first vector
    norm_a = math.sqrt(sum(x * x for x in a))
    # Calculate the length of the second vector
    norm_b = math.sqrt(sum(y * y for y in b))
    # Return the dot product divided by the product of the two lengths
    return dot / (norm_a * norm_b)

# Create a list of word pairs to compare
pairs = [("dog", "puppy"), ("dog", "cat"), ("dog", "democracy"), ("democracy", "election")]
# For each pair of words in the list
for w1, w2 in pairs:
    # Print the pair with its cosine similarity rounded to three places
    print(w1, "and", w2, "have similarity", round(cosine(w1, w2), 3))


CHAPTER 24. MENTAL IMAGERY AND ANALOG REPRESENTATION (PROCESS)

This chapter is about the pictures in your head.

Mental imagery is the experience of perceiving something in its absence, most familiarly "seeing" something with your mind's eye, as when you picture your front door or count the windows on your house from memory.

Almost everyone has some version of this experience, and it raises a genuinely deep question about the mind: when you picture something, is there really a picture-like thing in your head, or is that just a figure of speech for a process that is actually more like describing.

That question drove one of the longest and most instructive debates in cognitive science, and this chapter lays out the striking experiments first and then the debate they fed.

The word analog in the chapter title means a representation that varies smoothly and resembles what it stands for, the way the length of a mercury thermometer's column varies in step with the temperature, as opposed to a digital or symbolic code that stands for things by arbitrary labels.

Viewed as a system, imagery is a generator and a workspace: it takes a request from thought, loads a spatial representation from memory, applies continuous transformations such as rotation and scanning, and publishes the transformed image back for inspection, with a processing time that grows in a lawful way with the size of the transformation.


24.1 The phenomena of imagery

Before the theories, this section presents the two classic experimental findings that made imagery a respectable scientific topic, because both produced clean, orderly numbers rather than mere reports of private experience.


24.1.1 Mental rotation and its linear signature

The most celebrated imagery experiment was carried out by Roger Shepard and Jacqueline Metzler in 1971, and its result is beautifully simple.

They showed people pairs of drawings of three-dimensional shapes built from little cubes, and the task was just to decide whether the two shapes were the same object seen from different angles, or genuinely different mirror-image shapes.

The crucial trick was that when the two shapes were the same, one was shown rotated by some amount relative to the other, anywhere from zero up to 180 degrees.

The striking finding was a straight-line relationship: the more one shape was rotated away from the other, the longer people took to decide they matched, and the increase was remarkably steady, adding a roughly constant amount of time for each extra degree of rotation.

This orderly straight-line pattern is the "linear signature" of the chapter title.

The natural interpretation, and the one Shepard and Metzler drew, is that people literally rotate a mental image of one shape, smoothly and at a fairly constant speed of very roughly 60 degrees per second, until it lines up with the other and they can compare them.

In systems terms the rotation module takes an image and a target orientation as inputs and publishes an aligned image, and its time cost is the angular disparity divided by a rotation rate of roughly 60 degrees per second, so a 180 degree rotation costs about 3 seconds on top of the fixed time to encode the shapes and press the button.

The importance of this result is that the timing behaves as if a real object were being physically turned in space, which is hard to explain if the mind were only shuffling abstract symbols, and it strongly suggested that imagery is an analog process that preserves the spatial structure of what it represents.


24.1.2 Image scanning and the preservation of metric structure

The second classic finding came from Stephen Kosslyn in the 1970s, and it concerns not rotating an image but scanning across one.

Kosslyn had people memorise a map of a made-up island dotted with landmarks such as a hut, a tree, and a well, and then, with eyes closed, picture the map and mentally move their attention from one named landmark to another.

The result mirrored the rotation studies: the greater the real distance between two landmarks on the original map, the longer people took to scan between them in their mind's eye.

Again the times rose in a steady, straight-line fashion with distance.

The phrase "preservation of metric structure" means that the mental image keeps the actual distances of the real thing, so that things far apart on the map are far apart in the image and take longer to travel between.

In systems terms the scanning module moves an attention pointer across a stored spatial layout at a roughly constant internal speed, so its output latency is a linear function of represented distance, which is precisely the behaviour of a pointer traversing a genuine spatial medium.

Kosslyn argued that this is exactly what you would expect if a mental image is genuinely laid out like a picture in a space, with the mind's eye moving across it much as real eyes move across a real scene.

Taken together with mental rotation, image scanning built a strong case that mental images are not just vague inner talk but structured, space-like representations you can move around in, which set up the great debate that follows.


24.2 The imagery debate

The experiments above were dramatic, but they did not by themselves settle what a mental image really is, and for decades two camps drew opposite conclusions from the same data.

This section lays out the two positions and then gives an honest account of what was and was not resolved.


24.2.1 The depictive account

The depictive account, championed by Stephen Kosslyn, takes the experiments largely at face value.

Depictive means picture-like, representing by resemblance the way a photograph does, so that parts of the representation correspond to parts of the thing and spatial layout is genuinely preserved.

On this view a mental image really is a special kind of picture in the head, displayed on an internal space-like medium that Kosslyn compared to a screen, which the rest of the mind can inspect much as an eye inspects a scene.

This account explains the rotation and scanning results very naturally: they take time in an orderly, distance-dependent way precisely because a real spatial layout is being traversed step by step, just as it would take you longer to walk across a bigger room.

In systems terms the depictive claim is a claim about the storage format: the image buffer is an array-like medium in which adjacency in the representation mirrors adjacency in the world, so transformation cost necessarily scales with represented distance.

Kosslyn's stronger claim, developed later, was that these mental pictures are actually laid out on the maps in the early visual areas of the brain, the same regions that light up when you really see, so that imagining and seeing share hardware.


24.2.2 The propositional account

The opposing view was pressed hardest by Zenon Pylyshyn, and it denies that there is any real picture in the head at all.

A proposition is an abstract, language-like description of a fact, something like "the hut is north of the tree", with no pictorial quality of its own.

Pylyshyn argued that all knowledge, including so-called images, is really stored in this abstract propositional form, and that the feeling of seeing a picture is just that, a feeling, not evidence of an actual internal picture doing the work.

His sharpest objection was ingenious.

He suggested that the scanning and rotation results might come not from any picture but from what he called tacit knowledge, meaning people's unconscious knowledge about how real objects behave.

The idea is that participants know, without realising they are using it, that in the real world scanning a longer distance or rotating a larger angle takes more time, and they unconsciously reproduce that expected timing when asked to imagine, so the neat results reflect their beliefs about the world rather than the mechanics of a mental image.

In systems terms the two accounts predict differently under a change of instructions: a fixed depictive medium should yield the same time-per-degree regardless of what participants believe, whereas a tacit-knowledge simulation should shift its timing when expectations are changed.

Pylyshyn backed this with the finding that the results can change when you change the instructions or what people expect, which is awkward for the idea that you are simply reading off a fixed internal picture.


24.2.3 What the debate settled and what it did not

After decades of argument, the imagery debate reached a partial and honest resolution rather than a clean victory for either side.

What the newer evidence, especially brain imaging, did settle for many researchers is that imagery is not purely abstract description.

When people form vivid visual images, the early visual areas of the brain, including the primary visual cortex that also processes real sight, often become active, and the pattern of activity even reflects the size and shape of what is imagined, which fits the depictive account and is hard to square with a purely propositional one.

Damage to visual brain areas can impair imagery in ways that parallel its effect on perception, further tying the two together.

What the debate did not fully settle is the deeper philosophical point, and Pylyshyn and his allies were never entirely refuted, because one can always insist that the brain activity is a by-product and that the real computations underneath are still symbol-like.

There is also a genuine puzzle the debate did not anticipate: people vary enormously in their imagery, and some individuals, described only in recent years under the name aphantasia, report no conscious visual imagery at all yet can still do many imagery tasks, which suggests the vivid inner picture may not be doing all the work we once assumed.

In systems terms aphantasia looks like a missing or silent display channel with the underlying spatial computation intact, a dissociation between the workspace and its conscious readout that neither original camp predicted.

The lasting lesson is a good one for a beginner to carry away: two careful camps looked at the same solid data and disagreed for years, and progress came less from winning the argument than from inventing new methods, here brain imaging, that could see past the private nature of the experience.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Generation requests from thought and language: a description or memory cue naming what to imagine.

◦ Stored visual and spatial long-term memories, supplying the content that the image is built from.

◦ Transformation commands from executive control: rotate, scan, zoom, or recompose the current image.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ The current image state, a space-preserving representation, consumed by inspection processes that read off shape, size, and spatial relations.

◦ Comparison verdicts, for example same object or mirror image, with response times that grow linearly with the transformation applied, consumed by decision and response systems.

◦ Reactivation of early visual cortex that can prime or interfere with concurrent real seeing.

• STATE.

◦ The contents of the visual buffer: the currently generated image, its position, scale, and orientation, plus the location of the attention pointer within it.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rotation rate in degrees per second; scanning speed across the represented layout; buffer resolution and extent; image vividness, which varies enormously between individuals.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Mental rotation proceeds at very roughly 60 degrees per second for the Shepard and Metzler block figures, adding roughly 1 second of decision time per 60 degrees of angular disparity.

◦ Image scanning time grows linearly with represented distance in Kosslyn's map studies, with scanning a full map taking on the order of 1 to 2 seconds.

◦ Image generation time for a simple familiar object: REFUSED, because reported values vary widely with image complexity and no single standard figure is agreed.

◦ Unrehearsed image maintenance fades within a few seconds without active refreshing, consistent with visual short-term store limits.

• MODES.

◦ Generation mode, building an image from memory, against inspection mode, reading properties off the current image, against transformation mode, rotating or scanning it, with executive commands switching between the three.

◦ Perception-coupled against decoupled operation: the same early visual machinery serves real seeing or imagery, with sensory input normally dominating and imagery running when input is absent or gated.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Aphantasia, the absence of conscious voluntary imagery; imagery loss after damage to visual cortex that parallels perceptual loss; confusing vividly imagined events with perceived ones, a source of false memory; and experimenter-expectation effects in which tacit knowledge shapes the measured timings.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called rotation rate with value sixty, representing degrees rotated per second.
Create a number variable called base time with value one, representing the fixed seconds needed to encode the shapes and respond.
Create a list variable called disparities containing the angles zero, thirty, sixty, ninety, one hundred twenty, one hundred fifty, and one hundred eighty.
Create an empty list called predicted times.
For each angle in disparities:
    Calculate the quotient of the angle divided by rotation rate.
    Calculate the sum of base time and the quotient, and store the result as the predicted response time.
    Add a small random amount of noise to the predicted response time.
    Add the predicted response time to predicted times.
For each pair of angle and predicted response time, print the angle and the time.
Calculate the difference between the last predicted time and the first predicted time.
Calculate the quotient of that difference divided by one hundred eighty, and store the result as the estimated slope in seconds per degree.
Print the estimated slope to show the linear signature of mental rotation.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for response-time noise
import random

# Create a variable for the mental rotation rate in degrees per second
rotation_rate = 60.0
# Create a variable for the fixed encoding and response time in seconds
base_time = 1.0

# Define a function that predicts the response time for one trial
def predict_response_time(angle):
    # Calculate the rotation time as the angle divided by the rotation rate
    rotation_time = angle / rotation_rate
    # Calculate a small random noise value between minus and plus a tenth of a second
    noise = random.uniform(-0.1, 0.1)
    # Return the sum of the base time, the rotation time, and the noise
    return base_time + rotation_time + noise

# Create a list of angular disparities from zero to one hundred eighty degrees
disparities = [0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180]
# Create an empty list for the predicted times
times = []
# For each angle in the list of disparities
for angle in disparities:
    # Predict the response time for this angle
    rt = predict_response_time(angle)
    # Add the predicted time to the list
    times.append(rt)
    # Print the angle and the predicted response time rounded to two places
    print("disparity", angle, "degrees -> response time", round(rt, 2), "seconds")

# Calculate the estimated slope as the rise over the run of the line
slope = (times[-1] - times[0]) / (disparities[-1] - disparities[0])
# Print the slope in milliseconds per degree to show the linear signature
print("estimated slope:", round(slope * 1000, 1), "milliseconds per degree")


================================================================================

PART SIX. LANGUAGE

================================================================================

CHAPTER 25. THE STRUCTURE AND FACULTY OF LANGUAGE (PROCESS)

Language is the system that lets one mind put a thought into another mind using sound, sign, or written marks.

Viewed as an engineered system, language is a layered protocol stack: each layer consumes the output of the layer below it, applies its own rules, and publishes a richer representation to the layer above.

This chapter is about what language is made of and whether the ability to use it is a special piece of mental machinery all its own.

We will start with the layers that every language is built from, then look at the features that make human language so powerful, and finish by asking whether language is a separate faculty or just ordinary thinking put to use.

The reason any of this matters is simple: understanding how language is structured is the first step toward understanding how a mind, human or machine, could ever produce and understand it.


25.1 The levels of linguistic structure

Language looks like a single smooth stream, but underneath it is organised into separate layers, each with its own rules.

Linguists find it useful to peel these layers apart, because a problem at one layer can be studied without solving the others.

In systems terms this is classic modular decomposition: each layer exposes a clean interface to its neighbours, so an engineer, or a scientist, can debug one layer while treating the others as black boxes.

The sections below walk up from the smallest pieces, the sounds, to the largest, whole conversations.


25.1.1 Phonology and morphology

Phonology is the study of the sound system of a language, meaning the set of sounds it uses and the rules for how those sounds may be combined.

The smallest unit of sound that can change the meaning of a word is called a phoneme, and swapping one phoneme for another turns "bat" into "pat" or "cat".

A phoneme is not a letter and not an exact acoustic recording; it is a category of sound that speakers of a language treat as the same, even when the actual noise varies from person to person and moment to moment.

Different languages carve the sound world up differently, so a distinction that matters in one language can be invisible in another.

For example, English treats the "r" and "l" sounds as two different phonemes, while Japanese does not draw that line in the same way, which is why the contrast is famously hard for some Japanese learners of English.

Phonology also covers rules about which sound sequences are allowed, so an English speaker senses that "blick" could be a word but "bnick" could not, even though neither is real.

Morphology is the study of the internal structure of words, meaning how words are built out of smaller meaningful pieces.

The smallest unit that carries meaning is called a morpheme, and a single word can contain several of them.

The word "cats" contains two morphemes, the root "cat" and the plural marker "s", and the word "unhappiness" contains three, namely "un", "happy", and "ness".

Morphemes come in two broad kinds, free morphemes that can stand alone as words, like "dog", and bound morphemes that must attach to something else, like the past-tense "ed".

Morphology is why you can hear a brand new word like "to google" and instantly know that "googled" means it happened in the past, without anyone teaching you that specific form.

Together, phonology and morphology handle the raw materials of language, the sounds and the word-parts, before any sentence is built.

As a system, the phonological layer takes a continuous acoustic or articulatory signal as input, outputs a discrete sequence of phoneme categories, and operates at the timescale of ordinary speech, which runs at roughly five syllables per second, so its units turn over every few hundred milliseconds; the morphological layer takes that phoneme sequence as input and outputs structured words tagged with their meaningful parts.


25.1.2 Syntax

Syntax is the set of rules that govern how words are combined into phrases and sentences.

It is the reason "the dog chased the cat" and "the cat chased the dog" mean different things even though they contain exactly the same words.

Syntax shows that meaning does not live in words alone; it lives partly in the arrangement, in who is placed where.

A key idea in syntax is that sentences are not flat strings of words but have hidden hierarchical structure, meaning words group into phrases, and phrases group into larger phrases, like nested boxes.

In "the old man in the corner smiled", the words "the old man in the corner" form one group that acts as a single unit, the thing that did the smiling.

This grouping is invisible in the sound but real in the grammar, and it is what lets us understand sentences we have never heard before.

Syntax also captures the fact that some strings of words are well formed and others are not, so "she quickly ran home" is fine while "quickly she home ran" feels broken to an English ear.

A grammar, in the technical sense, is a finite set of such rules that can describe an unlimited number of possible sentences.

Noam Chomsky, the linguist whose work reshaped this field starting in the 1950s, argued that the deep patterns of syntax are surprisingly similar across the world's languages, hinting at a shared underlying design.

Syntax is often treated as the engine room of language, the part that assembles small meaningful pieces into the endless variety of things we can say.

In systems terms the syntactic layer takes an ordered stream of tagged words as input, outputs a hierarchical tree structure over them, and must do its work incrementally at the pace of incoming speech, committing to structure within a few hundred milliseconds of each word.


25.1.3 Semantics, pragmatics, and discourse

Semantics is the study of meaning: what words, phrases, and sentences actually refer to and how their meanings combine.

At the word level, semantics asks what "dog" picks out in the world, and at the sentence level it asks how the meanings of the parts add up to the meaning of the whole.

A central principle here is compositionality, the idea that the meaning of a sentence is built up in a regular way from the meanings of its words and the way they are arranged.

Compositionality is why, once you know the words and the grammar, you can understand "the purple elephant sneezed" even though no one has ever said it to you.

Pragmatics is the study of meaning in context, meaning what a speaker actually intends beyond the literal words.

If someone at the dinner table says "can you pass the salt?", the literal question is about your ability, but the intended meaning is a polite request, and pragmatics is what explains the gap.

Pragmatics covers things like sarcasm, hinting, politeness, and the way "it is cold in here" can be a request to close the window.

Discourse is the level above the single sentence, the study of how sentences link together into a coherent stretch of language, such as a paragraph, a story, or a conversation.

At the discourse level we track things like who "she" refers to three sentences later, and how one sentence sets up an expectation that the next one fulfils.

These three levels, semantics, pragmatics, and discourse, are where language stops being a formal puzzle and starts being about communication between real people with intentions and shared history.

As a system, the semantic layer takes syntactic trees as input and outputs propositions, the pragmatic layer takes propositions plus a model of the speaker and the situation as input and outputs intended meanings, and the discourse layer maintains a running state across sentences, holding referents and expectations open over seconds to minutes.


25.2 The defining properties

Having seen the layers, we can now ask what makes human language special compared with other communication systems in nature.

The properties in this section are the features most often named as the signature of human language, the things a honeybee's dance or a vervet monkey's alarm call does not fully share.


25.2.1 Generativity, productivity, and recursion

Generativity, also called productivity, is the ability of a language to produce and understand an unlimited number of new sentences from a limited set of words and rules.

You are almost certainly reading sentences right now that you have never encountered before, and you understand them effortlessly, which is generativity in action.

This is what separates human language from a fixed list of calls or signals, where an animal has, say, a few dozen fixed messages and no way to make new ones.

In engineering language, generativity means the system's output space is unbounded while its program, the grammar, is finite, which is only possible if the rules can be applied repeatedly and in combination.

Recursion is a specific and powerful trick that helps make this openness possible: it is the ability to place a structure inside another structure of the same kind.

For example, you can put a sentence inside a sentence, as in "she said that he thought that they knew that it would rain".

Because recursion can in principle be repeated without a fixed limit, it lets a finite grammar describe an infinite range of possible sentences, exactly as a recursive function in software lets a few lines of code handle inputs of any depth.

In an influential 2002 paper in the journal Science, Marc Hauser, Noam Chomsky, and W. Tecumseh Fitch proposed that recursion might be the one core ingredient of the language faculty that is uniquely human.

This claim became the centre of a heated debate, because in 2005 the linguist Daniel Everett argued that Piraha, a language of the Amazon, lacks recursive embedding, which he attributed to the culture rather than to a different brain.

Critics replied on several fronts, some disputing Everett's data, and others pointing out that Piraha speakers readily learn Portuguese, a language that clearly uses recursion, so their minds must be capable of it even if their own language rarely displays it.

In systems terms the two sides predict different things: if recursion is a built-in core capability, every human language processor ships with a call stack and only culture decides whether it is exercised, whereas if it is a cultural construction, some processors might genuinely lack the stack.

The honest current state of the matter is that the special status of recursion is still contested, and experts have not reached full agreement, though the broader point that human language is open ended in a way animal signals are not is widely accepted.


25.2.2 Competence against performance

Competence and performance is a distinction, introduced by Chomsky, between what a speaker knows about their language and how they actually use it in real time.

Competence is the idealised underlying knowledge, the internal grammar that in principle allows a speaker to produce and judge an unlimited set of sentences.

Performance is the actual behaviour, the messy real-world talking and listening that is shaped by memory limits, tiredness, distractions, and slips of the tongue.

A computer systems analogy makes the distinction crisp: competence is the specification, the abstract program, while performance is the program running on real hardware with finite memory, interrupts, and noise.

The distinction matters because our performance often falls short of our competence, and a scientist must decide which one is the real target of study.

Consider a sentence like "the cat the dog the rat bit chased ran", which is grammatical by the rules yet almost impossible to understand because it overloads memory.

By the competence view, that sentence is a legitimate product of the grammar, and its difficulty is a performance problem about the limited working memory of a real brain, not a flaw in the grammar itself.

Chomsky argued that linguistics should aim first at describing competence, the pure knowledge, treating performance factors as a separate matter.

Many psychologists pushed back, arguing that the limits of real-time processing are not a nuisance to be set aside but a central fact about how the mind actually works.

In systems terms the two camps predict differently: a pure competence theory says difficulty should track only grammatical complexity, while a performance theory says difficulty should track resource load, such as how many unfinished structures must be held open at once, and the nested-cat sentence favours the resource account.

This tension runs through the whole field, and it is one reason cognitive scientists and formal linguists sometimes talk past one another, since they are aiming at different targets.


25.3 The modularity question

We now reach the deepest question of the chapter: is the ability to use language a special, dedicated system in the mind, or is it just general intelligence applied to words?

This is called the modularity question, and how you answer it shapes how you would try to build or model a language user.

For an engineer the question is whether language runs on a dedicated coprocessor with its own firmware, or as one more application on the general-purpose central processor.


25.3.1 Language as a distinct faculty

A faculty, in this context, means a distinct mental capacity with its own dedicated machinery, as opposed to a general-purpose ability used for many things.

The claim that language is a distinct faculty says that the mind contains specialised equipment for language that is not simply the same equipment we use for vision, memory, or reasoning.

The philosopher Jerry Fodor sharpened this idea in 1983 with the notion of a mental module, a processing system that is specialised for one kind of input and runs somewhat automatically and independently of the rest of thought.

A module, in Fodor's sense, is fast, mandatory, and informationally encapsulated, meaning it does its job without waiting for the rest of your knowledge and beliefs to weigh in.

Encapsulation is a systems property: the module reads only its own input channel and its own internal database, and no signal path exists by which general beliefs can reach inside and alter its computation mid-run.

The classic evidence for encapsulation is that you cannot help understanding a sentence in your native language when you hear it, just as you cannot choose to stop seeing an optical illusion.

On the strongest version of this view, associated with Chomsky, humans are born with a language-specific endowment, sometimes called universal grammar, that guides how any child acquires whatever language surrounds them.

The opposing camp holds that language is built out of more general abilities, such as learning statistical patterns, imitating others, and reading intentions, rather than from a dedicated grammar organ.

The two views predict differently in systems terms: a dedicated module predicts sharp input selectivity and immunity to belief, while the general-abilities view predicts that language performance should rise and fall with the same resources that drive other learning.

This disagreement is genuine and ongoing, and researchers of good faith line up on both sides, so the fair summary is that the question of a distinct language faculty remains open.


25.3.2 The evidence from dissociation and development

Two main streams of evidence are used to argue that language is at least partly its own system: dissociation and development.

A dissociation, in this field, is a case where one ability is damaged while another is spared, which suggests the two rely on at least partly separate machinery.

The strongest form is a double dissociation, where in one group ability A is lost but ability B survives, and in another group the reverse is true, which is powerful evidence that A and B are separate, exactly as two software services that can each fail independently must be running on separate components.

Language provides a striking dissociation between grammar and general intelligence, and between different parts of language itself.

In a condition called Broca's aphasia, caused by damage usually toward the front of the left side of the brain, people can often still understand meaning but produce halting, grammatically stripped-down speech, a pattern called agrammatism.

In another pattern linked to damage further back, people may produce fluent, smoothly structured speech that is oddly empty of correct meaning, roughly the mirror image.

Recent brain-mapping studies have supported a genuine double dissociation of this sort, with grammatical production and meaning leaning on partly different tissue, which many take as evidence that the language system has separable internal parts.

There is also a developmental disorder called developmental language disorder, once widely known as specific language impairment, in which children struggle with grammar despite otherwise typical intelligence and hearing.

Cases like this, where language lags while general reasoning proceeds normally, are used to argue that language draws on some machinery of its own rather than riding entirely on general smarts.

It is important to be careful here, because the brain regions involved are not neat single-purpose boxes, and later research has shown these areas also take part in other tasks, so the evidence points to specialisation of degree rather than to a perfectly sealed language organ.

The developmental evidence adds a second angle: children the world over acquire language on a broadly similar timetable, rapidly and without formal teaching, which supporters of a language faculty read as a sign of built-in guidance.

Skeptics answer that powerful general learning, plus the rich social input children receive, could produce the same regularities, so this evidence too is read in more than one way.

Taken together, the dissociation and development findings make a serious case that language has some dedicated machinery, while stopping well short of proving that it is a fully separate and self-contained organ of mind.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Acoustic speech signal, a continuous air-pressure waveform delivered by the auditory system, or visual marks delivered by the visual system for reading and sign.

◦ Conceptual intentions, the preverbal thoughts to be expressed, delivered by general cognition to the production side of the stack.

◦ Contextual and social information, including the situation and a model of the interlocutor, delivered by memory and social cognition to the pragmatic layer.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Structured meaning, propositions and speaker intentions, delivered to reasoning, memory, and decision systems.

◦ Articulated utterances, motor commands for speech or sign, delivered to the motor system.

◦ Grammaticality signals, fast judgements of whether an input is well formed, available to metalinguistic thought.

• STATE.

◦ The lexicon, a long-term store of tens of thousands of words with their sounds, meanings, and grammatical properties.

◦ The grammar, a long-term store of combinatorial rules at each layer, phonological, morphological, syntactic.

◦ A running discourse state holding current referents, topics, and expectations across sentences.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Vocabulary size, on the order of tens of thousands of words for an adult.

◦ Embedding depth tolerance, the number of unfinished structures the processor can hold open, in practice about two before comprehension collapses.

◦ Degree of encapsulation, how much general knowledge can penetrate the fast parsing machinery, the tuning knob the modularity debate is about.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Syllable turnover in ordinary speech is roughly 150 to 250 milliseconds, since speakers produce about five syllables per second.

◦ Word-level processing commits within a few hundred milliseconds of each word, as the electrophysiological signatures in Chapter 27 show.

◦ Timescale of the competence grammar itself: REFUSED, because competence is a timeless body of knowledge and assigning it a latency would be a category error.

• MODES.

◦ Comprehension mode against production mode, switched by whether the system is currently receiving signal or executing an intention to speak.

◦ Native fluent mode against effortful learner mode, switched by proficiency, with the fluent mode fast, mandatory, and automatic and the learner mode slow and attention-hungry.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Agrammatism in Broca's aphasia, halting speech stripped of grammar with meaning relatively spared.

◦ Fluent but empty speech after more posterior damage, the mirror dissociation.

◦ Developmental language disorder, grammar lagging behind otherwise typical intelligence.

◦ Performance overload on centre-embedded sentences that the grammar licenses but working memory cannot hold.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called layers with the values phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics.
Create a variable called signal with the raw input stream as its initial value.
For each layer in the layers list, perform the following steps.
    Retrieve the rule set stored for the current layer.
    Create a list variable called units with no items.
    For each segment of the signal, check the segment against the rule set.
        If the segment is licensed by a rule, add the resulting structured unit to the units list.
        If the segment is not licensed by any rule, mark the segment as ill formed and add a repair request to the units list.
    Replace the signal with the units list, so the output of this layer becomes the input of the next layer.
Return the final signal as the structured meaning.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a dictionary mapping each word to the letters that support it.
words = {"cat": "cat", "car": "car", "can": "can", "bat": "bat"}
# Create a dictionary of word activations, each starting at zero.
act = {w: 0.0 for w in words}
# Create the bottom-up letter evidence, with the middle letter ambiguous.
evidence = [{"c": 1.0}, {"a": 1.0}, {"t": 0.6, "r": 0.4}]
# Set the excitation gain to 0.1 and the inhibition gain to 0.04.
excite, inhibit = 0.1, 0.04
# Repeat the interactive-activation cycle twenty times.
for step in range(20):
    # Create a dictionary to hold the change in each word's activation.
    delta = {w: 0.0 for w in words}
    # For each word, gather excitation from every matching letter position.
    for w, spelling in words.items():
        # For each letter position, add evidence times gain if the letter matches.
        for pos, letter in enumerate(spelling):
            # Add the letter evidence at this position, scaled by the excitation gain.
            delta[w] += excite * evidence[pos].get(letter, 0.0)
        # Words feed activation back down, sharpening their own letters (top-down flow).
        for pos, letter in enumerate(spelling):
            # Increase the supported letter's evidence by a small fraction of the word's activation.
            evidence[pos][letter] = evidence[pos].get(letter, 0.0) + 0.01 * act[w]
    # Apply lateral inhibition, so each word suppresses its rivals.
    for w in words:
        # Subtract the inhibition gain times the total activation of all other words.
        delta[w] -= inhibit * sum(act[v] for v in words if v != w)
    # Update every activation, keeping it at or above zero.
    for w in words:
        # Add the change and clip the result at zero from below.
        act[w] = max(0.0, act[w] + delta[w])
# Report the winning word, the one with the highest activation.
print("recognised:", max(act, key=act.get), {w: round(a, 3) for w, a in act.items()})


CHAPTER 26. SPEECH PERCEPTION AND WORD RECOGNITION (PROCESS)

When someone speaks to you, your ears receive nothing but a continuously changing wave of air pressure, yet you hear crisp, separate words.

This chapter is about the remarkable and largely unconscious work that turns that smeared, noisy sound stream into recognised words.

In systems terms the task is a decoding problem: recover a discrete symbol sequence from a continuous, noisy, speaker-dependent channel, in real time, with no possibility of asking the transmitter to slow down.

We look first at how the mind hears individual speech sounds, then at how it identifies spoken words as they unfold in time, and finally at how the same recognition problem plays out for written words on a page.

The theme throughout is that recognition is an active guessing process, not a passive recording, because the raw signal is far too messy to read off directly.


26.1 Speech perception

Speech perception is the process by which the sounds of speech are mapped onto the units of language, such as consonants and vowels.

It is harder than it sounds, because the acoustic signal for a given speech sound is never exactly the same twice.

The two sections here cover the mind's tidy solution to that messiness and the surprising fact that seeing a speaker's face changes what you hear.


26.1.1 Categorical perception and the lack of invariance

The lack of invariance problem is the fact that there is no single fixed acoustic pattern that always corresponds to a given speech sound.

The exact sound waves for the consonant "d" differ depending on the vowel that follows it, the speaker's voice, the speed of talking, and the surrounding words, yet listeners hear "d" every time.

This is a deep puzzle, because it means the mind cannot simply match incoming sound against a stored template, since there is no one true template to match.

Categorical perception is part of the mind's answer, and it means we tend to hear speech sounds as belonging to distinct categories rather than as points on a smooth continuum.

The classic demonstration uses a cue called voice onset time, which is the gap between when a sound is released and when the vocal cords start buzzing.

A short voice onset time near zero milliseconds is heard as "b", while a longer one around forty milliseconds is heard as "p", with a fairly sharp boundary near twenty milliseconds.

The striking finding is that if you slowly slide the voice onset time from zero upward, listeners do not hear a gradual blend; they hear a clear "b" right up to the boundary and then abruptly a clear "p".

Two sounds that sit on the same side of the boundary are hard to tell apart, while two sounds the same physical distance apart but straddling the boundary are easy to tell apart.

The practical effect is that the mind throws away fine within-category detail and keeps only the category identity, which is exactly what you want if your goal is to recover the intended word rather than the exact noise.

In systems terms this stage is a quantiser: input, a continuous acoustic cue such as voice onset time; output, a discrete phoneme label; characteristic timescale, tens of milliseconds, since the "b" to "p" boundary sits near twenty milliseconds of voice onset time.

Later research has softened the original strict picture, showing listeners retain more graded, within-category sensitivity than once believed, and can use it when the task demands, so the perception is less all-or-nothing than the early studies suggested.

Even so, the core insight stands: speech perception imposes stable categories on an unstable signal, which is a large part of how we cope with the lack of invariance.


26.1.2 The multimodal nature of speech and the McGurk effect

Speech perception is multimodal, meaning it uses more than one sense at once, in particular sight as well as hearing.

We are usually unaware of it, but when we can see a talker's lips, we use that visual information to help decide what we heard, which is why a noisy phone call is harder than a face-to-face chat.

The most famous demonstration is the McGurk effect, first reported by Harry McGurk and John MacDonald in 1976.

In the classic setup, a listener hears the sound "ba" while watching a video of a mouth silently articulating "ga", and the surprising result is that most people report hearing "da", a third sound that matches neither the ears nor the eyes exactly but splits the difference.

The effect is compelling because closing your eyes instantly restores the true "ba", proving that vision was actively shaping what felt like a purely auditory experience.

McGurk and MacDonald originally reported that around ninety-eight percent of adults experienced the illusion, though more recent studies find the rate varies widely, often much lower, depending on the exact stimuli and person.

That variability is itself informative, because it shows the brain is weighing the reliability of each sense rather than blindly merging them, exactly as an engineered sensor-fusion system weights each sensor by its estimated noise level.

Brain research locates much of this audiovisual blending in a region called the superior temporal sulcus, a groove on the side of the brain that combines information across the senses.

One influential way to understand the effect is that the brain estimates whether the sound and the lip movements came from the same source, and if it judges that they did, it fuses them into a single best guess.

As a system, this stage subscribes to two input channels, auditory and visual, publishes a single fused phoneme estimate, and must complete the fusion within the duration of a syllable, a few hundred milliseconds, to keep up with speech.

The broad lesson is that hearing speech is not a pure ear task but a whole-perception task, in which the brain integrates every clue it can get to recover what was said.


26.2 Spoken-word recognition

Spoken-word recognition is the process of identifying which word a speaker is producing as the sound arrives over time.

Its defining challenge is that speech unfolds moment by moment, so the listener must work with fragments and cannot wait for the whole word before starting.

The two models below are the most influential attempts to describe how the mind narrows down the possibilities as the sound comes in.


26.2.1 The cohort model

The cohort model, developed by William Marslen-Wilson and colleagues starting around 1980, describes word recognition as a process of rapid narrowing from many candidates to one.

The core idea is that as soon as you hear the beginning of a word, your mind activates a whole set of words that start that way, and this set is called the cohort.

When you hear the first sounds "ele", your mental cohort might include "elephant", "elegant", "eleven", "elevator", and "element", all lit up at once.

As more of the word arrives, candidates that no longer fit drop out of the running, so hearing the next sound "eleph" knocks out "elegant" and "eleven" and leaves "elephant".

The moment when only one candidate remains is called the uniqueness point, the point at which enough sound has been heard that no other word in your vocabulary could continue that way.

A key and testable prediction is that a word is effectively recognised at its uniqueness point, which can arrive before the word has finished, so you often know the word before the speaker stops saying it.

This explains the everyday feeling of finishing someone's word in your head a beat before they do.

In systems terms the cohort model is a streaming filter: input, one phoneme per time step; state, the current candidate set; output, a recognised word the instant the set size reaches one; characteristic timescale, one pruning cycle per phoneme, on the order of tens of milliseconds each.

The original model was strict about word beginnings, holding that a mispronounced first sound would launch the wrong cohort and derail recognition, and later versions softened this to allow the system to recover and to let context and word frequency tilt the competition.

The lasting contribution of the cohort model is the picture of recognition as a race among competitors that is settled the instant the winner becomes unique.


26.2.2 Interactive-activation and competition models

Interactive-activation and competition models describe recognition using a network of simple units that excite and inhibit one another.

The best known example for speech is the TRACE model, built by James McClelland and Jeffrey Elman in 1986.

In this kind of model, there are layers of units, one layer for features of the sound, one for phonemes, and one for whole words, and units are connected within and across the layers.

Two things happen at once: units that are consistent with each other send excitement upward and downward, while units that compete at the same level send inhibition sideways to suppress their rivals.

Interactive means the flow runs in both directions, so higher-level word knowledge can reach back down and influence how the lower-level sounds are perceived.

This top-down influence lets the model explain how listeners can restore a sound that was covered by a cough, because the activated word fills in the missing piece.

The competition part, the sideways inhibition, is how the model settles on a single winner, as the strongest word unit gradually silences its neighbours.

The main difference from the cohort model is this two-way, top-down flow, since the strict early cohort model let information travel mainly bottom up, from sound to word.

In systems terms the two architectures predict differently: a strictly bottom-up pipeline predicts that word knowledge can never alter what the phoneme layer reports, while an interactive network predicts measurable feedback effects, such as restored phonemes, and the debate is about which wiring diagram the brain uses.

The debate between strictly bottom-up accounts and interactive accounts has been one of the long-running arguments in the field, and both camps still have serious support, with the disagreement centring on exactly how much and how early higher knowledge reaches down to shape perception.


26.3 Visual word recognition and reading

Reading is recognising words from marks on a surface, and it is a skill humans invented far too recently for evolution to have built special equipment for it.

That makes reading a fascinating case of the brain repurposing older machinery, chiefly vision and spoken language, for a brand new job.

The two sections here cover the main theory of how we turn letters into sound and meaning, and how tracking the eyes reveals the hidden work of reading.


26.3.1 The dual-route and connectionist accounts

The dual-route model proposes that there are two different pathways from a written word to its pronunciation, working side by side.

The first pathway is the lexical route, which recognises a whole familiar word directly and looks up its stored pronunciation, rather like recognising a friend's face at a glance.

The second is the non-lexical route, which sounds a word out letter by letter using the regular rules that link letters to sounds, rather like a beginner decoding "cat" one piece at a time.

In systems terms this is a cache plus a computation: the lexical route is a fast lookup table for known entries, and the non-lexical route is a slower rule interpreter that can handle any input, with the two racing in parallel.

The two routes explain a neat pattern in the words themselves.

Regular words that follow the usual spelling rules, like "mint", can be handled by either route, while a made-up nonword like "blorp" can only be read by sounding it out, since there is no stored entry for it.

Irregular words that break the rules, like "yacht" or "pint", must go through the lexical whole-word route, because sounding them out gives the wrong answer.

This model gains strong support from patients with reading disorders, where damage can knock out one route while sparing the other, producing people who can read familiar irregular words but not new nonwords, or the reverse.

The connectionist account, most associated with the "triangle model" of David Plaut, James McClelland, and colleagues, challenges the idea of two separate routes.

It uses a single network of interconnected units that learns the statistical links among spelling, sound, and meaning all at once, so regular and irregular words are handled by the same learned system rather than by two boxes.

The two accounts predict differently: two discrete routes predict clean double dissociations after damage, while a single learned network predicts graded breakdowns in which regularity and frequency trade off smoothly.

Which picture is closer to the truth is still argued, and the debate mirrors the larger clash in the field between rule-based, box-and-arrow models and single-network learning models.


26.3.2 Eye movements as a window on reading

While reading feels like a smooth glide across the page, the eyes actually move in quick jumps with brief pauses in between.

The jumps are called saccades, and they are so fast that vision is essentially suppressed during them, so no useful reading happens while the eye is in motion.

The pauses are called fixations, and they are when the eye holds still and information is actually taken in, typically for a fraction of a second each, around 200 to 250 milliseconds in skilled reading.

Because fixation times and jump lengths can be measured very precisely, tracking the eyes gives researchers a moment-by-moment window into the hidden effort of reading.

The region from which useful information is gathered in a single fixation is called the perceptual span, and in English it stretches only about three to four letters to the left of where you are looking but around fourteen to fifteen letters to the right.

This lopsided span, biased in the direction of reading, shows that the mind is already previewing the upcoming word before the eyes land on it.

The measurements reveal that we do not fixate every word; short, common, and predictable words are often skipped entirely, while long or unexpected words get longer looks.

The fact that a word's frequency and predictability change how long the eye lingers is powerful evidence that recognition and comprehension are happening right there, tied to the eye in real time.

When comprehension stumbles, the eyes make a backward jump called a regression, returning to an earlier word to sort out a difficulty, which lets researchers catch the exact spot where reading broke down.

Detailed computational models, such as the E-Z Reader model of Erik Reichle and colleagues, tie all this together by proposing that attention moves to a word, lexical processing of that word triggers the next eye movement, and the cycle repeats, capturing the timing patterns seen in real readers.

As a system, the reading controller takes lexical-processing progress as input, outputs saccade commands to the eye muscles, and cycles at roughly four fixations per second.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ The continuous acoustic waveform of speech, delivered by the auditory periphery.

◦ Visual articulation cues, lip and face movements, delivered by the visual system.

◦ Printed letter strings, delivered by the visual system during reading.

◦ Top-down context, sentence meaning and word frequency, delivered by the comprehension system.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Phoneme category labels, consumed by the word recognition stage.

◦ Recognised word identities with their meanings, consumed by sentence comprehension.

◦ Eye movement commands, saccade targets and timings, consumed by the oculomotor system during reading.

• STATE.

◦ The active cohort, the candidate word set still consistent with the input so far.

◦ Graded activation levels across feature, phoneme or letter, and word units.

◦ The current fixation position and the preview of upcoming text within the perceptual span.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Category boundary placement, for example the voice onset time boundary near 20 milliseconds for "b" against "p".

◦ Excitation and inhibition gains in the recognition network.

◦ Word frequency weights that give common words a head start in the race.

◦ Perceptual span width, about 3 to 4 letters leftward and about 14 to 15 letters rightward in English.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Voice onset time boundary near 20 milliseconds separating voiced from voiceless stops.

◦ Pruning of the cohort proceeds phoneme by phoneme, with recognition often complete at the uniqueness point before the word ends, typically within about 200 to 300 milliseconds of word onset for words in context.

◦ Reading fixations last about 200 to 250 milliseconds, and saccades themselves take tens of milliseconds during which vision is suppressed.

• MODES.

◦ Auditory-only mode against audiovisual fusion mode, switched by whether the talker's face is visible and judged to share a source with the sound.

◦ Listening mode against reading mode, switched by input channel, with reading routed through either the whole-word lookup route or the letter-to-sound assembly route.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ The McGurk illusion, where mismatched lips and sound fuse into a phoneme that was never spoken.

◦ Misrecognition when an early phoneme is degraded and the wrong cohort is launched.

◦ Acquired dyslexias, where damage spares whole-word reading but not sounding out, or the reverse.

◦ Regressions and rereading when recognition outruns the evidence and must be repaired.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called vocabulary containing all known words.
Create a list variable called cohort containing every word in the vocabulary.
Create a text variable called heard with an empty initial value.
For each incoming phoneme in the spoken input, perform the following steps.
    Append the phoneme to the end of heard.
    Create a new empty list called survivors.
    For each word in the cohort, check whether the word begins with heard.
        If the word begins with heard, add the word to the survivors list.
    Replace the cohort with the survivors list.
    If the cohort contains exactly one word, report that word as recognised at this position and stop.
    If the cohort contains no words, report a recognition failure and stop.
If the input ends with more than one candidate remaining, report the most frequent remaining candidate.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create the vocabulary, a list of known words.
vocabulary = ["elephant", "elegant", "eleven", "elevator", "element", "engine"]
# Define a cohort recogniser that consumes a word one letter at a time.
def recognise(spoken):
    # Start the cohort as a copy of the whole vocabulary.
    cohort = list(vocabulary)
    # Start the heard prefix as an empty string.
    heard = ""
    # For each letter position and letter in the spoken word, prune the cohort.
    for position, letter in enumerate(spoken, start=1):
        # Append the new letter to the heard prefix.
        heard = heard + letter
        # Keep only the candidates that still begin with the heard prefix.
        cohort = [word for word in cohort if word.startswith(heard)]
        # Print the prefix and the surviving cohort to show the narrowing race.
        print(heard, "->", cohort)
        # If exactly one candidate remains, this is the uniqueness point.
        if len(cohort) == 1:
            # Report recognition before the word has necessarily finished.
            return cohort[0], position
        # If no candidate remains, the input matches nothing in the vocabulary.
        if len(cohort) == 0:
            # Report a recognition failure at this position.
            return None, position
    # If several candidates survive the whole word, the word was not unique.
    return (cohort[0] if cohort else None), len(spoken)
# Run the recogniser on the word elephant.
word, point = recognise("elephant")
# Report the recognised word and the position of its uniqueness point.
print("recognised", word, "at letter", point, "of", len("elephant"))


CHAPTER 27. SENTENCE AND DISCOURSE COMPREHENSION (PROCESS)

Recognising words is only the start, because the real payoff of language is understanding whole sentences and connected stretches of talk.

This chapter is about how the mind assembles words into structured meaning and then knits sentences together into a coherent understanding of a situation.

In systems terms, comprehension is a streaming pipeline under a hard real-time constraint: words arrive at a fixed rate, structure must be committed before the evidence is complete, and wrong commitments must be detected and repaired on the fly.

We begin with parsing, the building of sentence structure, move to how the mind handles ambiguity and prediction, and end with the broader skills of drawing inferences and reading between the lines.

The recurring lesson is that comprehension is fast, forward-looking, and often just good enough rather than perfect.


27.1 Parsing

Parsing is the mental process of working out the grammatical structure of a sentence as it is read or heard.

Because words arrive one at a time, the mind cannot wait for the end; it must build structure on the fly, committing to an interpretation before all the evidence is in.

The two sections here present the two great families of theory about how it does this: a fast first-guess approach and a many-clues-at-once approach.


27.1.1 The garden-path model and structural principles

The garden-path model, developed by Lyn Frazier, says the mind builds sentence structure quickly using a single first-choice guess based on simple grammatical rules.

The name comes from the phrase "to be led up the garden path", meaning to be misled, because the model explains sentences that fool us into the wrong structure.

A famous example is "the horse raced past the barn fell", which feels broken at the word "fell" because we first read "raced" as the main verb and then have to backtrack.

The model proposes that the parser follows two guiding principles to make its snap decision.

The first is minimal attachment, which says the parser prefers the simplest possible structure, adding new words with the fewest extra grammatical nodes.

The second is late closure, which says the parser prefers to attach an incoming word to the phrase it is currently working on rather than starting a new one.

Crucially, this model is a two-stage story: the parser first commits to one structure using only grammar, fast and blind to meaning, and only afterward checks whether that structure makes sense.

In systems terms this is a greedy deterministic algorithm with a repair routine: input, one word per step; state, a single partial tree; output, a committed structure; and on contradiction, an exception is raised and the parser backtracks and reanalyses.

When the first guess turns out wrong, as in the horse sentence, the reader hits a snag and must reanalyse, which is measurable as a slowdown in reading.

The strength of the garden-path model is that it makes clear, testable predictions about exactly which sentences will cause trouble, and many of those predictions have held up.

Its central claim, that the first pass ignores meaning and uses grammar alone, is exactly what its rivals dispute.


27.1.2 Constraint-satisfaction and good-enough processing

Constraint-satisfaction models offer a rival to the garden-path view, arguing that the mind uses many sources of information at once rather than grammar first.

On this account, from the very first moment the parser weighs grammar, word meanings, how often a word takes a particular role, and the wider context, all in parallel, and settles on whichever interpretation the combined evidence best supports.

Under this view there is no strictly grammar-only first stage; a plausible meaning or a strong context can steer the interpretation right away and prevent the garden-path stumble that the two-stage model predicts.

Evidence for this comes from findings that a rich context or the plausibility of the words can reduce or erase the difficulty of otherwise tricky sentences.

In systems terms the two families predict differently: a grammar-first pipeline predicts the same stumble regardless of context, while a parallel evidence-weighing network predicts that stumbles shrink whenever other cues favour the correct structure.

The debate between the grammar-first garden-path model and the everything-at-once constraint-satisfaction model has not been fully settled, and it remains one of the live arguments in the psychology of language.

A related and important idea is good-enough processing, put forward by Fernanda Ferreira and colleagues around 2002.

The good-enough view says that in everyday life the mind often does not build a complete, fully accurate structure, but instead settles for an interpretation that is good enough for the current purpose.

For example, when people are asked "the dog was bitten by the man, who got hurt?", a surprising number answer "the dog", because they extract a rough gist rather than parse every relationship exactly.

This shows that comprehension is often shallow and pragmatic, aimed at getting the point rather than achieving a perfect analysis, which is efficient for a busy mind but leaves room for misunderstanding.

Good-enough processing is a helpful corrective to the older assumption that understanding always means building a complete and correct representation.


27.2 Ambiguity and prediction

Language is riddled with ambiguity, where a word or structure could mean more than one thing, yet we barely notice because the mind resolves it so smoothly.

At the same time, the mind is constantly running ahead of the incoming words, predicting what is likely to come next.

The two sections here examine how ambiguity gets resolved and how prediction shows up even in the electrical signals of the brain.


27.2.1 Lexical and syntactic ambiguity resolution

Lexical ambiguity is when a single word has more than one meaning, such as "bank", which can mean a riverside or a place for money.

Syntactic ambiguity is when a whole sentence structure can be built in more than one way, such as "I saw the man with the telescope", where the telescope could belong to the seeing or to the man.

The mind resolves lexical ambiguity astonishingly fast, and research suggests that for a brief instant both meanings of an ambiguous word are activated, even the one that does not fit, before context quickly suppresses the wrong one.

This momentary activation of an irrelevant meaning, detectable in the lab within a fraction of a second, is strong evidence that meaning access is at first automatic and only later filtered by context.

How quickly context wins depends on factors like how common each meaning is, so a rare meaning may take longer to settle even when the context strongly favours it.

Syntactic ambiguity is resolved using the same tools discussed under parsing, whether a fast structural first guess or a weighing of many constraints together.

As a system, the resolver takes an ambiguous item plus context as input, briefly holds multiple candidate meanings in parallel, and outputs a single committed reading within a few hundred milliseconds, paying a measurable revision cost if the commitment later proves wrong.

The general finding is that the mind does not enjoy holding two interpretations open; it commits quickly and, when the commitment proves wrong, pays a measurable cost to revise.

Ambiguity resolution is therefore a good example of the mind trading a small risk of error for the large benefit of keeping up with the incoming stream.


27.2.2 Prediction in comprehension and its electrophysiological signatures

For a long time comprehension was pictured as purely reactive, with the mind responding to each word as it arrived, but the modern view is that the mind actively predicts upcoming words.

Prediction means the brain uses the context so far to pre-activate what is likely to come next, so that a fitting word is processed faster and an unexpected one causes a jolt.

The evidence comes largely from a technique called electroencephalography, often shortened to EEG, which records the brain's electrical activity through sensors on the scalp.

Averaging this activity across many trials yields an event-related potential, abbreviated ERP, which is the brain's electrical response time-locked to a specific word or event.

One famous ERP signature is the N400, a dip in the electrical trace occurring about four hundred milliseconds after a word, whose size reflects how hard the word is to fit with the meaning built up so far.

A sentence like "he spread the warm bread with socks" produces a large N400 at "socks", because that word clashes with the expectation set up by the context, whereas "butter" would produce a small one.

The N400 is thus read as an index of semantic processing, essentially a measure of how surprising or ill-fitting a word's meaning is.

A second signature is the P600, a rise in the trace around six hundred milliseconds after a word, classically linked to grammatical trouble, such as a word that breaks the sentence's syntax.

The rough division of labour, with the N400 tracking meaning problems and the P600 tracking structural problems, has been enormously useful, though researchers stress it is not clean, since meaning violations can sometimes produce a P600 too.

In systems terms these signals are the error channels of a predictive controller: the N400 behaves like a prediction-error report from the meaning layer at about 400 milliseconds, and the P600 like a repair-and-reanalysis report from the structure layer at about 600 milliseconds.

The deeper significance of these signals is that they appear even before a predicted word arrives or is completed, which is strong evidence that comprehension is a forward-looking, predictive act rather than a purely reactive one.

This predictive view of the mind connects language comprehension to a broader modern theme in which the brain is seen as a prediction machine that is always anticipating its next input.


27.3 Discourse and pragmatics

Understanding goes well beyond single sentences, because real language comes in connected chunks that describe situations and carry meanings the words never literally state.

Discourse processing is how we build a joined-up understanding across sentences, and pragmatics is how we recover what a speaker means beyond what they say.

The two sections here cover the mental picture we build of a described situation and the social reasoning that lets us grasp implied meaning.


27.3.1 Inference, coherence, and the situation model

A situation model is the mental representation a reader or listener builds of the state of affairs that a text or conversation is about.

The key insight is that skilled comprehension is not about storing the exact words or even the exact sentences, but about constructing a model of the world the language describes.

If you read "Jane took the picnic basket out of the car. The beer was warm.", you effortlessly understand that the beer was in the basket, even though no sentence said so.

That understanding comes from an inference, a piece of information you supply yourself by drawing on your general knowledge to fill the gaps between sentences.

Inferences are what make a text feel coherent, meaning connected and sensible rather than a list of unrelated facts, and readers generate them constantly and mostly without noticing.

The situation model tracks several dimensions of the described world at once, including who the characters are, where and when events happen, causes, and goals, and readers slow down when any of these shifts, such as a jump to a new location or time.

Evidence that people build situation models rather than word lists includes the finding that, days later, readers often remember the gist of what a passage meant while forgetting its exact wording.

As a system, the discourse level takes sentence meanings as input, consults long-term world knowledge to fill gaps, maintains a persistent multi-dimensional state across the whole text, and outputs a world model whose gist can outlive the exact wording by days.

The situation model is therefore the level at which language finally becomes understanding of the world, rather than mere processing of symbols.


27.3.2 Grice's maxims and the computation of common ground

Much of what we mean is not in our words at all, and the philosopher Paul Grice offered the most influential account of how listeners recover that unspoken meaning.

Grice proposed the cooperative principle, the assumption that people in a conversation are generally trying to communicate helpfully and cooperatively.

From this he drew four maxims, or rules of thumb, that cooperative speakers are expected to follow.

The maxim of quantity says to give the right amount of information, neither too little nor too much.

The maxim of quality says to be truthful and not say what you believe to be false.

The maxim of relation, or relevance, says to say things that bear on the matter at hand.

The maxim of manner says to be clear, brief, and orderly, avoiding obscurity and confusion.

The clever part is what happens when a speaker openly breaks one of these maxims, which Grice called flouting, because the listener assumes cooperation is still intended and reasons out an extra hidden meaning.

If you ask "how was the meeting?" and I sigh and say "well, the coffee was nice", I have flouted the maxim of quantity by dodging the real question, and you infer that the meeting itself went badly.

This inferred, unstated meaning is called an implicature, and computing implicatures is a large part of everyday understanding.

Underpinning all of this is common ground, the body of knowledge, beliefs, and assumptions that the speakers treat as shared between them.

Common ground is why you can say "did you see it?" to a friend and both know exactly what "it" means, and skilled communicators constantly track what is and is not shared so they can leave the obvious unsaid.

Modern researchers try to make this precise, sometimes modelling a listener as reasoning about what a rational, cooperative speaker would have chosen to say, which turns Grice's insight into a computation about other minds.

In systems terms the pragmatic layer takes the literal utterance plus the common-ground state as input, runs an inference over a model of the speaker's choices, and outputs the intended meaning, with the maxims serving as the assumed protocol that makes the inference solvable.

Pragmatics, in the end, shows that understanding language is inseparable from understanding people, since to grasp what is meant you must model the mind of the one who is speaking.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ A stream of recognised words with their grammatical categories, delivered one at a time by the word recognition system.

◦ World knowledge and plausibility information, delivered by long-term semantic memory.

◦ Common-ground and speaker information, delivered by social cognition and conversation history.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ An incremental syntactic structure over the words heard so far, consumed by the meaning-building stage.

◦ A situation model of the described state of affairs, consumed by memory, reasoning, and action planning.

◦ Prediction-error signals, measurable as the N400 and P600 event-related potentials, consumed by the system's own repair and learning machinery.

• STATE.

◦ The current partial parse, the single committed structure or the ranked set of live candidates.

◦ Pre-activated predictions about likely upcoming words and structures.

◦ The evolving situation model, tracking characters, place, time, causes, and goals.

◦ The common-ground register of what both parties treat as shared.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Structural preferences such as minimal attachment and late closure, the parser's tie-breaking rules.

◦ Constraint weights on frequency, plausibility, and context in interpretation.

◦ Depth-of-processing setting, from full parsing down to good-enough gist extraction.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ The N400 semantic prediction-error signal peaks about 400 milliseconds after a word.

◦ The P600 structural repair signal peaks about 600 milliseconds after a word.

◦ Time to build a full situation model of a long text: REFUSED, because it scales with text length and reader goals and the literature supports no single characteristic value.

• MODES.

◦ Deep parsing mode against good-enough mode, switched by task demands, time pressure, and available attention.

◦ Literal interpretation mode against implicature mode, switched by detecting that a cooperative speaker has flouted a maxim.

◦ Forward prediction mode against reanalysis mode, switched by the arrival of a word that contradicts the committed structure.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Garden-path breakdowns, where a committed structure must be torn down and rebuilt at measurable cost.

◦ Good-enough misreadings, such as answering that the dog got hurt in "the dog was bitten by the man".

◦ Missed or false implicatures, hearing sarcasm where none was meant or missing a hint.

◦ Incoherence when inferences fail, leaving the text a list of unconnected facts.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called structure with no items.
Create a variable called main verb slot with an empty initial value.
For each incoming word in the sentence, perform the following steps.
    If the word is a noun phrase word, attach the word to the current phrase in the structure.
    If the word is a verb and the main verb slot is empty, assign the word to the main verb slot, following the simplest-attachment preference.
    If the word is a verb and the main verb slot is already filled, perform the following repair steps.
        Report a garden-path signal, because the committed structure cannot accept a second main verb.
        Remove the earlier verb from the main verb slot.
        Reattach the earlier verb to the preceding noun phrase as a reduced relative clause modifier.
        Assign the incoming word to the main verb slot.
        Add one reanalysis cost unit to a running cost counter.
Check that the main verb slot is filled; if it is not, report that the sentence is incomplete.
Return the structure and the total reanalysis cost.

CODE SAMPLE:

# List the words of the classic garden-path sentence.
sentence = ["the", "horse", "raced", "past", "the", "barn", "fell"]
# Name the words that can act as verbs in this tiny grammar.
verbs = {"raced", "fell"}
# Create an empty list to hold the growing structure.
structure = []
# Create an empty slot for the main verb.
main_verb = None
# Create a counter for the cost of any reanalysis.
cost = 0
# Process the sentence one word at a time, committing greedily.
for word in sentence:
    # Decide whether the incoming word is a verb.
    if word in verbs:
        # If no main verb is committed yet, commit this one (minimal attachment).
        if main_verb is None:
            # Record the word as the main verb of the sentence.
            main_verb = word
            # Note the commitment in the structure.
            structure.append(("main-verb", word))
        # If a main verb already exists, the parse has hit the garden path.
        else:
            # Announce the stumble at this word.
            print("garden path at:", word, "- reanalysing")
            # Demote the earlier verb to a reduced relative clause modifier.
            structure.remove(("main-verb", main_verb))
            # Reattach the old verb to the preceding noun phrase as a modifier.
            structure.append(("modifier-of-horse", main_verb))
            # Commit the incoming word as the true main verb.
            main_verb = word
            # Record the new commitment in the structure.
            structure.append(("main-verb", word))
            # Charge one unit of reanalysis cost, the measurable slowdown.
            cost = cost + 1
    # If the word is not a verb, attach it as noun phrase material.
    else:
        # Add the word to the structure as ordinary phrase content.
        structure.append(("phrase-word", word))
# Report the final structure and the reanalysis cost paid.
print("structure:", structure)
# Print the total cost, which is zero only when no garden path occurred.
print("reanalysis cost:", cost)


CHAPTER 28. LANGUAGE PRODUCTION (PROCESS)

Producing language is the mirror image of understanding it, turning a private thought into a public stream of sounds or signs.

This chapter is about that outward journey, from a fuzzy idea to a fully articulated sentence, and about what the mind's slips and stumbles reveal about the machinery doing the work.

In systems terms production is an output pipeline: a conceptual payload enters, passes through staged encoders for grammar and sound, and exits as motor commands, with a monitor tapping the line to catch errors before and after they become audible.

We look first at the stages a thought passes through on its way to speech, and then at the errors and blockages that expose those stages in action.

Because we cannot directly watch the steps of speaking, much of what we know comes from the clever study of when speaking goes wrong.


28.1 The architecture of production

The architecture of production means the arrangement of processing stages that transform an intention into spoken words.

Researchers generally agree that production moves through several levels, from planning the meaning, to choosing and shaping words, to controlling the mouth.

The two sections here describe the overall flow and then zoom in on a key two-step within it, the split between a word's meaning and its sound.


28.1.1 From message to articulation

The most influential map of speech production comes from Willem Levelt, whose model lays out a sequence of stages from idea to sound.

The journey begins in the conceptualizer, the stage where the speaker decides what they want to express and builds a preverbal message, meaning a plan of the intended meaning that does not yet contain any actual words.

This preverbal message then passes to the formulator, the stage that gives the message linguistic form by selecting words and arranging them grammatically and then working out their sound.

Within the formulator, grammatical encoding chooses the words and builds the sentence frame, and phonological encoding fills in the actual speech sounds and rhythm.

The output of the formulator is a phonetic plan, essentially a detailed set of instructions for the mouth, sometimes described as inner speech.

Finally, the articulator takes that plan and drives the muscles of the lips, tongue, and vocal cords to produce the audible speech.

A key feature of Levelt's model is that production is incremental, meaning the speaker does not fully plan the whole sentence before starting, but begins uttering the first part while later parts are still being prepared.

In systems terms this is a pipelined architecture: each stage hands off its partial product downstream and immediately begins the next chunk, which raises throughput to conversational speed, roughly two to three words per second, at the price of occasional planning dead ends.

Incremental production is why we can start a sentence confidently and figure out the ending on the way, and it is also why we sometimes paint ourselves into a grammatical corner.

The model also includes a monitor, a self-checking loop by which speakers listen to their own inner and outer speech and catch errors, which is how you sometimes stop yourself mid-word.

The monitor is a feedback controller: it subscribes to both the inner phonetic plan and the outer audible speech, compares them against the intended message, and can issue a halt-and-repair command within a fraction of a second.

This staged picture, from meaning to grammar to sound to muscle, provides the framework within which most production research is understood.


28.1.2 The lemma and the lexeme

A central claim in Levelt's model, and in production research generally, is that retrieving a word happens in two distinct steps rather than one.

The first step retrieves the lemma, which is the word considered as a unit of meaning and grammar, but without its sound yet attached.

The lemma of the word "sheep" carries its meaning and grammatical facts, such as that it is a noun, but not yet the actual sounds "sh-ee-p".

The second step retrieves the lexeme, sometimes called the word form, which is the word's actual sound shape, its phonemes and syllables and stress.

So producing a word means first selecting the right concept-and-grammar unit, the lemma, and then, as a separate stage, looking up how it sounds, the lexeme.

In systems terms word retrieval is a two-stage lookup: stage one maps a concept to a lemma record holding meaning and grammar, stage two maps that lemma to a lexeme record holding phonemes and stress, and the whole pipeline from picture to speech onset runs in roughly 600 milliseconds in naming experiments.

This two-step idea is not just a tidy diagram; it makes predictions that can be tested, and much of the evidence comes from the kinds of errors and states discussed later in this chapter.

The strongest support is the tip-of-the-tongue state, where you have clearly retrieved the lemma, since you know exactly which concept you want and often its grammar, yet the lexeme, the sound, refuses to come.

That everyday experience of knowing a word's meaning while its sound eludes you is hard to explain unless meaning and sound are stored and accessed as separate steps.

The lemma-lexeme distinction is therefore one of the better-supported ideas about the fine structure of producing a single word.


28.2 The evidence from error

Because the stages of production happen silently and fast, one of the best ways to study them is to examine what happens when they misfire.

Errors are not random noise; they follow strict patterns, and those patterns are like fingerprints left by the hidden machinery.

For an engineer this is fault-injection analysis in reverse: nature injects the faults, and the researcher reads the crash logs to reconstruct the architecture.

The two sections here cover slips of the tongue and the frustrating tip-of-the-tongue state, each of which exposes a different part of the production process.


28.2.1 Speech errors as a window on the plan

Speech errors, or slips of the tongue, are the small mistakes we all make when talking, and their regularities reveal how speech is planned.

The crucial observation is that errors are not chaotic; they obey rules, and those rules tell us about the units and stages of production.

In an exchange error, two elements swap places, as in saying "you have hissed all my mystery lectures" when meaning "missed all my history lectures", a type of slip collected famously and named the spoonerism after Reverend William Spooner.

The fact that whole sounds can trade places across several words shows that the speaker had planned that whole stretch in advance, since you cannot swap two things unless both are already prepared, which in systems terms means the phonetic plan is buffered several words ahead of the mouth.

Errors also respect linguistic categories, so sounds swap with sounds and whole words swap with whole words, but the two kinds rarely mix, which supports the idea of separate levels for sound and for word selection.

Sound errors also obey the sound rules of the language, so a slip almost always produces a pronounceable sequence rather than an illegal one, showing that even mistakes pass through the phonological system.

Another type is the word-substitution error, where a wrong word pops out, and these split revealingly into two kinds.

Some substitutions are based on meaning, like saying "fork" for "spoon", which points to an error at the lemma stage where meaning-based selection happens.

Others are based on sound, like saying "historical" for "hysterical", which points to an error at the lexeme stage where sound is retrieved.

That the two kinds of substitution exist and stay separate is further evidence for the two-step lemma-then-lexeme picture from earlier.

The systematic study of speech errors, pioneered by researchers such as Victoria Fromkin in the 1970s, turned slips from mere bloopers into a serious scientific window on the plan behind speaking.


28.2.2 The tip-of-the-tongue state

The tip-of-the-tongue state is the maddening experience of being certain you know a word while being temporarily unable to produce its sound.

It is a nearly universal experience, and it was first studied carefully by Roger Brown and David McNeill in 1966.

Their method was to read people the definitions of rare words and watch for those who fell into the tip-of-the-tongue state, then ask what they could recover about the missing word.

The striking finding was that people in this state are not in a total blackout; they often correctly know the first letter, the number of syllables, and the stress pattern of the word they cannot quite say.

This partial access is powerful evidence for the two-step model, because it shows the meaning and grammar of the word, the lemma, have been fully retrieved while only the full sound, the lexeme, is stuck.

In other words, the tip-of-the-tongue state is a production failure caught in the very act of crossing from meaning to sound, a successful stage-one lookup followed by a stage-two lookup that returns only fragments of the record.

Researchers have debated what causes the block, and two main explanations compete.

The blocking hypothesis says an unwanted similar-sounding word gets in the way and jams retrieval of the target, and some experiments do find more tip-of-the-tongue states when a similar-sounding distractor word is present.

The transmission-deficit hypothesis says there is no active blocker; instead the connection carrying activation to the word's sounds is simply too weak at that moment to fully light them up.

In systems terms the two hypotheses predict differently: blocking predicts that removing or avoiding the rival word should free the target, while transmission deficit predicts that strengthening the target link, through recency and frequency of use, is what matters, with rivals merely bystanders.

The transmission-deficit view fits the finding that tip-of-the-tongue states grow more common with age and with rarely used words, both of which would weaken those sound connections, and it is the account many researchers now favour, though the matter is not fully closed.

Either way, the tip-of-the-tongue state remains one of the clearest everyday demonstrations that knowing what you mean and knowing how it sounds are two genuinely separate things in the mind.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ A preverbal message, the intended meaning without words, delivered by the conceptualizer from general thought.

◦ Feedback of the speaker's own inner and outer speech, delivered by the monitor loop.

◦ Common-ground and audience information, delivered by social cognition, shaping what needs saying at all.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A grammatically encoded sentence frame with selected lemmas, consumed by phonological encoding.

◦ A phonetic plan, detailed articulation instructions, consumed by the articulator.

◦ Audible speech, consumed by the listener and by the speaker's own monitor.

◦ Halt-and-repair commands, issued by the monitor back into the pipeline when an error is detected.

• STATE.

◦ The mental lexicon with its two-layer word records, lemmas for meaning and grammar, lexemes for sound.

◦ A buffered stretch of the utterance plan several words ahead of the mouth, as exchange errors prove.

◦ The current sentence frame with its unfilled slots during incremental planning.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Lemma selection threshold, how much a candidate must beat its semantic rivals before being chosen.

◦ Connection strength from lemma to lexeme, which weakens with age and disuse and governs tip-of-the-tongue risk.

◦ Lookahead depth, how many words are planned ahead of articulation.

◦ Monitor sensitivity, how aggressively inner speech is checked before release.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Fluent speech runs at roughly two to three words per second.

◦ Naming a pictured object takes about 600 milliseconds from picture onset to the start of speech in laboratory studies.

◦ Duration of a tip-of-the-tongue state: REFUSED, because resolution ranges from seconds to days and the literature supports no single characteristic value.

• MODES.

◦ Fluent incremental mode against deliberate planned mode, switched by task stakes and available planning time.

◦ Normal output mode against repair mode, switched by the monitor detecting a mismatch between plan and intention.

◦ Full retrieval against tip-of-the-tongue mode, switched by whether lemma-to-lexeme transmission clears threshold.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Exchange errors and spoonerisms, sounds or words swapping across the buffered plan.

◦ Meaning-based substitutions at the lemma stage and sound-based substitutions at the lexeme stage.

◦ The tip-of-the-tongue state, a lemma retrieved with its lexeme stuck, yielding only first letters and syllable counts.

◦ Agrammatic production after damage to anterior language regions, the clinical extreme of formulator failure.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a dictionary variable called lemmas mapping each concept to a record of meaning features and a grammatical category.
Create a dictionary variable called lexemes mapping each lemma to a record of phonemes, a syllable count, and a stress pattern.
Receive the intended concept as the input message.
Create a variable called best lemma with an empty initial value.
Create a number variable called best score with initial value zero.
For each candidate lemma in the lemmas dictionary, perform the following steps.
    Calculate the overlap between the candidate's meaning features and the intended concept's features.
    If the overlap is greater than best score, assign the candidate to best lemma and the overlap to best score.
Report the selected lemma and its grammatical category, completing stage one.
Retrieve the connection strength between the selected lemma and its lexeme.
If the connection strength is greater than the retrieval threshold, perform the following steps.
    Retrieve the full phoneme sequence from the lexemes dictionary.
    Send the phoneme sequence to the articulator and report fluent production.
Otherwise, perform the following steps.
    Retrieve only the first phoneme and the syllable count from the lexeme record.
    Report a tip-of-the-tongue state with the partial information.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module to vary connection strength.
import random
# Stage-one store: map each concept's meaning features to a lemma with grammar.
lemmas = {
    # The sheep lemma carries features and the fact that it is a noun.
    "sheep": {"features": {"animal", "woolly", "farm"}, "category": "noun"},
    # The goat lemma is a semantic rival with overlapping features.
    "goat": {"features": {"animal", "horned", "farm"}, "category": "noun"},
}
# Stage-two store: map each lemma to its sound form, syllables, and stress.
lexemes = {
    # The sheep lexeme holds its phonemes, syllable count, and stress pattern.
    "sheep": {"phonemes": ["sh", "ee", "p"], "syllables": 1, "stress": "1"},
    # The goat lexeme holds the same kinds of sound facts.
    "goat": {"phonemes": ["g", "oa", "t"], "syllables": 1, "stress": "1"},
}
# The speaker's intended meaning arrives as a feature set, with no words yet.
message = {"animal", "woolly", "farm"}
# Stage one: select the lemma whose features best overlap the message.
best = max(lemmas, key=lambda name: len(lemmas[name]["features"] & message))
# Report the selected lemma and its grammatical category.
print("lemma selected:", best, "category:", lemmas[best]["category"])
# Draw a lemma-to-lexeme connection strength between zero and one.
strength = random.random()
# Set the retrieval threshold the transmission must clear.
threshold = 0.3
# Stage two: attempt to retrieve the full sound form of the lemma.
if strength > threshold:
    # Retrieve the complete phoneme sequence for articulation.
    plan = lexemes[best]["phonemes"]
    # Send the phonetic plan to the articulator, joined into speech.
    print("spoken:", "-".join(plan))
# If transmission is too weak, only fragments of the sound come through.
else:
    # Recover just the first phoneme and the syllable count, as in real cases.
    partial = (lexemes[best]["phonemes"][0], lexemes[best]["syllables"])
    # Report the tip-of-the-tongue state with its partial information.
    print("tip of the tongue: starts with", partial[0], "and has", partial[1], "syllable")

CHAPTER 29. LANGUAGE ACQUISITION AND THE LANGUAGE-THOUGHT RELATION (PROCESS)

This chapter is about two of the deepest puzzles in the science of the mind.

The first puzzle is how a small child, without lessons or grammar drills, comes to speak a full human language in just a few years.

The second puzzle is whether the language you speak shapes the way you think, or whether thought runs on its own track underneath language.

Both questions matter for konnectome because building a humanlike mind means understanding how language gets into a mind in the first place, and how tightly language and thought are bound together.

Viewed as an engineered system, language acquisition is a learning process that takes a noisy, unsegmented stream of speech as input and, over roughly three to five years, outputs a working grammar, a lexicon of tens of thousands of words, and a sound system, all without labelled training data or explicit correction.

We will move from how children learn to how words and thoughts relate, keeping everything grounded in plain examples.


29.1 The acquisition of language

Language acquisition is the process by which a person, usually a young child, comes to understand and produce a language.

What makes it remarkable is its speed and its reliability: nearly every healthy child, in every culture, masters their native tongue on a roughly similar timetable, with very little explicit teaching.

In systems terms, the input to this process is caregiver speech arriving as a continuous acoustic stream, the state is the child's growing lexicon and grammar, and the output is comprehension and production that improve on a timescale of months to years.

This section lays out the main competing explanations for how that happens, from the idea that language is largely built into us to the idea that it is learned from patterns in what we hear.


29.1.1 Nativism, universal grammar, and the poverty of the stimulus

Nativism is the view that a large part of our capacity for language is inborn, present in the mind before experience rather than learned from scratch.

The most famous version comes from the linguist Noam Chomsky, who argued starting in the late 1950s that humans are born with a specialised mental endowment for language.

Universal grammar is Chomsky's name for that inborn endowment: a set of abstract structural principles, shared by every human language, that a child brings to the task of learning.

In plain terms, the claim is that a baby does not arrive as a blank slate but with a rough template for how any human language can be built, so the child only has to figure out which specific language is being spoken around them.

The central argument for this view is called the poverty of the stimulus.

The argument runs like this: the speech a child actually hears is limited, messy, and full of errors and unfinished sentences, yet children reliably end up knowing subtle grammatical rules that were never explicitly present in what they heard.

A standard example is that children rarely hear the exact sentences they later produce, and they almost never get clear correction for grammatical mistakes, yet they still converge on the right rules.

If the input is too thin to fully specify the grammar, the reasoning goes, then some of the knowledge must have been supplied by the child's own mind, that is, by innate structure.

It is important to be honest that this is a contested claim rather than a settled fact.

Critics argue that the input to children is far richer than the poverty-of-the-stimulus argument assumes, and that modern statistical learning can extract more from that input than was once thought possible.

Supporters reply that certain deep regularities, such as the way questions are formed around the structure of a sentence rather than by counting words, still seem to be known without direct evidence in the input.

The current state of the debate is genuinely open: most researchers accept that humans have some special biological readiness for language, while disagreeing sharply about how much specific grammatical content is built in versus learned.

Because this sub-section describes a debate rather than a single mechanism, the systems reading is a pair of predictions.

A nativist system predicts that a learner given sparse input still converges on the correct grammar, because much of the model is pre-loaded as fixed parameters.

A pure learning system predicts that grammar quality tracks the quantity and richness of the input, because everything in the model must be estimated from data.


29.1.2 Usage-based and statistical learning

The usage-based approach is the main rival to strong nativism.

It holds that children learn language not from an inborn grammar but from the actual use of language around them, by detecting patterns, generalising from examples, and gradually building rules out of concrete instances.

In this view, championed by researchers such as Michael Tomasello, grammar is an emergent product of general learning abilities and social understanding, not a pre-installed module.

A key engine of this account is statistical learning, which is the mind's ability to pick up on the frequencies and co-occurrences of things in the world without trying to.

The landmark demonstration came from Jenny Saffran, Richard Aslin, and Elissa Newport in 1996, who showed that eight-month-old infants could find word boundaries in a continuous stream of speech after only about two minutes of passive listening.

To understand what they did, imagine hearing a made-up language with no pauses between words, like "bidakupadotigolabubidaku".

The infants tracked a statistical cue called the transitional probability, which is simply how likely one syllable is to follow another.

Within a real word the syllables follow each other very reliably, while across a word boundary the next syllable is less predictable, so a dip in predictability signals "a word probably ends here".

The infants used exactly these dips to segment the stream, which showed that a core part of learning language can be accomplished by tracking statistics alone.

This finding was hugely influential because it showed that powerful learning does not require an inborn grammar for at least some tasks, only a sensitivity to patterns.

As a mechanism, the statistical segmenter takes a syllable stream as input, maintains a running table of syllable-pair counts as state, and outputs word-boundary hypotheses, with measurable learning after about two minutes of exposure in the infant studies.

The honest summary is that usage-based and statistical learning clearly do a great deal of the work, especially for vocabulary and sound patterns, while the debate continues over whether they are enough to explain the most abstract parts of syntax, which is the system of rules for combining words into sentences.


29.1.3 The critical period and bilingualism

A critical period is a window of time early in life during which the brain is especially ready to learn something, after which learning the same thing becomes harder and often less complete.

The biologist Eric Lenneberg proposed in his 1967 book that language has such a window, roughly from early childhood to around puberty.

The everyday evidence people point to is that young children pick up a new language effortlessly and end up sounding like natives, while adults who move to a new country often learn to communicate well yet keep an accent and struggle with fine points of grammar.

More striking evidence comes from rare and tragic cases of children deprived of language early in life, who then have great difficulty acquiring normal grammar even with later help, and from studies of deaf signers who acquired sign language at different ages.

The strength and even the existence of a sharp critical period remain debated.

Many researchers now prefer to speak of a gradual decline in language-learning ability with age rather than a hard cutoff, and they argue about whether the cause is biological maturation, changes in learning strategy, or simply reduced exposure and motivation.

Johnson and Newport's influential 1989 study found that the age at which people arrived in a new country strongly predicted their later grammar, consistent with a maturational window, but the interpretation of such data is still argued over.

In systems terms, a critical period is a learning-rate parameter that is high in early childhood and declines over a timescale of years, so the same input produces less change in the model as the learner ages.

Bilingualism is the ability to use two languages, and it is the norm rather than the exception across the world's population.

Growing up with two languages does not confuse children or delay their language development in any lasting way, contrary to an old worry, though bilingual children may know slightly fewer words in each single language while knowing more words overall.

For years many scientists reported a "bilingual advantage", the claim that juggling two languages strengthens executive control, which is the set of mental skills for focusing, switching, and holding back impulses.

That claim has since been seriously challenged, because large and carefully controlled studies often fail to find the advantage, and studies that do find it may reflect publication bias, meaning positive results get published while null results sit in drawers.

The fair current view is that any cognitive benefit of bilingualism, if it exists, is small and inconsistent, while the communicative and cultural benefits of speaking two languages are real and large.


29.2 Language and thought

This section turns from how we learn language to how language relates to thinking itself.

The core question is old and stubborn: does the particular language you speak mould the concepts you can form and the way you reason, or is thought largely independent of language and merely expressed through it?

We will look at the modern evidence on that question, at the idea that thought has its own internal language, and at how language may have evolved in the first place.


29.2.1 Linguistic relativity and its modern evidence

Linguistic relativity is the idea that the language you speak influences the way you perceive and think about the world.

It is often called the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, after the linguists Edward Sapir and Benjamin Lee Whorf who wrote about it in the early twentieth century.

There is a strong version and a weak version, and keeping them apart is essential.

The strong version, linguistic determinism, says language completely determines thought, so that you cannot think what your language cannot express.

That strong version is now rejected by almost everyone, because people clearly can think about things their language has no single word for, and can learn new distinctions.

The weak version says language influences or nudges thought, making some distinctions easier or more habitual, and this weaker claim has real experimental support.

One well-studied domain is colour: languages divide the colour spectrum differently, and speakers of a language that has separate basic words for light blue and dark blue, such as Russian, are slightly faster at telling those shades apart than English speakers who call both "blue".

Another domain is space: some Aboriginal Australian languages describe location using fixed compass directions like north and south rather than "left" and "right", and speakers of those languages show a remarkable, constant awareness of their orientation.

A third domain is grammatical gender, where the gender a language assigns to an object can subtly colour how people describe it.

The modern consensus, associated with researchers such as Lera Boroditsky, is that language does shape thought in measurable but bounded ways, more like tinting a lens than building the eye.

Language seems to influence thinking most when a task lets people lean on verbal labels, and its influence shrinks when people are prevented from using language or when the task is purely perceptual.

The systems reading of the weak version is that verbal labels act as an optional fast pathway feeding into perception and categorisation, shaving tens of milliseconds off discrimination when the labels align with the task, and contributing nothing when the labelling channel is blocked.


29.2.2 The language of thought hypothesis

The language of thought hypothesis is a very different idea about the language-thought relation, proposed by the philosopher Jerry Fodor in his 1975 book.

It claims that thinking happens in an internal mental code, a kind of inner language, that is separate from any spoken language like English or Japanese.

This inner code is often nicknamed "Mentalese".

The core claim is that thoughts have parts that combine according to rules, much as words combine into sentences, and that this combining is what lets us think an unlimited number of new thoughts.

Two properties are central to the argument.

Productivity means you can understand and produce endlessly many new thoughts you have never encountered, just as you can understand a sentence you have never heard before.

Systematicity means that if you can think "the dog chased the cat", you can automatically also think "the cat chased the dog", because the same parts recombine in an orderly way.

Fodor argued that only a structured, symbol-like internal language could explain these properties, which is why the language of thought hypothesis is a foundational idea for the symbolic tradition in cognitive science.

Notice how this differs from linguistic relativity: relativity is about whether your spoken language shapes thought, while the language of thought hypothesis is about whether thought itself has a language-like structure underneath all spoken languages.

The hypothesis remains influential but contested, because rival approaches, especially connectionism which models the mind as networks of simple units, argue that structured thought can emerge without a literal inner symbolic language.

Because this is a debate, here is what each side predicts in systems terms: a symbolic inner language predicts that any thought built from known parts is immediately available at no extra learning cost, while a network account predicts that recombination ability depends on training and can fail for unfamiliar combinations.


29.2.3 The evolution of language

The evolution of language asks how our species came to have language at all, when no other animal has anything close to it.

This is one of the hardest questions in science because language does not fossilise, so there is no direct record of when or how it appeared.

Researchers piece together indirect clues from anatomy, genetics, archaeology, and comparisons with other animals.

One long-running debate is whether language evolved gradually as a communication tool shaped by natural selection, or appeared more suddenly as a side effect of some other change in the brain.

The linguist Steven Pinker, with Paul Bloom in an influential 1990 paper, argued that language is a biological adaptation gradually shaped by selection for communication, much like the eye.

Chomsky and some colleagues have argued instead that the core computational ingredient of language, the ability to combine elements into ever larger structures, may have arisen relatively suddenly and was not primarily selected for communication.

Genetics adds a piece to the puzzle: a gene called FOXP2, which stands for forkhead box protein P2, was found to be disrupted in a family with severe speech and language difficulties, and it plays a role in the brain circuits for fine motor control of speech.

Early excitement that FOXP2 was "the language gene" has been tempered, because the gene is involved in many species and many functions, so it is better understood as one contributor among many rather than a single switch for language.

A separate and important debate concerns whether language evolved first for communicating with others or first as a tool for thinking, and the evidence does not yet settle this.

The honest bottom line is that the evolution of language is genuinely unresolved, with reasonable scientists disagreeing about timing, cause, and mechanism, and with the field relying on careful inference rather than direct evidence.

In systems terms the two sides predict differently: gradual selection for communication predicts a series of intermediate, partially useful communication systems in our lineage, while the sudden-emergence view predicts a single structural innovation, the capacity to combine elements recursively, appearing without communicative intermediates.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Continuous caregiver speech, arriving as an unsegmented acoustic stream of syllables, from the auditory system.

◦ Joint attention and social context signals, such as gaze direction and pointing, from the visual and social-cognition systems, used to link sounds to referents.

◦ Prosodic cues, meaning the melody, stress, and rhythm of speech, which supply additional boundary and structure information.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A segmented word stream, consumed by the growing lexicon, which is the mental dictionary.

◦ A lexicon of word-to-meaning mappings, consumed by comprehension and production systems.

◦ A grammar, meaning a set of combination rules, consumed by the sentence comprehension and production systems of the earlier language chapters.

• STATE.

◦ Running frequency and co-occurrence counts over syllables and words, the raw material of statistical learning.

◦ The current lexicon and the current grammar hypothesis, both revised continuously as evidence arrives.

◦ A maturational setting that scales how strongly new input changes the stored model.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Learning rate, high in early childhood and declining with age under the critical-period account.

◦ A boundary threshold on transitional probability, below which a syllable transition is treated as a word boundary.

◦ Input volume, the sheer number of words heard per day, which varies widely across children and predicts vocabulary growth.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Detectable statistical segmentation of an artificial speech stream after about 2 minutes of exposure in eight-month-old infants, per Saffran, Aslin, and Newport 1996.

◦ First words at roughly 12 months and first two-word combinations at roughly 18 to 24 months, the typical developmental timetable.

◦ Decline of language-learning ability across a window from early childhood to roughly puberty under Lenneberg's proposal, though whether the decline is sharp or gradual is debated.

◦ Full native-like grammar acquisition over roughly 3 to 5 years of immersion in childhood.

• MODES.

◦ Segmentation mode, in which the dominant task is carving the sound stream into words, prominent in the first year.

◦ Mapping mode, in which words are linked to meanings, driven by joint attention with a caregiver.

◦ Rule-extraction mode, in which regularities across many stored utterances are generalised into grammar, becoming prominent from the second year onward.

◦ The transitions are driven by data accumulation: each mode's output becomes the next mode's input, so the system shifts as its own state matures.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Overregularisation errors, such as a child saying "goed" instead of "went", which reveal a rule applied too broadly before exceptions are learned.

◦ Severe and lasting grammatical deficits after early language deprivation, the tragic evidence linked to the critical-period debate.

◦ Developmental language disorder, in which acquisition is slow and effortful despite normal hearing and intelligence.

◦ Overextension of word meanings, as when a child calls every four-legged animal "dog", reflecting a lexicon still generalising from too few examples.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called syllable stream containing the incoming syllables in order.
Create a dictionary variable called pair counts with no entries.
Create a dictionary variable called first counts with no entries.
For each position from the first syllable to the second-to-last syllable in syllable stream, do the following.
    Set current to the syllable at the position.
    Set following to the syllable at the next position.
    Add one to the entry of first counts for current, creating the entry with value zero if it is absent.
    Add one to the entry of pair counts for the pair of current and following, creating the entry with value zero if it is absent.
Create a number variable called boundary threshold with initial value zero point five.
Create a list variable called words with no items.
Create a text variable called current word with initial value equal to the first syllable of syllable stream.
For each position from the first syllable to the second-to-last syllable in syllable stream, do the following.
    Set current to the syllable at the position.
    Set following to the syllable at the next position.
    Calculate the transitional probability as the pair counts entry for the pair of current and following divided by the first counts entry for current.
    If the transitional probability is less than boundary threshold, then do the following.
        Append current word to words.
        Set current word to following.
    Otherwise, do the following.
        Append following to the end of current word.
Append current word to words.
Return words.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Bring in the randomness module from the standard library.
import random

# Fix the random seed so the demonstration is repeatable.
random.seed(1)

# Create a list variable called words_of_language holding three nonsense words as syllable lists.
words_of_language = [["bi", "da", "ku"], ["pa", "do", "ti"], ["go", "la", "bu"]]

# Create a list variable called syllables by concatenating three hundred randomly chosen words.
syllables = [s for _ in range(300) for s in random.choice(words_of_language)]

# Create a dictionary variable called pair_counts with no entries.
pair_counts = {}
# Create a dictionary variable called first_counts with no entries.
first_counts = {}

# For each position from the first syllable to the second-to-last syllable, count pairs.
for i in range(len(syllables) - 1):
    # Set current to the syllable at the position.
    current = syllables[i]
    # Set following to the syllable at the next position.
    following = syllables[i + 1]
    # Add one to the entry of first_counts for current, creating it at zero if absent.
    first_counts[current] = first_counts.get(current, 0) + 1
    # Add one to the entry of pair_counts for the pair, creating it at zero if absent.
    pair_counts[(current, following)] = pair_counts.get((current, following), 0) + 1

# Create a number variable called boundary_threshold with initial value zero point five.
boundary_threshold = 0.5

# Create a list variable called words with no items.
words = []
# Create a text variable called current_word starting with the first syllable.
current_word = syllables[0]

# For each position, place a boundary wherever the transitional probability dips.
for i in range(len(syllables) - 1):
    # Set current to the syllable at the position.
    current = syllables[i]
    # Set following to the syllable at the next position.
    following = syllables[i + 1]
    # Calculate the transitional probability as the pair count divided by the first count.
    transitional_probability = pair_counts[(current, following)] / first_counts[current]
    # If the transitional probability is below the threshold, end the current word.
    if transitional_probability < boundary_threshold:
        # Append current_word to words.
        words.append(current_word)
        # Set current_word to following.
        current_word = following
    # Otherwise, extend the current word with the following syllable.
    else:
        # Append following to the end of current_word.
        current_word = current_word + following

# Append the final current_word to words.
words.append(current_word)

# Print the first six segmented words the learner discovered.
print("Segmented words:", words[:6])




================================================================================

PART SEVEN. LEARNING

================================================================================

CHAPTER 30. NON-ASSOCIATIVE AND ASSOCIATIVE LEARNING (PROCESS)

This chapter covers the most basic ways that experience changes behaviour, the building blocks on which more complex learning is built.

Learning, at its simplest, means a lasting change in behaviour or knowledge that comes from experience.

We start with the simplest forms, in which an animal adjusts its response to a single repeated event, and then move to forms in which the mind links two things together.

These mechanisms are ancient and shared across the animal kingdom, and they turn out to be described by surprisingly precise mathematical rules, which is why they matter for a computational understanding of mind.

In systems terms, this chapter describes learning processes whose input is a stream of stimuli and outcomes, whose state is a set of association strengths, and whose update rule, we will see, is driven by prediction error, the gap between what was expected and what occurred.


30.1 Non-associative learning

Non-associative learning is the simplest kind of learning, in which your response to a single stimulus changes just because you have encountered it repeatedly.

It is called non-associative because it does not involve linking two different things together, only adjusting to one thing on its own.

Despite its simplicity, it is the foundation of how nervous systems tune themselves to their environment, filtering out the unimportant and staying alert to the important.

As a mechanism, its input is a repeated stimulus, its state is a single response-gain value for that stimulus, and its output is a response whose amplitude drifts downward or upward over seconds to minutes of repetition.


30.1.1 Habituation and sensitisation

Habituation is the fading of a response to a stimulus that is repeated over and over without consequence.

A homely example is a clock that ticks loudly when you first enter a room, but which you stop noticing after a while, even though the sound never changed.

Habituation is useful because it lets an animal ignore harmless, familiar events and save its attention for things that matter.

It is not the same as sensory fatigue or simple tiredness, and scientists distinguish it by specific signatures, such as the fact that the response comes back if the stimulus changes, a phenomenon called dishabituation.

Sensitisation is the opposite process, in which a response grows stronger rather than weaker.

This typically happens after an intense, painful, or threatening stimulus, which leaves the animal more reactive to everything for a while.

For example, after a sudden loud bang, you may jump at small sounds that would not normally startle you at all.

Sensitisation is useful because a dangerous event should raise an animal's overall vigilance.

Much of what we know about the cellular basis of these processes comes from the neuroscientist Eric Kandel's work on the sea slug Aplysia, a simple animal whose large nerve cells let researchers trace exactly how habituation and sensitisation change the strength of connections between neurons.

That work, which earned a share of the Nobel Prize in 2000, showed that even the simplest learning is stored as changes in the connections between nerve cells, a principle that scales up to more complex memory.

The systems reading: habituation is a stimulus-specific gain that decays with each repetition and recovers with rest, on timescales from seconds to minutes for short-term forms and days for long-term forms, while sensitisation is a global gain raised by a strong aversive input and decaying back over minutes to hours.


30.2 Classical conditioning

Classical conditioning is a form of associative learning in which an animal learns that one event predicts another.

Associative learning means learning a link between two things, so that one comes to stand for or signal the other.

This kind of learning lets an animal use a cue in the world to prepare for something important that reliably follows it, which is enormously adaptive.

As a mechanism, its inputs are paired events, a cue and an outcome, its state is the learned strength of the cue-to-outcome link, and its output is an anticipatory response emitted to the cue alone, typically established over tens of pairings.


30.2.1 The Pavlovian paradigm and its phenomena

Classical conditioning is also called Pavlovian conditioning after the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov, who discovered it around the turn of the twentieth century while studying digestion in dogs.

Pavlov noticed that his dogs began to salivate not just when food arrived but at signals that food was coming, such as the footsteps of the person who fed them.

The basic setup uses four terms that are worth defining clearly.

The unconditioned stimulus is something that naturally triggers a response without any learning, such as food in the mouth.

The unconditioned response is the natural, unlearned reaction to it, such as salivating to food.

The conditioned stimulus is a neutral signal, such as a bell, that the animal learns to associate with the unconditioned stimulus.

The conditioned response is the learned reaction to that signal, such as salivating to the bell alone.

After the bell is paired with food many times, the animal salivates to the bell by itself, which shows it has learned that the bell predicts food.

Several further phenomena flesh out the picture.

Acquisition is the gradual building up of the conditioned response over repeated pairings.

Extinction is the fading of the conditioned response when the signal is presented many times without the food, so the animal learns the bell no longer predicts anything.

Spontaneous recovery is the surprising reappearance of the response after a rest, which shows that extinction does not erase the original learning but rather overlays it with new learning.

Generalisation means the animal responds to signals similar to the trained one, while discrimination means it learns to respond only to the specific signal and not to others.

In systems terms, acquisition and extinction are both the same update process running on different data: the state variable is association strength, acquisition drives it toward a positive ceiling over tens of trials, extinction drives it back toward zero, and spontaneous recovery shows that extinction writes a second, competing memory rather than deleting the first.


30.2.2 The Rescorla-Wagner model and prediction error

The Rescorla-Wagner model, published by Robert Rescorla and Allan Wagner in 1972, is one of the most important theories in the whole of learning science.

Before it, people often assumed that learning happened simply because two things occurred close together in time, an idea called contiguity.

The Rescorla-Wagner model made a deeper and more powerful claim: learning is driven by surprise, not merely by togetherness.

The central idea is prediction error, which is the gap between what actually happens and what the animal expected to happen.

When an outcome is fully expected, the prediction error is zero, and no new learning occurs, because there is nothing to update.

When an outcome is surprising, either better or worse than expected, the prediction error is large, and learning is strong, because the animal must revise its expectations.

In plain terms, you learn about a cue only to the extent that the outcome it predicts caught you off guard.

The model can be stated as a simple rule: the change in the strength of an association depends on how salient the cue and outcome are, multiplied by the difference between the maximum possible learning and how much has already been learned.

Crucially, when several cues are present at once, the expectation is the sum of all their strengths, and the shared prediction error is divided among them, which is what gives the model its distinctive predictions.

This one idea, that learning tracks prediction error, turned out to be extraordinarily fruitful, and as later chapters show, it became the bridge between animal conditioning and modern theories of how the brain and artificial systems learn from rewards.

As a mechanism, the model's inputs on each trial are the set of cues present and the outcome, its state is one strength number per cue, its parameters are the salience-based learning rates, and its output is the updated strengths, converging over tens of trials at typical learning rates.


30.2.3 Blocking, overshadowing, and the primacy of contingency over contiguity

Blocking is the single most important piece of evidence for the prediction-error view of learning, and it was discovered by Leon Kamin around 1969.

In a blocking experiment, an animal first learns that one cue, say a light, reliably predicts a shock.

Then a second cue, say a tone, is added, so the light and tone appear together and are followed by the same shock.

Common sense might expect the animal to learn that the tone also predicts shock, since the tone was always paired with it.

Instead, the animal learns little or nothing about the tone, because the shock was already fully predicted by the light, so there was no surprise and no prediction error to drive learning about the tone.

The prior learning about the light "blocks" learning about the tone, which is exactly what the Rescorla-Wagner model predicts and what a simple contiguity account cannot explain.

Overshadowing is a related effect: when two cues of unequal salience are trained together from the start, the more noticeable cue captures most of the learning and overshadows the weaker one.

Together these findings establish the primacy of contingency over contiguity.

Contiguity means two things merely occurring close together in time.

Contingency means one thing genuinely predicting another, that is, the outcome being more likely when the cue is present than when it is absent.

Rescorla showed in a classic experiment that animals learn about a cue only when it actually changes the odds of the outcome, not simply when the cue and outcome happen to co-occur.

The lesson, which reshaped the field, is that brains are not passive recorders of what happens together but active predictors that learn from the mismatch between expectation and reality.

The systems reading of blocking is direct: because the shared prediction error is computed from the summed expectation of all present cues, a cue added after the error has already been driven to zero receives no update, so blocking is not an anomaly but a mathematical consequence of the update rule.


30.3 Instrumental conditioning

Instrumental conditioning, also called operant conditioning, is learning from the consequences of your own actions.

In classical conditioning the animal learns a relationship between two events it does not control, but in instrumental conditioning the animal learns that its own behaviour produces outcomes.

This is the kind of learning behind training a dog to sit for a treat, or a person forming a habit because it pays off, and it is central to how goals and rewards shape behaviour.

As a mechanism, its input is the outcome that follows the animal's own action, its state is a value attached to each action, and its output is a shifted probability of emitting each action, changing over tens to hundreds of trials.


30.3.1 The law of effect and schedules of reinforcement

The law of effect was formulated by the psychologist Edward Thorndike around 1898, based on experiments with cats learning to escape from puzzle boxes.

The law states, in plain form, that actions followed by satisfying outcomes become more likely to be repeated, while actions followed by unpleasant outcomes become less likely.

Thorndike's cats did not solve the box in a flash of insight but gradually got faster over many trials, as successful actions were stamped in by their rewarding consequences.

Reinforcement is anything that makes a behaviour more likely in the future, while punishment is anything that makes it less likely.

The psychologist B. F. Skinner built an entire research programme on these ideas, using a device now called the Skinner box in which an animal presses a lever for food.

A key discovery was that the pattern, or schedule, on which reinforcement is delivered has powerful and predictable effects on behaviour.

A fixed-ratio schedule gives a reward after a set number of responses, such as one treat per five lever presses, and produces high, steady rates of responding.

A variable-ratio schedule gives a reward after an unpredictable number of responses, and produces very high and persistent responding, which is why slot machines, built on exactly this schedule, are so compelling.

A fixed-interval schedule rewards the first response after a set time has passed, producing a burst of responding as the deadline approaches.

A variable-interval schedule rewards the first response after an unpredictable amount of time, producing slow, steady responding.

These schedules matter because they reveal that behaviour is finely tuned to the statistics of reward, a theme that connects directly to the reinforcement-learning theories of the next chapter.

In systems terms, a schedule is the environment's reward function, and the observed response rates are the learner's policy adapting to that function, which is why each schedule produces its own characteristic response curve.


30.3.2 Goal-directed against habitual control

A crucial insight of modern learning science is that instrumental behaviour is not one thing but is controlled by two different systems.

Goal-directed control means acting because you expect the action to lead to a specific outcome that you currently want.

If you press a lever because you know it delivers a particular food and you are hungry for that food, your behaviour is goal-directed.

Habitual control means acting out of ingrained routine, triggered by the situation, without weighing the current value of the outcome.

If you keep pressing the lever automatically even after the food has been made worthless, your behaviour has become a habit.

Researchers tease these apart with a clever manipulation called outcome devaluation.

They make the reward worthless, for example by letting the animal eat it to full satiation or by making it mildly sickening, and then see whether the animal still performs the action.

A goal-directed animal immediately stops, because it no longer wants the outcome, while a habitual animal keeps going, because its behaviour is no longer tied to the outcome's value.

A central finding, associated with researchers such as Anthony Dickinson, is that behaviour tends to start out goal-directed and become habitual with extended practice.

This distinction is deeply important, because it maps onto the difference between flexible, thoughtful action and automatic routine, and, as the next chapter describes, onto two computational strategies known as model-based and model-free learning.

The systems reading: goal-directed control consults a stored action-to-outcome map plus the outcome's current value at decision time, so it updates instantly when value changes, while habitual control consults only a cached action strength, so it updates only through slow retraining over many trials.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ A stream of stimuli, meaning cues such as tones and lights, arriving from the perceptual systems.

◦ Outcome signals, such as food, shock, or their omission, arriving from the body's reward and pain systems.

◦ For instrumental learning, a copy of the animal's own emitted action, so that consequences can be credited to behaviour.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Anticipatory conditioned responses, such as salivation to a bell, sent to the autonomic and motor systems.

◦ Updated association strengths and action values, consumed by the decision and reinforcement-learning systems of the next chapter.

◦ A prediction-error signal, the difference between expected and received outcome, broadcast as a teaching signal.

• STATE.

◦ One association strength per cue, summed across present cues to form the current expectation.

◦ One value per action for instrumental learning, plus a record of which controller, goal-directed or habitual, currently dominates.

◦ A separate extinction memory that competes with the original learning rather than erasing it, as spontaneous recovery shows.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Cue salience, the learning-rate factor determined by how noticeable a cue is.

◦ Outcome salience, the learning-rate factor determined by how important the outcome is.

◦ The asymptote, the maximum association strength a given outcome can support.

◦ The reinforcement schedule, the environment-side rule mapping responses and time to rewards.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Conditioned eyeblink responses form best when the cue leads the outcome by roughly 250 to 500 milliseconds, a classic optimal-interval finding.

◦ Acquisition of a reliable conditioned response typically takes on the order of tens of pairings, though single-trial learning occurs for taste aversion.

◦ Taste-aversion learning tolerates cue-to-outcome delays of minutes to hours, a striking exception to short-interval contiguity.

◦ Short-term habituation decays over seconds to minutes, while long-term habituation in Aplysia can persist for days to weeks after repeated training sessions.

◦ Transfer from goal-directed to habitual control emerges with extended training, REFUSED as a single number because the trial count at which it occurs varies widely with task, schedule, and species.

• MODES.

◦ Acquisition mode, active while the prediction error is positive and the association is growing toward its asymptote.

◦ Extinction mode, triggered when the cue repeatedly occurs without the outcome, driving expression of the response back down.

◦ Goal-directed mode, dominant early in instrumental training, in which actions are chosen by expected outcome value.

◦ Habitual mode, reached after extended repetition on a stable schedule, in which actions are triggered by the situation itself; outcome devaluation is the diagnostic switch test.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Blocking and overshadowing, in which perfectly correlated cues fail to be learned because other cues already absorb the prediction error.

◦ Phobias, in which a single traumatic pairing creates a fear association that resists extinction.

◦ Relapse after apparently successful extinction, through spontaneous recovery, renewal in a new context, or reinstatement by a stress or reminder.

◦ Compulsive habit, in which behaviour persists despite a devalued or harmful outcome, a laboratory model for aspects of addiction.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a dictionary variable called strength with an entry for light with value zero and an entry for tone with value zero.
Create a number variable called learning rate with initial value zero point two.
Create a number variable called asymptote with initial value one.
Create a list variable called phase one containing sixty trials, each with the cue list containing only light and with the outcome present.
Create a list variable called phase two containing sixty trials, each with the cue list containing light and tone and with the outcome present.
Create a list variable called all trials by joining phase one and phase two.
For each trial in all trials, do the following.
    Create a number variable called expectation with initial value zero.
    For each cue in the trial's cue list, add the strength entry for the cue to expectation.
    If the trial's outcome is present, set target to asymptote; otherwise set target to zero.
    Calculate the prediction error as target minus expectation.
    For each cue in the trial's cue list, add the product of learning rate and the prediction error to the strength entry for the cue.
Return the strength entries for light and tone.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a dictionary variable called strength with entries for light and tone, both zero.
strength = {"light": 0.0, "tone": 0.0}

# Create a number variable called learning_rate with initial value zero point two.
learning_rate = 0.2
# Create a number variable called asymptote with initial value one.
asymptote = 1.0

# Create a list of phase-one trials: sixty trials of light alone followed by shock.
phase_one = [(["light"], True)] * 60
# Create a list of phase-two trials: sixty trials of light plus tone followed by shock.
phase_two = [(["light", "tone"], True)] * 60
# Create a list variable called all_trials by joining phase one and phase two.
all_trials = phase_one + phase_two

# For each trial in all_trials, apply the Rescorla-Wagner update.
for cues, outcome_present in all_trials:
    # Create a number variable called expectation with initial value zero.
    expectation = 0.0
    # For each cue in the trial's cue list, add its strength to expectation.
    for cue in cues:
        # Add the strength entry for the cue to expectation.
        expectation = expectation + strength[cue]
    # If the outcome is present, set target to the asymptote; otherwise set target to zero.
    target = asymptote if outcome_present else 0.0
    # Calculate the prediction error as target minus expectation.
    prediction_error = target - expectation
    # For each cue present, nudge its strength by the shared prediction error.
    for cue in cues:
        # Add the product of learning_rate and prediction_error to the cue's strength.
        strength[cue] = strength[cue] + learning_rate * prediction_error

# Print the final strengths, showing the light near one and the tone blocked near zero.
print("Light strength:", round(strength["light"], 3))
print("Tone strength (blocked):", round(strength["tone"], 3))


CHAPTER 31. REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AS A THEORY OF COGNITION (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter presents one of the most successful bridges ever built between artificial intelligence, psychology, and neuroscience.

Reinforcement learning is a mathematical framework for how an agent should learn to act in order to maximise reward over time, through trial and error.

It began as an engineering method for training machines, but it turned out to describe, with startling accuracy, how real brains learn from reward, using the very prediction-error idea introduced in the last chapter.

In systems terms, a reinforcement-learning agent is a control loop: it reads the current state, emits an action, receives a reward and a new state, and updates an internal table of values, cycling continuously for the lifetime of the agent.

Because it is precise, testable, and shared across biological and artificial minds, reinforcement learning is a central framework for konnectome's aim of understanding humanlike intelligence.


31.1 The formal framework

This section lays out the basic mathematical machinery of reinforcement learning in plain terms.

The goal is to give you the core concepts, an agent, states, actions, rewards, and value, without heavy equations, so the later sections make sense.

Do not worry if the vocabulary is new; each term names a simple, intuitive idea.


31.1.1 Markov decision processes and value functions

A Markov decision process is the standard formal description of the situation a learning agent faces.

It sounds technical, but the idea is simple: it is a way of describing a world made of situations you can be in, actions you can take, and rewards you can receive.

A state is the situation the agent is currently in, such as a particular square on a game board.

An action is a choice the agent can make, such as moving left or right.

A reward is a number signalling how good the immediate outcome was, such as plus one for finding food or minus one for hitting a wall.

The word Markov refers to a simplifying assumption: that the future depends only on the present state, not on the whole history of how you got there.

In other words, if you know where you are now, you know everything you need to decide what to do next, and the path you took to get there does not add information.

The agent's job is to find a policy, which is a rule that says which action to take in each state.

To choose well, the agent needs to think beyond the immediate reward, because a small reward now might lead to a big reward later, or a tempting reward now might lead to disaster.

This is captured by the value function, which is the heart of the framework.

The value of a state is the total amount of reward the agent can expect to collect in the long run, starting from that state and following its policy.

Value is distinct from immediate reward: a state can feel unrewarding right now yet have high value because it leads somewhere good.

Because future rewards are less certain and less pressing than present ones, they are usually discounted, meaning a reward far in the future counts for a little less than the same reward now.

The systems reading: the Markov decision process is the interface contract between agent and world, specifying the input format as a state and reward pair, the output format as an action, and the discount factor as the parameter that sets the agent's effective planning horizon.

Learning good value estimates is the key to acting well, and the next sub-section describes the elegant trick that makes such learning possible.


31.1.2 Temporal-difference learning and its variants

Temporal-difference learning is the central algorithm of reinforcement learning, developed largely by Richard Sutton and Andrew Barto in the 1980s.

It solves a hard problem: how can an agent learn the long-run value of situations when the rewards may come much later, without waiting to see the entire future?

The clever answer is to learn from the difference between successive predictions, which is where the name temporal difference comes from.

Here is the idea in plain words.

At each step, the agent has a prediction of how much reward is coming.

A moment later, it has a new, slightly better-informed prediction, plus whatever reward it just received.

If the new estimate is higher than the old one, the agent was pleasantly surprised, and it nudges the earlier prediction upward; if lower, it nudges it downward.

This nudge is the temporal-difference error, and it is a form of the very same prediction error we met in classical conditioning.

The beauty of this method is that the agent learns continually, step by step, using each prediction to correct the one before it, without ever needing to know the full outcome in advance.

There are several variants worth naming.

In one variant, called Q-learning, the agent learns the value of taking a particular action in a particular state, which directly tells it which action is best.

Q-learning is called off-policy because it can learn about the best possible actions even while behaving more cautiously or randomly.

Another variant, called SARSA, which stands for state, action, reward, state, action, learns the value of the actions the agent actually takes, and is called on-policy.

As a mechanism, temporal-difference learning takes the current reward and the next state's value estimate as input, holds a table of value estimates as state, and outputs an updated estimate every step of the loop, so learning happens at the same tempo as behaviour itself.

The deep significance of temporal-difference learning, spelled out later in this chapter, is that the brain appears to use exactly this kind of error signal, carried by the chemical dopamine.


31.1.3 The exploration and exploitation trade-off

The exploration-exploitation trade-off is a fundamental dilemma that every learning agent, biological or artificial, must face.

Exploitation means using what you already know to get the best reward you can right now.

Exploration means trying something new and uncertain, giving up guaranteed reward now for the chance of discovering something better.

The tension is easy to feel in everyday life.

Imagine you have a favourite restaurant you know is good; going there is exploitation.

Trying a new restaurant that might be wonderful or might be terrible is exploration.

If you only ever exploit, you may never discover a better option and get stuck in a rut.

If you only ever explore, you never settle down to enjoy what you have found, and you waste chances on bad options.

A good learner must balance the two, exploring more when it is ignorant and exploiting more as it grows confident.

Researchers have formalised several strategies for striking this balance.

One simple method is to act greedily most of the time but occasionally choose at random, ensuring the agent keeps sampling alternatives.

A widely used refinement is the softmax rule, which turns the learned values into choice probabilities so that better actions are chosen more often but weaker actions still get sampled, with a single temperature parameter controlling how random the choices are.

More sophisticated methods add a bonus for uncertainty, deliberately favouring options the agent knows little about, an idea sometimes summarised as optimism in the face of uncertainty.

In systems terms, the exploration policy is a tunable gain between value estimates and action output: high temperature or high random-choice rate spreads choices widely early in learning, and annealing that parameter downward over time shifts the agent from exploration to exploitation.

This trade-off is not just an engineering concern; it describes real dilemmas that animals and people navigate constantly, from foraging for food to choosing a career, and it reappears in the chapter on decision making.


31.2 Model-free and model-based control

This section describes a deep division within reinforcement learning that mirrors the psychological distinction between habits and goal-directed action from the previous chapter.

The two approaches, model-free and model-based, represent two fundamentally different ways of using experience to choose actions.

Understanding their trade-offs illuminates both how brains work and how to build flexible artificial agents.


31.2.1 The two systems and their behavioural dissociation

Model-free control is learning by directly storing the value of actions, based on how much reward they have produced in the past, without any understanding of how the world works.

It is like memorising, through repetition, that a certain route gets you home quickly, without knowing why or being able to reason about detours.

Model-free learning is computationally cheap and fast to use once learned, but it is inflexible, because if the world changes, it must relearn slowly through many new experiences.

This maps neatly onto habitual behaviour: efficient, automatic, but slow to update.

Model-based control, by contrast, builds an internal model of how the world works, a map of which actions lead to which states, and then uses that model to plan by imagining the consequences of different choices.

It is like having a real map of the city, so that when a road is closed you can immediately reason out a new route.

Model-based learning is flexible and updates quickly when circumstances change, but it is computationally expensive, because planning takes effort and time.

This maps onto goal-directed behaviour: flexible, thoughtful, but costly.

The two systems can be told apart in the laboratory using tasks designed to separate them.

A widely used tool is the two-step task, developed by Nathaniel Daw and colleagues, in which the pattern of a person's choices after surprising outcomes reveals whether they are relying on stored action values or on an internal model of the task's structure.

The evidence shows that people use a blend of both systems, leaning more on the effortful model-based system when it is worth the cost and falling back on the cheap model-free system when under time pressure, stress, or fatigue.

The systems reading: model-free control answers a value query in a single table lookup, while model-based control answers it by simulating futures through its stored map, so the two differ chiefly in their time constant at decision time, milliseconds for the lookup versus a slower, effortful search for the simulation.


31.2.2 The successor representation as a middle ground

The successor representation is an elegant idea that sits between the model-free and model-based extremes, offering some of the flexibility of planning at much of the speed of habit.

The problem it solves is that model-free learning is too rigid while model-based planning is too slow, so the mind may use a clever compromise.

The core idea, originally proposed by Peter Dayan in 1993 and revived strongly in recent years, is to store not the full model of the world, and not just cached values, but a predictive map of where you are likely to go.

In plain terms, the successor representation records, for each situation, which other situations you tend to end up in later.

Instead of memorising raw values or simulating every step, the agent keeps a summary of its expected future whereabouts and combines that with current reward information to compute values quickly.

This gives a useful pattern of strengths: the successor representation adjusts quickly when the rewards in the world change, because reward information is kept separate, but it adjusts slowly when the very structure of the world changes, because the predictive map must be relearned.

That specific signature, flexible to reward changes yet rigid to structural changes, has been found in human behaviour by researchers such as Ida Momennejad and colleagues, supporting the idea that the brain uses something like a successor representation.

It is also attractive because it connects to how the hippocampus, a brain region important for memory and navigation, appears to represent maps of space and experience in a predictive way.

In systems terms, the successor representation factorises the value computation into two stored components, a predictive occupancy map and a reward vector, so value queries stay cheap while reward updates propagate in a single step and structural updates still require slow relearning of the map.


31.3 The neuroscience of reward

This section turns from mathematics and behaviour to the brain itself.

It presents one of the great success stories of computational neuroscience: the discovery that a specific brain signal implements the abstract prediction-error idea with remarkable precision.

The key player is a chemical messenger called dopamine.


31.3.1 The dopamine reward-prediction-error hypothesis

Dopamine is a neurotransmitter, which is a chemical that nerve cells use to signal to one another, produced by a small group of cells deep in the midbrain.

For a long time dopamine was loosely described as a "pleasure chemical", but the modern and better-supported view is quite different and more precise.

The dopamine reward-prediction-error hypothesis holds that these dopamine cells signal not pleasure itself but the prediction error, the gap between the reward received and the reward expected.

This was established through recordings of monkey dopamine neurons by Wolfram Schultz and colleagues, interpreted in light of temporal-difference learning by Peter Dayan, Read Montague, and Terrence Sejnowski in a landmark 1997 paper.

The findings are strikingly clean.

When a monkey receives an unexpected reward, its dopamine cells fire a burst, signalling a positive prediction error.

When a cue reliably predicts the reward, the dopamine burst shifts backward in time from the reward to the cue, exactly as temporal-difference learning says it should.

When a fully predicted reward arrives, the cells show no burst at all, because there is no surprise and no error.

And when an expected reward is omitted, the cells briefly dip below their baseline, signalling a negative prediction error, a disappointment signal.

As a signal, the phasic dopamine response is fast: the burst begins roughly 100 milliseconds after the triggering event and lasts on the order of 100 to 200 milliseconds, a timing consistent with a step-by-step teaching signal.

This match between a theory born in artificial intelligence and the behaviour of real neurons is one of the most celebrated results in neuroscience, and it firmly linked the abstract framework of reinforcement learning to the machinery of the brain.


31.3.2 The basal ganglia as an actor-critic

The basal ganglia are a set of structures deep in the brain that are heavily involved in selecting actions and in learning from reward.

A popular and productive way to understand their role uses a design from reinforcement learning called the actor-critic architecture.

In an actor-critic system, the work is split between two cooperating parts.

The critic learns to evaluate situations, computing the value of states and generating the prediction-error signal.

The actor learns the policy, that is, which actions to take, and it is trained by the critic's prediction-error signal, strengthening actions that turned out better than expected and weakening those that turned out worse.

Mapped onto the brain, the dopamine signal plays the role of the critic's teaching signal, broadcast to the striatum, which is the main input structure of the basal ganglia.

Within this scheme, parts of the striatum help evaluate states like a critic, while other parts help select actions like an actor, and dopamine adjusts the connections in both according to prediction error.

This account is attractive because it links anatomy, chemistry, and computation into one coherent story, and it helps explain disorders such as Parkinson's disease, in which the loss of dopamine cells impairs both movement and reward-based learning.

It should be said that the actor-critic mapping is a useful model rather than a fully settled fact, and researchers continue to debate the precise division of labour within the basal ganglia.

The systems reading: the critic subscribes to state and reward, publishes a scalar error, and the actor subscribes to that error to adjust its action weights, a two-module loop closed on every behavioural step.


31.3.3 Distributional codes for value

Distributional reinforcement learning is a recent and important refinement of the classic picture.

The traditional theory assumes that the brain learns a single average value for each situation, a single best guess of expected reward.

Distributional reinforcement learning proposes instead that the brain learns the whole spread of possible rewards, that is, the full range of good and bad outcomes and how likely each is, not just the average.

The idea came first from artificial intelligence, where representing the full distribution of possible returns was found to make learning agents perform better.

Then a 2020 study by Will Dabney, Naoshige Uchida, and colleagues reported evidence that real dopamine neurons do something similar.

They found that different dopamine cells are tuned to be optimistic or pessimistic to varying degrees, some firing mainly for better-than-expected outcomes and others mainly for worse-than-expected ones.

Taken together, this population of cells with different outlooks can represent the entire distribution of expected rewards rather than a single number.

This matters because knowing the range of possible outcomes, not just the average, supports better decisions under risk and uncertainty, and it is a fine example of an insight flowing from artificial intelligence back into neuroscience.

In systems terms, the change is in the output format of the value system: instead of publishing one scalar per state, the population publishes a set of estimates at different optimism settings, from which downstream systems can read off both the average and the risk.

As a recent finding, its full scope is still being worked out, but it has already reshaped how researchers think about what dopamine represents.


31.4 Extensions

This section surveys three ways the basic reinforcement-learning framework has been extended to capture more of the richness of real behaviour.

Each addresses a limitation of the simple picture: how to handle complex nested goals, how to learn faster by learning how to learn, and how to decide not just what to do but how hard to try.

Together they show reinforcement learning maturing from a narrow model into a broad theory of adaptive action.


31.4.1 Hierarchical reinforcement learning and subgoals

Hierarchical reinforcement learning addresses a serious weakness of the basic framework: it struggles with tasks that require long sequences of actions to reach a distant goal.

The problem is that if reward comes only at the very end of a long task, it is extremely slow to figure out which of the thousands of small actions along the way deserve credit.

The solution is to organise behaviour into a hierarchy, with big goals broken down into smaller subgoals, and those into individual actions.

Consider making breakfast: the overall goal decomposes into subgoals like "make toast" and "brew coffee", and each of those into concrete steps.

In hierarchical reinforcement learning, the agent learns reusable chunks of behaviour, sometimes called options or skills, that accomplish subgoals, and then it can plan at the level of these chunks rather than every tiny step.

This dramatically speeds up learning, because a subgoal reached becomes a milestone that can carry reward information, and because skills learned for one task can be reused in another.

In systems terms, the hierarchy inserts an extra control layer whose actions are whole sub-policies, so credit assignment operates over a handful of chunk-level steps instead of thousands of primitive steps.

This connects directly to the psychology of skill and to the way people plan by setting intermediate targets, and it is an active area where artificial intelligence and cognitive science inform each other.


31.4.2 Meta-reinforcement learning and learning to learn

Meta-reinforcement learning is the idea of learning how to learn.

Ordinary reinforcement learning masters a single task, but a human or animal placed in a new but related task does not start from zero; it draws on the general lessons of similar past tasks and adapts quickly.

Meta-reinforcement learning captures this by training an agent across many related tasks so that it acquires a general learning strategy, not just the solution to one task.

After such training, the agent can adapt to a fresh task within that family in just a few trials, because it has, in effect, learned the shape of the problems it tends to face.

An influential proposal by Jane Wang, Matthew Botvinick, and colleagues suggested that the brain implements something like this, with the slow dopamine-based learning system gradually shaping a faster learning process housed in the prefrontal cortex, the front part of the brain involved in flexible control.

In this view, one learning system trains another, so that the prefrontal network becomes able to adapt rapidly on its own, which would help explain the striking flexibility of human and animal learning.

The systems reading is a two-timescale design: a slow outer loop adjusts connection weights over many tasks, and a fast inner loop adapts within a task over a few trials using activity rather than weight change.

This is a frontier idea rather than an established fact, but it is a promising attempt to explain why real minds learn so much faster than a naive learning algorithm would.


31.4.3 Vigour, opportunity cost, and tonic dopamine

This final extension addresses a question the basic framework ignores: not just which action to take, but how fast or how hard to perform it.

Vigour refers to the energy or speed with which an animal acts, such as how quickly it presses a lever or how fast it moves toward a goal.

The key insight, developed by Yael Niv, Nathaniel Daw, Peter Dayan, and colleagues, is that the right level of vigour depends on the opportunity cost of time.

Opportunity cost is what you give up by spending time on one thing instead of another.

When rewards are plentiful in the environment, time is precious, because dawdling means missing out on all the reward you could be earning, so it pays to act quickly and vigorously.

When rewards are scarce, there is less to lose by taking your time, so slower, more leisurely action is appropriate.

The proposal links this to a distinction between two modes of dopamine signalling.

Phasic dopamine refers to brief bursts that, as we saw, carry the reward-prediction-error signal used for learning which actions are good.

Tonic dopamine refers to the slow, steady background level of dopamine, which this theory suggests represents the average rate of reward available, and thus sets how vigorous behaviour should be.

In systems terms, tonic dopamine is a slowly varying gain, integrating reward rate over seconds to minutes, that scales the speed of every action, while phasic dopamine is the fast error channel operating over roughly a tenth of a second.

This helps make sense of clinical observations, such as the slowed movement and reduced motivation seen when dopamine is depleted in Parkinson's disease, by tying dopamine not only to learning but to the energising of action.

Like the other extensions, this is an actively researched proposal that enriches the simple framework rather than a closed question.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ The current state, a description of the situation the agent is in, from the perceptual systems.

◦ A scalar reward signal after each action, from the environment via the body's reward systems.

◦ The next state that follows each action, closing the step of the control loop.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ An action selected on each step, sent to the motor systems.

◦ A prediction-error signal, the temporal-difference error, broadcast as the teaching signal that in the brain is carried by phasic dopamine.

◦ Learned values and policies, consumed by the decision-making and planning systems of later chapters.

• STATE.

◦ A table or function of action values, one entry per state and action pair, for the model-free controller.

◦ An internal model of state transitions for the model-based controller, or a predictive occupancy map under the successor representation.

◦ A running estimate of the average reward rate, the proposed content of tonic dopamine, used to set vigour.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ The learning rate, controlling how far each prediction error moves the stored values.

◦ The discount factor, controlling how strongly future rewards count relative to present ones and thus the planning horizon.

◦ The softmax temperature or random-choice rate, controlling the balance of exploration against exploitation.

◦ An arbitration weight setting how much control the model-based system gets relative to the model-free system.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Phasic dopamine bursts begin roughly 100 milliseconds after an unexpected reward and last on the order of 100 to 200 milliseconds, per recordings in the Schultz tradition.

◦ The control loop updates once per behavioural step, from hundreds of milliseconds upward depending on the task.

◦ Tonic dopamine and the average-reward estimate change over seconds to minutes, the vigour timescale.

◦ Convergence time of value learning, REFUSED as a single number because it scales with the size of the state space, the learning rate, and the reward sparsity of the task.

• MODES.

◦ Exploration mode, dominant when values are uncertain or the temperature parameter is high, producing varied action sampling.

◦ Exploitation mode, dominant once value estimates are confident, producing consistent choice of the best-known action.

◦ Model-based mode, engaged when stakes are high and cognitive resources are available, computing values by simulation.

◦ Model-free mode, engaged under time pressure, stress, fatigue, or after extensive practice, reading cached values directly; the arbitration between the two is itself learned.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Addiction-like persistence, in which drug-inflated dopamine signalling stamps in action values that no longer track real outcomes.

◦ Impaired reward learning and slowed, unenergetic movement in Parkinson's disease, when dopamine cells are lost.

◦ Getting stuck in local habits through premature exploitation, when exploration is shut down too early.

◦ Perseverative choice after reward contingencies reverse, the signature of an agent relying on stale cached values.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called number of arms with initial value three.
Create a list variable called true rewards containing the values zero point two, zero point five, and zero point eight.
Create a list variable called action values containing one zero for each arm.
Create a number variable called learning rate with initial value zero point one.
Create a number variable called temperature with initial value zero point two.
Repeat the following five hundred times.
    Create a list variable called preferences with no items.
    For each value in action values, calculate the exponential of the value divided by temperature, and append the result to preferences.
    Calculate the preference total as the sum of the items in preferences.
    Create a list variable called probabilities by dividing each item in preferences by the preference total.
    Choose an arm at random, weighted by probabilities, and call it chosen arm.
    Draw a random number between zero and one; if it is less than the true rewards entry for chosen arm, set reward to one, otherwise set reward to zero.
    Calculate the prediction error as reward minus the action values entry for chosen arm.
    Add the product of learning rate and the prediction error to the action values entry for chosen arm.
Return action values.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Bring in the mathematics and randomness modules from the standard library.
import math
import random

# Create a list variable called true_rewards holding each arm's real payoff probability.
true_rewards = [0.2, 0.5, 0.8]

# Create a list variable called action_values containing one zero for each arm.
action_values = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0]

# Create a number variable called learning_rate with initial value zero point one.
learning_rate = 0.1
# Create a number variable called temperature with initial value zero point two.
temperature = 0.2

# Repeat the learning loop five hundred times.
for trial in range(500):
    # For each value, calculate the exponential of the value divided by temperature.
    preferences = [math.exp(value / temperature) for value in action_values]
    # Calculate the preference total as the sum of the preferences.
    preference_total = sum(preferences)
    # Create the choice probabilities by dividing each preference by the total.
    probabilities = [preference / preference_total for preference in preferences]
    # Choose an arm at random, weighted by the softmax probabilities.
    chosen_arm = random.choices(range(len(action_values)), weights=probabilities)[0]
    # Draw a random number and pay out one if it falls under the arm's true probability.
    reward = 1.0 if random.random() < true_rewards[chosen_arm] else 0.0
    # Calculate the prediction error as reward minus the stored value of the chosen arm.
    prediction_error = reward - action_values[chosen_arm]
    # Add the product of learning_rate and prediction_error to the chosen arm's value.
    action_values[chosen_arm] = action_values[chosen_arm] + learning_rate * prediction_error

# Print the learned values, which should approximate the true payoff probabilities.
print("Learned action values:", [round(value, 2) for value in action_values])
# Print the arm the agent now prefers, which should be the best arm.
print("Preferred arm:", action_values.index(max(action_values)))


CHAPTER 32. STATISTICAL AND IMPLICIT LEARNING (PROCESS)

This chapter is about the quiet learning that happens all the time without our noticing.

Much of what we know we never deliberately studied; we simply absorbed the patterns in our environment through exposure.

Statistical learning is the mind's ability to soak up the regularities and probabilities in what we encounter, and implicit learning is the acquisition of knowledge without awareness of having learned it.

In systems terms, this chapter describes an always-on background process: its input is whatever structured stream the senses deliver, its state is a table of learned transition statistics, and its output is faster and more accurate processing of predictable input, delivered without any conscious report.

These forms of learning are foundational, underlying everything from finding words in speech to picking up the unspoken rules of a game or a social setting, which is why they matter for understanding both human minds and the machines meant to resemble them.


32.1 Statistical learning

Statistical learning is the process by which the mind detects patterns in the frequencies and co-occurrences of events, usually automatically and without effort.

It is how a mind extracts structure from a stream of experience, discovering which things tend to go together and which tend to follow which.

This section explains the core mechanism and then shows how broadly it operates across the senses and across the lifespan.


32.1.1 The extraction of transitional probabilities

The clearest demonstration of statistical learning concerns how we find the boundaries between words in continuous speech.

When you listen to someone talk, the sound is a nearly continuous stream, with no reliable silences marking where one word stops and the next begins.

Yet somehow, especially as infants, we carve that stream into words, and a key tool for doing so is tracking transitional probabilities.

A transitional probability is simply the likelihood that one element follows another; in speech, it is how likely a given syllable is to be followed by a particular next syllable.

The insight is that within a single word, the sequence of syllables is highly predictable, because the same syllables always occur in the same order.

Across a word boundary, though, the next syllable is much less predictable, because many different words could come next.

So a sudden drop in predictability is a good clue that a word has just ended and a new one is beginning.

The pioneering study by Jenny Saffran, Richard Aslin, and Elissa Newport in 1996, described earlier in the language chapter, showed that eight-month-old infants use exactly this cue.

After only two minutes of listening to a stream of nonsense syllables with no pauses, the infants treated syllable groups with high internal predictability as words and reacted to the low-predictability boundaries as breaks.

This showed that the mind is running a kind of automatic statistics engine, computing probabilities from mere exposure, without instruction and without conscious effort.

As a mechanism, the engine's input is the element stream, its state is a co-occurrence count table, its output is a predictability estimate for each transition, and its measurable learning timescale in the infant studies is about two minutes of exposure.

It was a profound result because it demonstrated a powerful learning mechanism that could get language acquisition off the ground using nothing but sensitivity to patterns.


32.1.2 Statistical learning across domains and ages

A striking feature of statistical learning is that it is not special to speech; it operates across many kinds of input and throughout life.

The word "domain" here means an area or type of information, such as sounds, sights, or touches.

Research after the 1996 speech study quickly showed that the same kind of probability tracking works with tone sequences that are not speech, demonstrating it is not tied to language.

It also works in vision: people can learn the regularities in sequences of shapes or in the spatial arrangement of visual scenes, which helps explain how we come to know where things are likely to be.

It even appears in the sense of touch, suggesting statistical learning is a general property of how the brain processes any structured stream of input.

This breadth has led many researchers to see statistical learning as a domain-general ability, meaning one broad mechanism rather than many separate ones, though there is ongoing debate about how unified it really is.

Some evidence suggests the learning in different senses may rely partly on separate, sense-specific processes rather than one central engine, so the "one mechanism or many" question is not fully settled.

Because that is a debate, the systems reading is a pair of predictions: a single central engine predicts that learning ability in one sense should correlate strongly with learning ability in another within the same person, while separate sense-specific engines predict weak cross-sense correlations, and current data lean toward the weaker correlations.

Statistical learning also spans ages.

It is present very early, in infants only a few months old, and even newborns show sensitivity to some regularities, which suggests it is a foundational learning ability available from the start of life.

It continues to operate in children and adults, quietly shaping our knowledge of language, music, visual environments, and routines throughout the lifespan.

Its early availability and wide reach are precisely why it is considered such an important building block: it is a mechanism the mind can rely on before it has language, instruction, or deliberate strategies.


32.2 Implicit learning

Implicit learning is learning that happens without conscious awareness, producing knowledge you possess and use but cannot fully describe.

It is closely related to statistical learning but the emphasis is different: statistical learning stresses what is learned, namely patterns and probabilities, while implicit learning stresses how it is learned, namely without awareness.

Much of our practical competence, from riding a bike to sensing the rhythm of our native language, is implicit in this sense, and this section examines how it is studied and how it relates to the knowledge we can consciously state.


32.2.1 Sequence learning and artificial grammar learning

Two laboratory tasks have done most to reveal implicit learning, and both are worth understanding.

The first is artificial grammar learning, introduced by Arthur Reber in the 1960s.

An artificial grammar is a made-up set of rules that decides which strings of letters are "legal", such as which sequences of the letters can follow which.

Participants first study a batch of legal letter strings without being told there are any rules; they are simply asked to memorise the strings.

Later they are told that the strings followed rules, and are asked to judge whether new strings are legal or not.

Remarkably, people judge new strings well above chance, showing they absorbed something about the grammar, yet they typically cannot state the rules they used.

That gap, good performance with poor ability to explain it, is the signature of implicit learning.

The second task is the serial reaction time task, developed by Marvin Nissen and Peter Bullemer in 1987.

In it, participants press buttons in response to targets that appear at various locations, and, unknown to them, the sequence of locations secretly follows a repeating pattern.

People get faster and faster on the repeating sequence, and then slow down abruptly when the pattern is changed to random, proving they had learned the sequence.

Yet many participants cannot report the pattern or even that there was one, again showing knowledge acquired without awareness.

Together these tasks establish that people can learn complex structure implicitly, extracting regularities they cannot consciously articulate.

The systems reading of the serial reaction time task: the input is the sequence of target locations, the state is a set of learned transition expectations, the output is a motor response whose reaction time drops by tens of milliseconds for predictable transitions, and the diagnostic is the abrupt slow-down when the hidden structure is removed.


32.2.2 The relation between implicit and explicit knowledge

The deepest and most debated question in this area is how implicit and explicit knowledge relate.

Explicit knowledge is knowledge you are aware of and can state in words, such as knowing that Paris is the capital of France.

Implicit knowledge is knowledge you have and use but cannot fully put into words, such as the feel of balancing on a bicycle.

The strong claim, associated with Arthur Reber, is that implicit learning is a genuinely separate mode of learning that acquires abstract knowledge unconsciously, largely independent of conscious thought.

This claim is supported by findings that implicit learning seems relatively robust, changing little with age and holding up in some patients with amnesia, a condition in which conscious memory is impaired.

But the strong claim has been seriously challenged, most notably by Pierre Perruchet and colleagues.

Their critique is that much of what looks like abstract, unconscious rule learning can be explained more simply by fragments of concrete knowledge, such as familiarity with small chunks of letters that appeared often, rather than by grasping the underlying grammar.

On this view, participants may be relying on remembered pieces and surface similarity rather than on any deep, hidden rule.

A further difficulty is methodological: it is genuinely hard to prove that knowledge is completely unconscious, because the tests used to measure awareness may be too insensitive to detect the fragments of conscious knowledge people actually have.

Because this is a debate, the two sides predict differently in systems terms: a separate unconscious rule-learning system predicts transfer of grammar knowledge to strings written in entirely new letters, since the abstract rules carry over, while the fragment account predicts that performance collapses when the familiar letter chunks are replaced, and the experimental record shows partial transfer, which is why the debate persists.

The current, cautious consensus is that learning without full awareness is real and important, but that many tasks involve a mixture of implicit and explicit knowledge, and that the sharp separation Reber originally proposed is more blurred than it first appeared.

This honest uncertainty matters for building humanlike minds, because it warns against assuming a clean split between conscious and unconscious learning when the reality is a continuum.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Any structured sequential stream from the senses: syllables, tones, shapes, spatial locations, or touches, delivered element by element.

◦ Timing information about element order and adjacency, since the learned content is which element follows which.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Predictability estimates for upcoming elements, consumed by perception to speed processing of expected input and by motor systems to pre-prepare responses.

◦ Segmentation of continuous streams into chunks, such as words from speech, consumed by the language-acquisition system of the earlier chapter.

◦ Above-chance familiarity judgments about pattern-conforming items, available to decision systems even when no verbal rule report is available.

• STATE.

◦ A table of element-to-element transition counts, accumulated automatically from exposure.

◦ Stored fragments or chunks of frequently co-occurring elements, the alternative currency emphasised by the Perruchet critique.

◦ Expectation strength for the next element, updated on every step of the stream.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Exposure amount, the number of elements observed, which sets the reliability of the statistics.

◦ A chunking threshold, the internal predictability level above which a group of elements is treated as a unit.

◦ Attention to the stream, which modulates but does not abolish learning, since learning proceeds under passive listening.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Statistical segmentation measurable after about 2 minutes of exposure to an artificial speech stream in eight-month-old infants, per Saffran, Aslin, and Newport 1996.

◦ Reaction-time savings in the serial reaction time task build over tens of minutes of practice, with tens of milliseconds of speed-up on predictable transitions.

◦ Above-chance grammar judgments after a study phase of minutes in artificial grammar learning, typically around 60 to 70 percent correct against a 50 percent chance level.

◦ Durability of implicitly learned knowledge, REFUSED as a single number because retention spans from days to a year across studies depending on task and amount of training.

• MODES.

◦ Passive absorption mode, the default, in which statistics accumulate from mere exposure without intent to learn.

◦ Expression mode, in which the stored statistics show themselves as faster reaction times, familiarity feelings, and segmentation, without verbal access.

◦ Explicit discovery mode, entered when a learner notices the pattern and can begin to describe it, converting implicit knowledge into reportable knowledge; noticing is the trigger, and many learners never enter this mode.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Learning false patterns from biased samples, so that accidental regularities in experience become confident expectations, a root of stereotype formation.

◦ Overinterpreting streaks in genuinely random input, since the statistics engine has no off switch for unstructured streams.

◦ Inflexibility of implicitly acquired routines, which are hard to correct verbally precisely because they were never verbally represented.

◦ Measurement failure in the laboratory: insensitive awareness tests can misclassify partly explicit knowledge as implicit, the central methodological trap of the field.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called sequence containing a long stream of location labels generated by repeating a hidden pattern.
Create a dictionary variable called transition counts with no entries.
Create a dictionary variable called context counts with no entries.
Create a list variable called reaction times with no items.
Create a number variable called base time with initial value five hundred.
Create a number variable called maximum saving with initial value one hundred.
For each position from the second element to the last element in sequence, do the following.
    Set previous to the element before the position.
    Set current to the element at the position.
    Create a number variable called expectation with initial value zero.
    If the context counts entry for previous is greater than zero, set expectation to the transition counts entry for the pair of previous and current divided by the context counts entry for previous, treating a missing entry as zero.
    Calculate the simulated reaction time as base time minus the product of maximum saving and expectation.
    Append the simulated reaction time to reaction times.
    Add one to the context counts entry for previous, creating the entry with value zero if it is absent.
    Add one to the transition counts entry for the pair of previous and current, creating the entry with value zero if it is absent.
Calculate the early average as the mean of the first fifty reaction times.
Calculate the late average as the mean of the last fifty reaction times.
Return the early average and the late average.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a list variable called sequence by repeating a hidden location pattern forty times.
sequence = ["A", "C", "B", "D", "C", "A", "D", "B"] * 40

# Create a dictionary variable called transition_counts with no entries.
transition_counts = {}
# Create a dictionary variable called context_counts with no entries.
context_counts = {}

# Create a list variable called reaction_times with no items.
reaction_times = []
# Create a number variable called base_time with initial value five hundred milliseconds.
base_time = 500.0
# Create a number variable called maximum_saving with initial value one hundred milliseconds.
maximum_saving = 100.0

# For each position from the second element to the last, respond and then learn.
for i in range(1, len(sequence)):
    # Set previous to the element before the position.
    previous = sequence[i - 1]
    # Set current to the element at the position.
    current = sequence[i]
    # Create a number variable called expectation with initial value zero.
    expectation = 0.0
    # If the context has been seen, set expectation to the learned transitional probability.
    if context_counts.get(previous, 0) > 0:
        # Divide the pair count by the context count, treating a missing pair as zero.
        expectation = transition_counts.get((previous, current), 0) / context_counts[previous]
    # Calculate the simulated reaction time as the base time minus the expectation saving.
    simulated_reaction_time = base_time - maximum_saving * expectation
    # Append the simulated reaction time to reaction_times.
    reaction_times.append(simulated_reaction_time)
    # Add one to the context count for previous, creating the entry at zero if absent.
    context_counts[previous] = context_counts.get(previous, 0) + 1
    # Add one to the transition count for the pair, creating the entry at zero if absent.
    transition_counts[(previous, current)] = transition_counts.get((previous, current), 0) + 1

# Calculate the early average as the mean of the first fifty reaction times.
early_average = sum(reaction_times[:50]) / 50
# Calculate the late average as the mean of the last fifty reaction times.
late_average = sum(reaction_times[-50:]) / 50

# Print the averages, showing responses speeding up as the hidden pattern is absorbed.
print("Early average reaction time:", round(early_average, 1), "ms")
print("Late average reaction time:", round(late_average, 1), "ms")

CHAPTER 33. SKILL ACQUISITION, EXPERTISE, AND TRANSFER (PROCESS)

This chapter is about how people get good at things.

A skill is any ability that improves with practice, from tying a shoelace to reading an X-ray or playing the violin.

We will look at how a beginner slowly turns into a smooth performer, what makes a true expert different from the rest of us, and the tricky question of whether being good at one thing helps you at another.

This matters because almost everything a mind does well, it once did badly, and understanding that change tells us a great deal about how learning actually works.

Viewed as an engineered system, skill acquisition is a compiler: it takes slow, instruction-following behaviour as input and, through repetition, outputs fast, automatic routines that no longer need step-by-step supervision.

The tag (PROCESS) means this chapter describes a real human capacity that any complete model of the mind would have to reproduce.


33.1 The stages of skill

When you learn something new, you do not stay the same kind of learner all the way through.

Researchers have long noticed that early practice feels very different from later practice, and they have tried to describe the recognisable phases you pass through.

This section lays out the classic picture of those phases and the simple mathematical law that describes how fast you speed up.

In systems terms, the learner moves through distinct operating modes, each with its own resource demands, error profile, and speed, and practice is the signal that drives the transitions.


33.1.1 The cognitive, associative, and autonomous stages

The most influential description of how a skill grows was proposed by two psychologists, Paul Fitts and Michael Posner, in 1967.

They suggested that learning a skill passes through three stages, which they named the cognitive, the associative, and the autonomous.

The cognitive stage is the very beginning, when you are working out what to do at all.

Here you lean heavily on instructions, you talk yourself through each step, and you make many large, clumsy errors.

Think of the first time behind the wheel of a car, when you have to consciously remember which pedal is the brake.

This stage is called cognitive because it leans so hard on conscious thought, which is the effortful, deliberate kind of thinking you are aware of doing.

The associative stage is the long middle period of practice.

By now you know roughly what to do, and the work shifts to doing it better, smoother, and with fewer mistakes.

The name associative refers to the strengthening of links between the situation and the right response, so that the correct action starts to come more reliably.

Errors become smaller and rarer, and the movements or steps begin to flow together instead of being performed one careful piece at a time.

The autonomous stage is the destination, where the skill runs almost by itself.

The word autonomous means self-governing, and here the skill needs very little conscious attention.

An experienced driver can hold a conversation while steering through traffic, because the driving has become nearly automatic, meaning it runs without deliberate control.

A useful sign of this stage is that you can do the skill and something else at the same time without the skill falling apart.

The psychologist John Anderson later gave this three-stage picture a more precise, mechanical explanation inside his computer model of the mind called ACT, short for Adaptive Control of Thought.

In his account, the beginner solves the task slowly by looking up remembered facts and instructions, which is why it is so effortful at first.

With practice, the mind builds direct rules, sometimes called productions, that fire off the right response to a situation without any looking-up, which is what makes an expert fast and seemingly effortless.

The systems reading of the three stages is a change of controller: the input is the same task situation throughout, but the output is generated first by a slow interpretive loop that consults declarative memory on every step, then by a mixed loop, and finally by compiled condition-action rules, each of which fires in roughly 50 milliseconds in production-system models such as ACT-R, the Adaptive Control of Thought - Rational architecture.

One caution is worth stating plainly.

These stages are a helpful description, not sharp lines with fences between them.

Learning is gradual, the boundaries blur, and a person can be at different stages for different parts of the same skill.


33.1.2 Proceduralisation and the power law of practice

Two ideas describe what is happening under the surface as a skill matures: proceduralisation, and the power law of practice.

Proceduralisation is the name for the shift from knowing about something to simply doing it.

At the start you hold the skill as declarative knowledge, which means facts and instructions you could state out loud, such as the written rules of a card game.

With repetition this turns into procedural knowledge, which means know-how that is embedded in action and is hard to put into words, such as the feel of when to play a card.

A telling clue that proceduralisation has happened is that skilled performers often cannot explain what they do; a fluent speaker of a language usually cannot recite its grammar rules.

As a mechanism, proceduralisation takes traces of successful step-by-step solutions as input and outputs new compiled rules, trading away flexibility and verbal access in exchange for speed and low attentional cost, over a timescale of hundreds to thousands of repetitions.

The power law of practice describes how quickly performance improves as you keep practising.

The core finding is simple and very robust: you improve fastest at the start, and then improvement slows down, even though it never quite stops.

The first hour of practice buys you a huge jump, while the thousandth hour buys you only a tiny sliver more.

This pattern was studied early by George Snoddy in 1926 and later made famous as a general law by Allan Newell and Paul Rosenbloom around 1981.

They called it a power law because the mathematics that fits the slowing-down curve is a power function, which is just a particular equation that produces exactly this fast-then-slow shape.

In that equation the time to perform the task equals a floor that can never be beaten, plus a learnable component that shrinks as the number of practice trials is raised to a negative exponent, so each doubling of practice cuts the remaining learnable time by a constant fraction.

There is an honest scientific dispute here that is worth knowing about.

Later researchers, including Andrew Heathcote and colleagues in 2000, argued that when you look at individual people rather than averages, an exponential curve, which is a different equation, often fits better than a power curve.

Averaging across many learners can, by itself, bend an exponential shape into something that looks like a power law, which may have fooled the earlier studies.

In systems terms the two sides predict different things: a power law predicts a learning rate that slows in proportion to how much practice has accumulated, while an exponential predicts a constant proportional gain per trial, and only careful fits to single learners can tell the two curves apart.

So the deep truth is agreed - practice brings large early gains and shrinking later ones - while the exact equation is still argued over.


33.2 Expertise

An expert is someone who performs at a very high level in a particular field after long practice, such as a chess master, a surgeon, or a concert pianist.

Studying experts is a clever research strategy, because they show us the far end of learning and reveal what the mind can build when it is pushed to its limits.

This section looks at what actually makes experts special, and at the fierce debate over how much of expertise is practice and how much is something else.

Read as a system, expertise is not a faster processor but a vastly larger and better-indexed pattern database, queried by recognition in well under a second.


33.2.1 Chunking and pattern recognition in experts

The single most important discovery about expertise is that experts do not have better general memories or faster minds; they have better-organised knowledge of their own field.

The classic demonstration came from chess.

In the 1940s the Dutch psychologist and chess master Adriaan de Groot found that when masters and weaker players were shown a chess position, the masters were far better at reconstructing it from memory - but only when the position came from a real game.

William Chase and Herbert Simon confirmed and extended this in 1973, and added the crucial twist.

When the chess pieces were placed at random, so that the arrangement made no sense as a game, the masters were no better than beginners at remembering it.

This shows the master's advantage is not a bigger memory in general; it is a memory stocked with meaningful patterns.

The explanation is called chunking.

A chunk is a group of individual items bound together into a single meaningful unit, so that the mind can hold and handle it as one thing.

Where a beginner sees twenty separate chess pieces, a master sees a handful of familiar formations, and holding a few chunks is far easier than holding twenty scraps.

The systems reading is a compression scheme: the input is a raw scene, the stored codebook of patterns re-encodes it into a few chunks that fit within a working memory span of about four chunks, and the output is both an economical description of the scene and a set of retrieved candidate actions.

Because experts have stored thousands of these patterns through years of practice, they can also recognise a situation at a glance and know what it calls for, which is why a master's good move often comes to mind almost instantly.

Later theories, such as the long-term working memory account of Anders Ericsson and Walter Kintsch in 1995, and a detailed template theory by Fernand Gobet and Simon in the late 1990s, refined this picture, but the central lesson has held up for decades.

Expertise is largely a matter of having built, through practice, a huge and well-indexed library of patterns in one domain.


33.2.2 Deliberate practice and its limits

If experts are made by storing patterns through practice, a natural question follows: is any practice enough, or does it have to be a special kind?

The psychologist Anders Ericsson argued that the kind matters enormously, and he named the effective kind deliberate practice.

Deliberate practice is not just repeating what you can already do; it is effortful, focused work aimed squarely at your weaknesses, guided by feedback, with clear goals and constant stretching beyond your comfort zone.

A pianist drilling the exact bars she keeps fumbling, slowly and with a teacher's correction, is doing deliberate practice; a pianist happily playing pieces she has mastered is not.

In systems terms deliberate practice is a closed control loop: the input is a performance sample, an external or internal critic compares it against a target, the error signal selects the next drill, and the output is a targeted update to exactly the weakest component, whereas mere repetition runs the loop open with no error signal.

Ericsson's studies of violinists in 1993 found that the best performers had accumulated far more hours of this kind of practice than the good-but-not-great performers.

The writer Malcolm Gladwell later popularised a rounded version of this as the ten thousand hour rule, the idea that roughly ten thousand hours of practice makes a world-class expert.

It is important to be clear that this catchy rule is a simplification that Ericsson himself did not fully endorse; there is no magic number, and the hours were an average, not a threshold everyone must hit.

The limits of the practice-is-everything view were sharpened by a large analysis by Brooke Macnamara and colleagues in 2014.

Pooling eighty-eight studies, they found that the amount of deliberate practice did predict skill, but explained only part of the differences between people - about twenty-six percent in games, twenty-one percent in music, and eighteen percent in sports.

That leaves most of the variation between people to be explained by other things, which may include starting age, working memory capacity, personality, and quite possibly inborn aptitude.

Ericsson pushed back, arguing that many of the pooled studies measured practice loosely, counting mere hours played rather than true deliberate practice, which would understate its real power.

In systems terms the debate is about how much of the variance in final performance the practice input alone controls, and the two camps predict different outcomes when practice quality is measured strictly: the strong practice view predicts the explained share should rise sharply, while the multi-factor view predicts a large residual will remain.

The honest current position is a middle one.

Sustained, well-designed practice is necessary for high expertise and is the largest single lever most people can pull, but it is not the whole story, and the claim that practice alone explains greatness is not supported by the evidence.


33.3 Transfer

Transfer is the question of whether learning one thing helps, or hinders, your learning or performance of another thing.

It is one of the most practically important topics in all of psychology, because education, training, and the popular hope of brain-training games all rest on the assumption that skills spread from where you learned them to somewhere new.

This section explains how far skills really travel, and the mechanisms that let them travel at all.

In systems terms, transfer asks how much of a trained module can be re-used by a different task, and the answer depends on how much of the module's internal machinery the two tasks genuinely share.


33.3.1 Near and far transfer and the theory of identical elements

Psychologists divide transfer by distance.

Near transfer is when a skill helps on a new task that closely resembles the one you trained on, such as touch-typing on a slightly different keyboard.

Far transfer is when training on one task is supposed to help a very different one, such as playing chess making you better at planning your finances.

The general and sobering finding across a century of research is that near transfer is common, while far transfer is rare and often absent.

The classic explanation was given by Edward Thorndike and Robert Woodworth in 1901 and is called the theory of identical elements.

Their claim is that training on task A helps task B only to the extent that the two tasks share specific components - the same movements, facts, or mental steps.

If two tasks overlap in their actual parts, transfer follows; if they merely feel similar or are both called reasoning, there is little or nothing to carry over.

The systems reading is component re-use: the amount of transfer is predicted by the overlap between the two tasks' processing components, so the input to a transfer prediction is a component-by-component comparison of the tasks, and the output is an expected saving proportional to the shared parts.

Thorndike's work overturned a popular older idea called formal discipline, the belief that studying hard subjects like Latin or geometry strengthens the mind in general, the way lifting weights strengthens a muscle for any task.

The modern echo of this is the disappointing record of commercial brain-training programmes.

Large reviews, including a consensus statement by many scientists in 2014 and careful studies since, have found that practising such games mostly makes you better at those games and at very similar tasks, with little convincing evidence of far transfer to everyday intelligence or memory.

The practical lesson is that if you want to be good at something, the surest route is to practise that thing, or tasks that genuinely share its parts.


33.3.2 Analogical and metacognitive transfer

If transfer by shared surface parts is so limited, is far transfer ever possible, and if so, how?

Research points to two routes that can, under the right conditions, carry learning across genuinely different situations: analogy and metacognition.

Analogical transfer means noticing that a new problem shares its deep structure with a problem you already know how to solve, even when the two look nothing alike on the surface.

A famous study by Mary Gick and Keith Holyoak in 1980 and 1983 showed both the promise and the difficulty of this.

People who had read a story about a general capturing a fort by sending small groups of soldiers along many roads at once could, in principle, use the same idea to solve a medical puzzle about destroying a tumour with many weak rays converging from different directions.

The catch was that most people did not spot the connection on their own; they needed a hint to see that the two problems shared the same underlying trick.

This tells us far transfer is possible but fragile, because people tend to notice surface features and miss deep structure unless something helps them look.

As a mechanism, analogical transfer takes the current problem as a retrieval cue, searches memory for a structurally matching prior case, maps the old solution onto the new elements, and outputs a candidate solution; the retrieval step is the bottleneck because the cue is dominated by surface features.

Metacognitive transfer is the second route, and metacognition means thinking about your own thinking - monitoring how you learn and choosing strategies for it.

The idea is that even when specific content does not transfer, general habits of learning can, such as planning before you start, checking your own understanding, and knowing when to switch approach.

Teaching people to compare cases and to abstract the general principle for themselves, rather than handing them one worked example, tends to improve the chance that they will transfer it later.

The overall verdict is cautiously hopeful.

Far transfer does not happen automatically, but it can be encouraged by teaching for deep structure, by using several varied examples, and by building the learner's awareness of the principles behind what they are doing.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Task situations and goals, delivered as perceptual descriptions from perception and as goal states from executive control.

◦ Instructions and worked examples, held as declarative facts supplied by semantic and episodic memory.

◦ Feedback signals, that is error and reward information from the environment, a teacher, or an internal critic.

◦ A practice counter, the accumulated history of repetitions that drives the learning curve.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Executed actions and solutions, delivered to the motor system or to downstream reasoning.

◦ Compiled production rules, condition-action pairs written into procedural memory for future automatic use.

◦ Chunked pattern codes, compressed re-descriptions of familiar situations published to working memory and to recognition-based action selection.

◦ Performance statistics such as speed and error rate, consumed by metacognitive monitoring to steer further practice.

• STATE.

◦ Declarative task knowledge, the stated rules and facts of the skill.

◦ Procedural rule store, the growing set of compiled productions and their strengths.

◦ Pattern library, the accumulated chunks and templates of the domain.

◦ Current stage mixture, the proportion of performance handled by the interpretive route versus the compiled route.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Learning rate, the size of the strength update per successful repetition.

◦ Power-law exponent, the steepness of the speed-up curve, typically fitted between about 0.2 and 0.6 across tasks.

◦ Asymptotic floor, the irreducible minimum time set by perceptual and motor limits.

◦ Practice quality gain, the multiplier by which feedback-guided deliberate practice outpaces unguided repetition.

◦ Chunk capacity, the number of chunks working memory can hold at once, about four.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Production rule firing cycle: about 50 milliseconds per rule in production-system models.

◦ Expert pattern recognition: familiar configurations are recognised within roughly the first second of viewing, as in brief-exposure chess studies using about 5 second presentations.

◦ Skill compilation: hundreds to thousands of trials over days to months before a component runs automatically.

◦ Elite expertise horizon: on the order of 10 years or roughly ten thousand hours of sustained practice in demanding domains, stated as an average and not a threshold.

◦ Single-trial speed-up magnitude: REFUSED, because the gain per trial depends on the task, the learner, and the disputed power versus exponential form, so no honest general number exists.

• MODES.

◦ Cognitive mode, interpretive step-by-step control from declarative instructions; entered whenever the task is novel or the compiled rules fail.

◦ Associative mode, mixed control while rules are being compiled and tuned; entered as repetitions accumulate and errors shrink.

◦ Autonomous mode, recognition-driven automatic execution; entered when compiled rules cover the task, and exited back toward deliberate control when errors, novelty, or deliberate self-monitoring intervene.

◦ Deliberate practice mode, a training regime in which an error signal selects drills at the edge of competence; switched on by a coach or by metacognitive intent, as opposed to plain performance mode.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Choking under pressure, where attending consciously to an automated skill disrupts it.

◦ Arrested development, where performance plateaus because practice continues without an error signal.

◦ Negative transfer, where old compiled habits fire in a new task that looks similar but demands different responses.

◦ Overconfident far transfer, the mistaken expectation that training one task will improve unrelated abilities, as in brain-training claims.

◦ Loss of verbal access, where the expert can no longer explain or teach what the compiled skill does.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called floor with initial value 0.4.
Create a number variable called learnable with initial value 1.6.
Create a number variable called exponent with initial value 0.5.
Create an empty list called times.
For each trial number from 1 to 1000, do the following.
    Calculate the learnable component as learnable multiplied by the trial number raised to the power of negative exponent.
    Calculate the predicted time as floor plus the learnable component.
    Draw a random noise value from a normal distribution with mean 1 and standard deviation 0.05.
    Calculate the observed time as the predicted time multiplied by the noise value.
    Append the observed time to the list called times.
Calculate the early gain as the first element of times minus the tenth element of times.
Calculate the late gain as the hundredth element of times minus the thousandth element of times.
Report the times at trials 1, 10, 100, and 1000, the early gain, and the late gain.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Load the random module for noise generation.
import random

# Create a number variable called floor with initial value 0.4, the seconds no practice can remove.
floor = 0.4
# Create a number variable called learnable with initial value 1.6, the seconds practice can remove.
learnable = 1.6
# Create a number variable called exponent with initial value 0.5, the power-law learning rate.
exponent = 0.5

# Seed the random number generator so the run is repeatable.
random.seed(33)

# Create an empty list called times to hold one observed time per trial.
times = []

# For each trial number from 1 to 1000, do the following.
for trial in range(1, 1001):
    # Calculate the learnable component as learnable times the trial number raised to negative exponent.
    component = learnable * trial ** (-exponent)
    # Calculate the predicted time as floor plus the learnable component.
    predicted = floor + component
    # Draw a random noise value from a normal distribution with mean 1 and standard deviation 0.05.
    noise = random.gauss(1.0, 0.05)
    # Calculate the observed time as the predicted time multiplied by the noise value.
    observed = predicted * noise
    # Append the observed time to the list called times.
    times.append(observed)

# Report the observed time at four milestone trials.
for milestone in (1, 10, 100, 1000):
    # Print the milestone trial number and its observed time in seconds.
    print("trial", milestone, "time", round(times[milestone - 1], 3), "seconds")

# Calculate the early gain as the time at trial 1 minus the time at trial 10.
early_gain = times[0] - times[9]
# Calculate the late gain as the time at trial 100 minus the time at trial 1000.
late_gain = times[99] - times[999]
# Print the early gain, nine trials of practice at the start of learning.
print("gain from 9 early trials", round(early_gain, 3), "seconds")
# Print the late gain, nine hundred trials of practice late in learning.
print("gain from 900 late trials", round(late_gain, 3), "seconds")





================================================================================

PART EIGHT. THINKING: REASONING, JUDGMENT, AND DECISION

================================================================================

CHAPTER 34. DEDUCTIVE AND INDUCTIVE REASONING (PROCESS)

This chapter is about reasoning, which means drawing conclusions from what you already know or observe.

Psychologists study two great families of reasoning.

Deduction moves from general rules to certain conclusions, as in a mathematical proof, while induction moves from specific observations to likely but uncertain conclusions, as when you guess a general pattern from a few examples.

The surprising and important theme running through the chapter is that ordinary human reasoning often departs from the rules of formal logic, and the deep question is whether that makes us irrational or whether logic was simply the wrong yardstick.

Viewed as a system, the reasoner takes premises and observations as input, holds candidate possibilities in a limited working memory, and outputs conclusions with confidence levels, and its characteristic errors reveal the machinery inside.

The tag (PROCESS) marks this as a description of a genuine human capacity a model of the mind must reproduce.


34.1 Deductive reasoning

Deductive reasoning is reasoning where the conclusion follows with certainty from the premises, the starting statements you take as given.

If the premises are true and the reasoning is valid, the conclusion simply must be true - that is the special power of deduction.

This section looks at how well ordinary people actually handle such reasoning, and the results are humbling.


34.1.1 Conditional reasoning and the selection task

Conditional reasoning is reasoning about if-then statements, such as if it rains, then the ground is wet.

These statements are the backbone of logic and of everyday planning, so how well we handle them matters a great deal.

The most famous test of it was invented by Peter Wason in 1966 and 1968 and is called the selection task.

In the classic version you see four cards, each with a letter on one side and a number on the other, showing for example A, K, 4, and 7.

You are told a rule - if a card has a vowel on one side, then it has an even number on the other - and asked which cards you must turn over to check whether the rule holds.

The logically correct answer is to turn the A and the 7, because only these can possibly break the rule.

You check the vowel to see if it hides an odd number, and you check the odd number to see if it hides a vowel.

Yet most people, typically only around ten percent get it right, choose the A alone or the A and the 4.

They correctly look for confirming cases but fail to look for the case that could prove the rule false, which is the 7.

In systems terms the task exposes the test-selection policy of the reasoner: the input is a rule and a set of partially hidden cases, the required output is the subset of cases that could falsify the rule, and the observed output is instead the subset of cases that match the terms named in the rule.

This is a striking result because the logic is simple, and it suggests that people do not reason by pure formal logic, and that they have a bias toward seeking confirmation rather than disproof.


34.1.2 Content effects and pragmatic reasoning schemas

The selection task took an even more interesting turn when researchers changed not the logic of the puzzle but its content, the everyday subject matter it was dressed in.

The abstract letters-and-numbers version is very hard, but a version with the same logical form set in a familiar real-world situation can suddenly become easy.

In a well-known example, people are told a rule such as if a person is drinking alcohol, then they must be over eighteen, and are shown cards representing drinkers of various ages and drinks.

Now most people correctly choose to check the person drinking alcohol and the person who is underage, which is exactly the logically right pattern they missed with letters and numbers.

This is called a content effect, meaning that the subject matter of a problem, not just its logical skeleton, changes how well people reason about it.

Patricia Cheng and Keith Holyoak offered an influential explanation in 1985 called pragmatic reasoning schemas.

A schema here means a package of general rules that the mind has abstracted from recurring real-life situations, such as situations of permission and obligation.

The drinking rule fits a permission schema - you may do this only if you meet that condition - and people reason well because they are using practical social know-how, not abstract logic.

There is a rival explanation worth noting, from Leda Cosmides and John Tooby, who argued that we have a specialised mental ability for detecting cheaters in social exchanges, sharpened by evolution.

In systems terms the two accounts predict differently: the schema view predicts good performance whenever any familiar permission or obligation structure is recognised, while the cheater-detection view predicts the boost specifically when the content involves a social exchange where someone could take a benefit without paying the cost.

Experts still debate which account is right, but they agree on the core fact: human reasoning is powerfully shaped by the familiar meaning of a problem, not by its bare logical form alone.


34.1.3 Syllogisms and belief bias

A syllogism is a classic form of logical argument with two premises and a conclusion, for example: all birds can fly; a robin is a bird; therefore a robin can fly.

Syllogisms let researchers test whether people can tell a valid argument, where the conclusion truly follows, from an invalid one, where it does not, regardless of whether the statements happen to be true.

Here a revealing error appears, called belief bias.

Belief bias is the tendency to judge an argument by whether its conclusion is believable rather than by whether it is logically valid.

People tend to accept a conclusion that sounds true even when the argument is invalid, and to reject a conclusion that sounds false even when the argument is perfectly valid.

For example, given a valid argument leading to an unbelievable conclusion, many people wrongly call it invalid, because the conclusion clashes with what they know of the world.

The effect is strongest, researchers have found, on invalid arguments with believable conclusions, where belief and logic pull in opposite directions and belief often wins.

In systems terms belief bias is a signal from a fast plausibility checker leaking into the output of a slow validity checker: the plausibility channel evaluates only the conclusion against world knowledge, the validity channel evaluates the whole argument structure, and under time pressure or load the plausibility channel dominates the shared output.

Belief bias shows again that people do not reason as pure logicians.

Instead, prior knowledge and the felt plausibility of a conclusion intrude on the judgment, which is efficient in daily life but can lead us to endorse bad arguments that reach comfortable conclusions.


34.2 The theories of deduction

Given that people reason imperfectly, psychologists want to know what mental machinery they actually use.

Two big theories have competed for decades, and a third, probabilistic view has more recently reframed the whole question.

This section lays out that contest.


34.2.1 Mental logic against mental models

The first theory is called mental logic.

It holds that the mind contains something like a built-in set of logical rules, and that we reason by applying these rules step by step to the statements we are given, rather as a mathematician applies rules of proof.

On this view, errors happen because some rules are missing, or because long chains of steps overload us, not because we lack logic in principle.

The rival theory, developed principally by Philip Johnson-Laird from the 1980s onward, is called mental models.

It holds that we do not manipulate logical rules at all; instead we imagine concrete possible situations - little mental pictures of how the world could be - and read our conclusions off these imagined situations.

For example, to reason about a statement you build a model of a world in which it is true, and check whether the conclusion holds there.

A key prediction of the mental models theory is that problems requiring you to juggle several possible situations at once should be harder, because holding many models strains our limited working memory, the small mental workspace where we keep information active.

This prediction is broadly supported: arguments that force people to consider multiple possibilities do produce more errors, which is a point in favour of mental models.

The systems contrast is sharp: mental logic predicts difficulty proportional to the number and length of rule applications, while mental models predicts difficulty proportional to the number of possibilities that must be held simultaneously, a load bounded by a working memory span of about four chunks.

The debate has never been settled outright, but the mental models approach became the more influential of the two, partly because it neatly explains why certain problems are hard and why people so often consider too few possibilities.


34.2.2 The probabilistic reinterpretation of reasoning

A more recent movement argues that the whole tradition may have been judging people against the wrong standard.

Classical logic treats statements as simply true or false and demands certainty, but everyday life is full of uncertainty, and everyday if-then statements usually express likelihood rather than guarantee.

When you say if you water the plant, it will grow, you mean it will probably grow, not that growth is logically guaranteed.

The probabilistic approach, associated with Mike Oaksford and Nick Chater and their 2007 book, proposes that people treat reasoning problems as matters of probability and useful information, not strict logic.

On this view, behaviour that logicians called errors can look sensible once you assume people are reasoning about what is probable and informative in a normal, uncertain world.

Their bold reanalysis of the Wason selection task argued that the card choices most people make are actually a reasonable strategy for gathering the most useful information, given ordinary assumptions about how rare things are.

In systems terms this swaps the reference standard against which the reasoner is scored: the logical standard scores outputs by falsification coverage, while the probabilistic standard scores them by expected information gain under realistic rarity assumptions, and the same observed behaviour ranks poorly on the first and well on the second.

Not everyone accepts this reinterpretation, and it remains debated.

But it marks an important shift in the field, from asking why people are bad at logic to asking whether people are instead pretty good at reasoning under uncertainty, which is the problem real life actually poses.


34.3 Inductive reasoning

Inductive reasoning moves from specific cases to general or uncertain conclusions.

When you see several white swans and conclude that swans are white, or meet a friendly dog and expect the next dog to be friendly, you are reasoning inductively.

Induction can never give certainty - the next swan might be black - but it is how we learn about the world and predict what we have not yet seen, so it is arguably even more important than deduction.

This section covers how people generalise, how they test their ideas, and how mathematics has been used to model good induction.


34.3.1 Category-based induction

Category-based induction is reasoning about which properties spread from one category of things to another.

If you learn that robins have some new property, say a certain enzyme in their blood, how confident are you that sparrows have it, or that ostriches do, or that all birds do?

Douglas Medin, Edward Smith, Daniel Osherson and colleagues studied this carefully around 1990 and found orderly patterns in how people make such leaps.

One pattern is similarity: people project a property more readily to things similar to the original case, so learning it about robins makes you more confident about sparrows than about ostriches.

Another pattern is diversity: an argument feels stronger when the known cases are varied, so finding the property in both robins and ostriches makes people more willing to believe all birds have it than finding it in two similar birds.

This diversity effect is interesting because it matches good scientific practice, where varied evidence is genuinely more convincing than repetitive evidence.

A further pattern involves the breadth of the conclusion category, and how typical the examples are of it.

In systems terms the inductive engine takes premise categories and a candidate conclusion category as input, computes similarity and coverage over a structured category space held in semantic memory, and outputs a graded argument strength within a second or two of reading the argument.

These findings show that human induction is not random guessing; it follows sensible principles, weighing similarity, variety, and typicality, even though people cannot state the principles they are using.


34.3.2 Hypothesis testing and confirmation bias

When people form an idea about how the world works, how do they check it?

Ideally, good testing means actively trying to prove your idea wrong, because a hypothesis that survives serious attempts to break it has really earned your confidence.

In practice, people show a strong tendency to do the opposite, called confirmation bias.

Confirmation bias is the tendency to seek, notice, and remember evidence that fits what you already believe, while overlooking or dismissing evidence that would count against it.

Wason demonstrated this in 1960 with a task in which people had to discover a hidden rule behind a sequence of three numbers, such as two, four, six.

Most people guessed a rule like even numbers increasing by two and then only tested examples that fit their guess, which kept confirming it, when the real rule was simply any three increasing numbers.

Because they never tried sequences that would break their pet hypothesis, they clung to a wrong rule while feeling sure they were right.

As a mechanism, the tester holds a current favourite hypothesis as state, generates probe queries as output, and updates on the world's yes-or-no answers as input; the bias is a skewed query generator that samples almost entirely from the region where the favourite hypothesis predicts a yes.

Confirmation bias matters far beyond the laboratory.

It helps explain why people cling to first impressions, why superstitions persist, and why opposing groups can look at the same evidence and each come away more certain they were right.

Understanding it also points to a remedy: deliberately asking what would prove me wrong is one of the most powerful thinking habits a person can build.


34.3.3 Bayesian models of induction

Mathematicians and psychologists have developed a precise framework for how a rational mind ought to reason from evidence, named after the eighteenth century clergyman and mathematician Thomas Bayes.

Bayesian reasoning, in plain terms, is a recipe for updating your beliefs by combining what you already thought with what new evidence tells you.

It has three ingredients: a prior, which is your degree of belief before the evidence; the evidence itself and how likely it would be under different hypotheses; and the posterior, which is your updated belief after taking the evidence into account.

The rule says, sensibly, that strong prior beliefs should shift only under strong evidence, and that a hypothesis under which the observed evidence would be very likely gains support.

Researchers such as Joshua Tenenbaum and Thomas Griffiths, from around 2000 onward, showed that Bayesian models can capture human induction strikingly well in many settings.

For instance, when people are shown a few examples of a concept and asked how far it extends, their guesses often track what a good Bayesian calculation would recommend, balancing how specific the examples are against how common such things are.

A key attraction of the Bayesian approach is that it explains where good priors come from and how learning at one level can guide learning at another, sometimes called learning to learn.

In systems terms a Bayesian inductive module subscribes to a hypothesis space with priors and to incoming evidence, holds a posterior distribution as its state, and publishes graded predictions; the open question is whether the brain implements the full update or a cheap approximation such as sampling a few hypotheses.

It is important to be balanced here.

Bayesian models describe how an ideal reasoner should combine evidence and often match human behaviour, but there is genuine debate over whether the mind literally carries out such calculations or merely approximates them with simpler shortcuts.

Either way, the Bayesian framework has become one of the most powerful tools we have for saying precisely what good inductive reasoning would look like, and for measuring how close people come to it.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Premises and rules, structured statements delivered by language comprehension.

◦ Observed cases and evidence, category examples and outcomes delivered by perception and memory retrieval.

◦ World knowledge and priors, plausibility signals supplied by semantic memory.

◦ Task framing, the stated goal of the reasoning episode, whether to test validity, discover a rule, or estimate likelihood.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Conclusions with validity or strength judgments, consumed by decision making and language production.

◦ Test selections, the chosen probes or cards or experiments, consumed by action systems.

◦ Updated beliefs, revised degrees of confidence written back to memory.

◦ A felt confidence signal, consumed by metacognitive monitoring.

• STATE.

◦ The current set of mental models, the possibilities being held and inspected in working memory.

◦ The current favourite hypothesis in a discovery task.

◦ The running posterior, the graded belief distribution over hypotheses.

◦ The premise text itself, held verbatim long enough to be re-inspected.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Working memory model capacity, the number of possibilities that can be held at once, about four chunks.

◦ Belief bias weight, the gain on the plausibility channel relative to the validity channel.

◦ Prior strength, how heavily existing belief resists new evidence.

◦ Confirmation sampling ratio, the fraction of tests drawn from the expected-yes region.

◦ Similarity and coverage weights in category-based induction.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Simple conditional inference: verified in roughly 1 to 3 seconds for easy one-model arguments in reaction-time studies.

◦ Multi-model syllogism evaluation: slower by seconds as the number of required models rises, with reliably longer latencies and more errors for multiple-model problems.

◦ Belief bias intrusion: present even at fast deadlines and reduced when several extra seconds of evaluation time are allowed.

◦ Exact latency per additional mental model: REFUSED, because the per-model cost varies widely with materials and individuals and no single supported value exists.

• MODES.

◦ Model-inspection mode, building and reading off one possibility at a time; the default for deduction.

◦ Search-for-counterexample mode, deliberately constructing alternative models to break a tentative conclusion; triggered by instruction, high stakes, or metacognitive doubt.

◦ Heuristic plausibility mode, accepting or rejecting by believability alone; triggered by time pressure, load, or low motivation.

◦ Probabilistic mode, treating premises as uncertain and reasoning about likelihoods; triggered when content signals an uncertain everyday domain rather than a formal puzzle.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Confirmation bias, testing only where the favourite hypothesis predicts success.

◦ Belief bias, endorsing invalid arguments with believable conclusions and rejecting valid ones with unbelievable conclusions.

◦ Matching bias in the selection task, choosing the cards named in the rule instead of the cards that could falsify it.

◦ Model shortfall, considering too few possibilities and so missing counterexamples.

◦ Base-rate neglect in induction, projecting from resemblance while ignoring how common categories are.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list called cards containing the visible faces A, K, 4, and 7.
Create an empty list called logical_choice.
For each card in the list called cards, do the following.
    If the visible face is a vowel, then the hidden face could be an odd number, so the card can falsify the rule; append it to logical_choice.
    Otherwise, if the visible face is an odd number, then the hidden face could be a vowel, so the card can falsify the rule; append it to logical_choice.
    Otherwise, the card cannot falsify the rule, so do not append it.
Create an empty list called matching_choice.
For each card in the list called cards, do the following.
    If the visible face is a vowel or an even number, meaning it matches a term named in the rule, then append the card to matching_choice.
Report the logical choice and the matching choice.
For each card in the list called cards, test every possible hidden face and report whether any hidden face would make the card break the rule.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Define a function that reports whether a character is a vowel.
def is_vowel(face):
    # Return whether the face is one of the vowel letters.
    return face in "AEIOU"

# Define a function that reports whether a character is an odd digit.
def is_odd(face):
    # Return whether the face is a digit and that digit is odd.
    return face.isdigit() and int(face) % 2 == 1

# Define a function that reports whether a character is an even digit.
def is_even(face):
    # Return whether the face is a digit and that digit is even.
    return face.isdigit() and int(face) % 2 == 0

# Create a list called cards containing the four visible faces.
cards = ["A", "K", "4", "7"]

# Create the logical choice as the cards whose hidden side could break the rule.
# A vowel could hide an odd number, and an odd number could hide a vowel.
logical_choice = [c for c in cards if is_vowel(c) or is_odd(c)]

# Create the matching choice as the cards that match a term named in the rule.
# The rule names vowels and even numbers, so those faces attract attention.
matching_choice = [c for c in cards if is_vowel(c) or is_even(c)]

# Print the logically correct selection.
print("logical reasoner turns:", logical_choice)
# Print the typical human selection driven by matching bias.
print("matching reasoner turns:", matching_choice)

# For each card, test every possible hidden face for a rule violation.
for card in cards:
    # Assume at first that no hidden face can make this card break the rule.
    can_falsify = False
    # For each possible hidden face among letters and digits, do the following.
    for hidden in "AEIOUKXZ0123456789":
        # Determine the letter side and the number side of this card and hidden face pair.
        letter = card if card.isalpha() else hidden
        # Determine the number side as whichever face is a digit.
        number = card if card.isdigit() else hidden
        # If the pair is a real letter and number pair with a vowel and an odd number, it breaks the rule.
        if letter.isalpha() and number.isdigit() and is_vowel(letter) and is_odd(number):
            # Record that this card can falsify the rule.
            can_falsify = True
    # Print whether turning this card could ever reveal a violation.
    print("card", card, "can reveal a violation:", can_falsify)


CHAPTER 35. ANALOGICAL AND CAUSAL REASONING (PROCESS)

This chapter is about two of the most powerful forms of human thinking: reasoning by analogy, and reasoning about cause and effect.

Analogy is seeing that one situation is like another and carrying understanding across, which is at the heart of insight, invention, and everyday explanation.

Causal reasoning is working out what makes what happen, which is what lets us predict, control, and intervene in the world rather than just watch it.

Both abilities are things humans do far better than any other animal and, until recently, far better than machines, so they sit close to the core of what makes human cognition special.

In systems terms, the analogy engine is a structure aligner that maps relations between two situations, and the causal engine is a graph learner that infers arrows of influence from patterns of observation and action.

The tag (PROCESS) marks these as real capacities a model of the mind must reproduce.


35.1 Analogical reasoning

Analogical reasoning is understanding something new by comparing it to something you already know.

When a teacher explains electricity as water flowing through pipes, or a scientist pictures the atom as a tiny solar system, they are using analogy to carry structure from a familiar case to an unfamiliar one.

This section explains the leading theory of how analogy works and the practical business of retrieving and using analogies.


35.1.1 Structure-mapping theory

The most influential account of analogy is structure-mapping theory, developed by Dedre Gentner starting in 1983.

Its central claim is that a good analogy is not about surface similarity but about shared relational structure - the pattern of relationships among the parts, rather than the parts themselves.

Consider the analogy between the solar system and the atom.

The planets and the sun do not look at all like electrons and a nucleus; what carries over is the relationship, namely that lighter things revolve around a heavier central thing that attracts them.

Structure-mapping says the mind lines up the two situations so that the system of relations in the familiar case maps onto the new case, and it prefers deep, connected systems of relations over isolated shared features.

Gentner called this preference the systematicity principle: we favour analogies that carry over an interconnected web of relations, because these support rich further inferences.

This is why a good analogy is so useful; once you map the structure, you can make new predictions about the unfamiliar case by reading them off the familiar one.

As a mechanism, the mapper takes two relational descriptions as input, searches for a consistent one-to-one alignment of their objects that preserves relations, scores candidate alignments by systematicity, and outputs both the best mapping and the candidate inferences it licenses.

The theory was made concrete as a working computer program, the Structure-Mapping Engine, built by Gentner with Brian Falkenhainer and Kenneth Forbus in the late 1980s, which is one of the most cited models of analogy ever made.

Its lasting contribution is the clear idea that analogy is fundamentally about aligning relationships, not matching appearances.


35.1.2 Analogical retrieval, transfer, and schema induction

Having a theory of how analogies are mapped raises a practical worry: to use an analogy, you first have to think of it, and this turns out to be the hard part.

Analogical retrieval is the process of calling to mind a relevant past case when you meet a new problem.

The uncomfortable finding, seen in the fortress-and-tumour studies of Mary Gick and Keith Holyoak in the early 1980s, is that people are much better at mapping an analogy once it is pointed out than at retrieving it on their own.

Worse, retrieval tends to be driven by surface similarity - people are reminded of past cases that look alike - even though useful analogies depend on deep structure that surface looks can hide.

This mismatch is important: the very thing that makes an analogy powerful, its deep shared structure, is not the thing that reliably brings it to mind.

In systems terms retrieval and mapping are two stages with different indexes: the retrieval stage queries long-term memory with a cue dominated by surface features and returns candidates in a second or two, while the mapping stage aligns relational structure over several seconds of deliberate comparison, so the pipeline fails most often at its first stage.

Analogical transfer is then the payoff, using the retrieved case to solve the new problem, and it succeeds only when the mapping is sound and the deep structure truly matches.

Schema induction is the happy long-term result of comparing analogous cases.

When you line up two examples that share a deep structure and notice what they have in common, you can abstract a general schema - a stripped-down mental template of the shared pattern that no longer depends on either specific case.

Gick and Holyoak showed that people who compared two analogous stories, rather than reading just one, were far more likely to abstract the common principle and apply it to a new problem.

This gives a concrete teaching lesson: comparing several examples helps people extract the underlying idea, which then transfers more readily than any single example would.


35.2 Causal reasoning and learning

Causal reasoning is figuring out what causes what.

It is one of the mind's most vital jobs, because knowing that A causes B lets you predict B, produce B by bringing about A, or prevent B by blocking A - powers that mere correlation cannot give you.

This section covers how the mind might represent causal structure and how it learns causes from experience.


35.2.1 Causal graphical models

In recent decades, philosophers, computer scientists, and psychologists have adopted a common mathematical language for describing causal knowledge, called causal graphical models, also known as causal Bayes nets.

The idea is to picture the world as a diagram of nodes and arrows, where each node stands for a variable, such as smoking or lung disease, and each arrow points from a cause to its effect.

This simple picture is powerful because it captures not just that things go together but which way the influence flows, and it can represent chains, common causes, and common effects.

A crucial strength of these models is that they distinguish merely watching from actively intervening.

If you only observe that yellowed fingers and lung disease go together, you might wrongly treat one as a cause of the other, when in fact both are effects of a common cause, smoking.

The graphical framework handles this by representing what happens when you reach in and set a variable yourself, which cuts the ordinary incoming arrows and reveals the true causal structure.

In systems terms the causal model is a stored graph data structure: queries about prediction read the graph forwards along the arrows, queries about explanation read it backwards, and queries about intervention first surgically delete the arrows into the manipulated node and then read forwards.

Researchers such as Alison Gopnik, Clark Glymour, and colleagues proposed around 2004 that both children and adults represent causal knowledge in something like this form, and learn it in broadly the way the mathematics prescribes.

The framework has been influential because it gives a precise, testable account of causal thinking and links human reasoning to the same tools now used in statistics and artificial intelligence.


35.2.2 Covariation, mechanism, and intervention

Where does causal knowledge come from in the first place?

Research points to three complementary sources of evidence the mind uses: covariation, mechanism, and intervention.

Covariation means noticing that things vary together - the cause tends to be present when the effect is, and absent when it is not.

This is a natural starting point, and much early psychology, including the work of Harold Kelley in the 1960s and 1970s, treated causal learning as essentially the tracking of such patterns of co-occurrence.

But covariation alone is famously not enough, captured in the maxim that correlation does not imply causation; two things can move together because one causes the other, or because a third thing causes both, or by sheer coincidence.

Mechanism means understanding the hidden process that connects a cause to its effect - not just that flipping the switch turns on the light, but the wiring and current in between.

People lean heavily on mechanism knowledge; we are much more willing to believe a causal claim when we can imagine a plausible process linking the two events.

Intervention means learning by doing rather than merely watching - deliberately changing something and seeing what follows.

Intervention is the most powerful source of causal evidence, because acting on the world yourself rules out the possibility that some hidden third factor is secretly producing the pattern, which is exactly why controlled experiments are the gold standard of science.

As inputs to the causal learner, the three sources differ in cost and quality: covariation arrives free with passive observation over many episodes, mechanism knowledge arrives from stored domain theories, and intervention requires spending an action but returns the least ambiguous evidence per trial.

Even young children learn causes better when they can poke and act on a toy than when they only observe it, showing that this preference for intervention runs deep.


35.2.3 Causal power and the estimation of strength

Beyond learning whether A causes B, people also judge how strongly A causes B, and this turns out to need more than counting co-occurrences.

Patricia Cheng proposed an influential account in 1997 called the power PC theory, where PC stands for probabilistic contrast.

The core problem it solves is this: simply comparing how often the effect occurs with and without the candidate cause can be misleading, because other background causes may already be producing the effect much of the time.

If a garden is already well watered by rain, adding a sprinkler will seem to have little power, not because the sprinkler is weak but because there is little room left for it to make a difference.

Cheng's theory offers a way to estimate a cause's underlying power, meaning its capacity to produce or prevent the effect on its own, by correcting for what the background causes are already doing.

The theory distinguishes generative causes, which bring the effect about, from preventive causes, which stop it, and gives a formula for each.

In systems terms the strength estimator takes two frequencies as input, the effect rate with the candidate cause present and the rate with it absent, and outputs a power estimate by dividing the raw contrast by the headroom the background leaves for a generative cause to act.

The power PC theory has been influential and fits many findings, but it is not the only contender, and it competes with pure covariation accounts and with Bayesian causal models over which best describes human strength judgments.

The debate is unsettled, and the honest summary is that people clearly go beyond raw co-occurrence when judging causal strength, taking account of the background, though researchers still argue about the exact rule they use.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ A target situation description, a set of objects and relations delivered by comprehension and perception.

◦ Stored base cases, relational descriptions of past situations retrieved from long-term memory.

◦ Covariation statistics, event co-occurrence counts accumulated by observation.

◦ Action outcomes, the results of the reasoner's own interventions.

◦ Domain mechanism knowledge, stored theories of processes that could link causes to effects.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ An object-to-object mapping between base and target, consumed by problem solving.

◦ Candidate inferences, predictions carried from the base into the target, consumed by reasoning and imagination.

◦ Induced schemas, abstracted relational templates written into long-term memory.

◦ A causal graph with strength estimates on its arrows, consumed by prediction, planning, and intervention choice.

• STATE.

◦ The current alignment under construction, the partial mapping held in working memory.

◦ The library of relational cases and schemas in long-term memory.

◦ The running causal graph hypothesis and its co-occurrence tallies.

◦ Confidence in each arrow, updated as observations and interventions arrive.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Systematicity weight, the preference for deep interconnected relation systems over isolated matches.

◦ Surface similarity weight in retrieval, the gain on appearance features when memory is queried.

◦ One-to-one constraint strictness, how firmly each base object may map to only one target object.

◦ Background rate estimate, the assumed effect rate from unobserved causes in power judgments.

◦ Intervention preference, the willingness to spend actions to disambiguate structure.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Analogical reminding: candidate cases surface from memory within about 1 to 2 seconds of reading a cue in reminding studies.

◦ Deliberate mapping and comparison: seconds to tens of seconds of controlled alignment work.

◦ Schema induction: emerges across a study session when at least two cases are explicitly compared.

◦ Causal impression from covariation: builds over tens of trials in contingency learning experiments.

◦ Exact time to compute one structure mapping in the head: REFUSED, because mapping latency depends on the size of the relational descriptions and no single supported human value exists.

• MODES.

◦ Retrieval mode, cue-driven search of memory for candidate analogues; triggered automatically by encountering a new problem.

◦ Mapping mode, deliberate structural alignment of a chosen base with the target; triggered by a retrieved or supplied candidate.

◦ Observational causal learning mode, passive accumulation of covariation; the default when action is unavailable.

◦ Interventional mode, active experimentation that cuts incoming arrows; triggered when the reasoner can act and structure is ambiguous.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Retrieval failure, missing a useful analogy because its surface differs from the current problem.

◦ Surface capture, mapping to a case that looks alike but shares no deep structure, yielding false inferences.

◦ Correlation-to-cause error, reading a common-cause pattern as a direct causal link.

◦ Illusory causation, inferring an arrow from coincidence or from a vivid imagined mechanism.

◦ Discounting error, underestimating a real cause because background causes already saturate the effect.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list called base_relations containing relation triples for the solar system, each triple naming a relation, a first object, and a second object.
Create a list called target_relations containing relation triples for the atom.
Create a list called base_objects containing the distinct objects in the base.
Create a list called target_objects containing the distinct objects in the target.
Create a variable called best_score with initial value negative one.
Create a variable called best_mapping with initial value empty.
For each possible one-to-one mapping from base objects to target objects, do the following.
    Set a number variable called score to zero.
    For each triple in base_relations, do the following.
        Translate the triple's objects through the mapping to make a predicted target triple.
        If the predicted target triple is present in target_relations, then add one to score.
    If score is greater than best_score, then set best_score to score and set best_mapping to the current mapping.
Report the best mapping and its score.
For each base relation whose translated triple is absent from the target, report it as a candidate inference about the target.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Load the permutations function to enumerate one-to-one mappings.
from itertools import permutations

# Create the base relations describing the solar system as relation triples.
base_relations = [("attracts", "sun", "planet"),
                  ("revolves_around", "planet", "sun"),
                  ("more_massive_than", "sun", "planet"),
                  ("hotter_than", "sun", "planet")]

# Create the target relations describing the atom as relation triples.
target_relations = [("attracts", "nucleus", "electron"),
                    ("revolves_around", "electron", "nucleus"),
                    ("more_massive_than", "nucleus", "electron")]

# Create the list of distinct base objects.
base_objects = ["sun", "planet"]
# Create the list of distinct target objects.
target_objects = ["nucleus", "electron"]

# Create a variable called best_score with initial value negative one.
best_score = -1
# Create a variable called best_mapping with initial value empty.
best_mapping = None

# For each one-to-one assignment of target objects to base objects, do the following.
for perm in permutations(target_objects):
    # Build the mapping dictionary from base objects to this permutation of target objects.
    mapping = dict(zip(base_objects, perm))
    # Set the structural consistency score to zero for this mapping.
    score = 0
    # For each relation triple in the base, do the following.
    for relation, a, b in base_relations:
        # Translate the triple's objects through the mapping to predict a target triple.
        predicted = (relation, mapping[a], mapping[b])
        # If the predicted triple is present in the target, add one to the score.
        if predicted in target_relations:
            # Add one matched relation to the score.
            score = score + 1
    # If this mapping scores higher than the best so far, remember it.
    if score > best_score:
        # Record the new best score.
        best_score = score
        # Record the new best mapping.
        best_mapping = mapping

# Print the best object mapping and its relational match score.
print("best mapping:", best_mapping, "matched relations:", best_score)

# For each base relation whose translation is absent from the target, propose an inference.
for relation, a, b in base_relations:
    # Translate the triple through the best mapping.
    predicted = (relation, best_mapping[a], best_mapping[b])
    # If the predicted triple is not already known in the target, report it as a candidate inference.
    if predicted not in target_relations:
        # Print the carried-over prediction about the target domain.
        print("candidate inference:", predicted)


CHAPTER 36. JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY: HEURISTICS AND BIASES (PROCESS)

This chapter is about how people make judgments when they do not and cannot know for sure - estimating probabilities, guessing quantities, and predicting outcomes.

Its central discovery, from the work of Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman beginning around 1970, is that people rely on a small set of mental shortcuts, called heuristics, which are usually helpful but which lead to predictable, systematic errors, called biases.

This work reshaped psychology and economics and earned Kahneman the Nobel Prize in Economics in 2002, after Tversky had died in 1996 and so could not share it.

In systems terms, the judgment system answers hard probability queries by substituting cheap proxy computations, such as similarity or ease of recall, and the biases are the signature distortions each proxy introduces.

The tag (PROCESS) marks this as a real feature of human cognition that any faithful model of the mind must capture.


36.1 The heuristics

A heuristic is a rule of thumb - a quick, intuitive shortcut for making a judgment without laborious calculation.

Heuristics are not stupidity; they are efficient tools that usually serve us well and let us act fast in a complicated world.

The catch is that each shortcut has a characteristic way of going wrong, and this section describes the three most famous heuristics and the errors they produce.


36.1.1 Representativeness and its fallacies

The representativeness heuristic is judging how likely something is by how much it resembles a typical example or stereotype of its kind.

If a description sounds like a librarian, you judge the person likely to be a librarian, based on the match to your mental image, while ignoring how many librarians there actually are.

In systems terms the heuristic answers the probability query by routing it to a similarity computation: the input is a description and a category prototype, the output is a resemblance score returned within a second, and the base rate input is simply never read.

This shortcut causes several distinctive errors.

One is neglect of base rates, where people ignore how common something is in the first place.

If there are far more farmers than librarians, a quiet, bookish person is still probably a farmer simply because farmers are so much more numerous, but representativeness tempts people to overlook this.

A second and striking error is the conjunction fallacy, revealed by the famous Linda problem.

People read a description of Linda as a bright, outspoken woman deeply concerned with social justice, then judge it more probable that Linda is a bank teller and a feminist than that she is simply a bank teller.

This cannot be true, because a combination of two things can never be more probable than one of them alone - every feminist bank teller is a bank teller.

About eighty-five percent of people made this error in the original study, because the fuller description resembles their image of Linda even though, by the iron rules of probability, adding a condition can only make something less likely, never more.

A third error is insensitivity to sample size, where people forget that small samples are far more prone to extreme results than large ones.

Together these fallacies show that people often substitute the easy question how similar is this for the hard question how probable is this, which is efficient but can be badly wrong.


36.1.2 Availability

The availability heuristic is judging how likely or how common something is by how easily examples come to mind.

If instances spring readily to memory, you judge the thing frequent; if they are hard to recall, you judge it rare.

This often works, because common things genuinely are easier to remember, but it misleads whenever ease of recall is driven by something other than true frequency.

In systems terms availability substitutes a memory retrieval fluency signal for a frequency count: the input is a category cue, the proxy output is how quickly and plentifully examples arrive within the first second or two of search, and any factor that boosts retrieval, such as vividness, recency, or media exposure, contaminates the estimate.

Vivid, dramatic, or recent events are especially easy to recall, so we overestimate their likelihood.

A classic example is that many people fear dying in a plane crash or a shark attack more than in a car crash or from heart disease, even though the ordinary risks are vastly greater, because the dramatic events get heavy news coverage and stick in memory.

Tversky and Kahneman showed the effect cleanly by asking whether English has more words beginning with the letter K or more words with K in the third position.

Most people say more words begin with K, because such words are easier to bring to mind, when in fact there are more words with K in third position - our search strategy, not the real frequency, drove the answer.

Availability helps explain distorted risk perception, the influence of the media on public fear, and why a single memorable anecdote can outweigh reams of statistics in people's minds.


36.1.3 Anchoring and adjustment

Anchoring and adjustment is a shortcut for estimating an unknown quantity: you start from some initial number, the anchor, and then adjust up or down from it.

The catch is that the adjustment is usually too small, so the final estimate stays pulled toward the starting number, even when that number is arbitrary and irrelevant.

Tversky and Kahneman demonstrated this dramatically by spinning a wheel of fortune that landed on a random number and then asking people to estimate the percentage of African countries in the United Nations.

People who saw a high spin gave much higher estimates than those who saw a low spin, even though everyone could see the number came from a spinning wheel and had nothing to do with the question.

The random anchor still dragged their answers toward it, which shows how powerful and how irrational anchoring can be.

As a mechanism, the estimator initialises its output register with whatever number is available in the input stream and then runs an adjustment loop that terminates as soon as the value feels plausible, so the stopping rule, not the anchor's relevance, determines how far the estimate travels.

Anchoring is remarkably robust and hard to resist; it works even when people are warned about it, even when the anchor is obviously absurd, and even among experts.

It has large practical consequences, shaping how we react to opening offers in a negotiation, initial price tags, first salary figures, and early estimates of any kind.

The practical lesson is that the first number on the table exerts a gravitational pull, so where a discussion starts can matter as much as the facts.


36.2 The biases of confidence and hindsight

Beyond errors in estimating probabilities, people show systematic distortions in how sure they feel and in how they remember what they once expected.

These biases concern our judgment of our own knowledge, which makes them especially important and especially hard to notice from the inside.

This section covers overconfidence and the twin distortions of hindsight and confirmation.


36.2.1 Overconfidence and its calibration

Overconfidence is the tendency to be more certain of our judgments than our actual accuracy warrants.

A useful way to measure this is calibration, which asks whether your confidence matches your hit rate over many judgments.

If you are well calibrated, then of all the times you say you are ninety percent sure, you should be right about ninety percent of the time.

The common finding is that people are overconfident: when they say they are ninety percent sure, they are often right far less often, perhaps seventy or seventy-five percent of the time.

This appears across many settings, from general-knowledge quizzes to professional forecasts, and it tends to be worse on hard questions than easy ones.

In systems terms confidence is a published meta-signal that should track the probability the answer output is correct, and calibration testing compares the signal against the measured hit rate over many trials; the standing finding is a positive offset between the signal and the rate.

There are nuances that keep the picture honest.

Overconfidence can shrink or even reverse for very easy questions, an effect called the hard-easy effect, and how you ask the question changes how much overconfidence appears.

Some researchers, such as Gerd Gigerenzer, have argued that a good deal of apparent overconfidence is an artefact of asking about single tricky items rather than natural frequencies, so the size of the effect is debated.

Still, the broad message stands: people generally hold their beliefs with more confidence than the evidence justifies, which matters wherever confident judgments guide important decisions.


36.2.2 Hindsight and confirmation bias

Two further biases concern how we handle evidence over time.

Hindsight bias is the tendency, once you know how something turned out, to believe you knew it all along.

After an election, a game, or a medical diagnosis, the outcome suddenly feels as though it had been obvious and predictable, even to people who predicted otherwise beforehand.

Baruch Fischhoff demonstrated this in the 1970s by showing that people who were told an outcome then remembered having expected it more strongly than they actually had.

In systems terms hindsight bias is a destructive memory update: learning the outcome overwrites the stored record of the earlier prediction, so the system cannot later read back its own true prior and cannot compute an honest error signal from which to learn.

Hindsight bias is harmful because it makes us think the world is more predictable than it is, it feeds unfair blame of people who could not really have foreseen an outcome, and it stops us learning properly from surprises.

Confirmation bias, met earlier in the chapter on reasoning, is the companion tendency to seek and favour evidence that fits what we already believe while neglecting evidence against it.

Together these two biases distort the whole cycle of belief.

Confirmation bias skews the evidence we gather going forward, and hindsight bias rewrites our memory of what we expected looking back, so that our beliefs can feel far better supported and far more consistent than they really are.


36.3 The interpretation of the biases

Having catalogued the biases, scientists disagree sharply about what they mean.

Do they show that the human mind is fundamentally flawed, or that psychologists have been judging it against an unfair and unrealistic standard?

This section presents the two leading interpretations, which represent one of the genuine live debates in the field.


36.3.1 The heuristics-and-biases reading

The original interpretation, from Tversky, Kahneman, and their followers, is called the heuristics-and-biases programme.

Its message is that human judgment systematically departs from the rules of probability and logic, because we rely on intuitive shortcuts instead of proper calculation.

On this reading, the biases are real flaws - not random slips but predictable, direction-specific errors baked into how intuition works.

Kahneman later folded this into his well-known two-system picture, popularised in his 2011 book, where a fast, intuitive mode of thought, called System One, produces the quick heuristic answers, and a slow, effortful mode, called System Two, can sometimes catch and correct them but often does not bother.

In systems terms this reading holds probability theory fixed as the reference specification and scores the human output against it, predicting that errors persist even with incentives and expertise because the proxy computations themselves are the source.

The practical upshot of this view is somewhat pessimistic about unaided human judgment, and it has fuelled efforts to help people decide better, from statistical training to structured decision procedures.

This reading has been enormously influential across psychology, medicine, law, and economics, where it helped launch the field of behavioural economics.


36.3.2 The rational and ecological reinterpretation

A vigorous opposing camp, led most prominently by Gerd Gigerenzer, argues that calling these shortcuts biases is often unfair.

Their central point is that the standard used to judge people - abstract, textbook probability applied to artificial word problems - is the wrong yardstick for minds that evolved to work in real environments.

Change the format of a problem to match how information naturally arrives, and much of the apparent irrationality shrinks or disappears.

A powerful example is that many people who stumble on probability problems stated in percentages solve the very same problems easily when the numbers are given as natural frequencies, such as saying ten out of every thousand people rather than one percent.

Gigerenzer's positive proposal is that of ecological rationality, the idea that simple heuristics are not lazy approximations but smart tools finely matched to the structure of the environments where they are used.

His fast-and-frugal heuristics research shows that simple rules, using little information, can match or even beat complicated calculations in the messy, uncertain real world, an outcome sometimes called a less-is-more effect.

In systems terms this reading scores the same output against a different specification, expected performance in the natural input distribution, and predicts that reformatting the input to natural frequencies or moving the task into its native environment will largely remove the error, which is a testable difference from the first reading.

On this view a heuristic is rational relative to its environment, and it counts as a bias only when applied in a setting it was not suited to.

The two camps have argued for decades, and the fairest summary is that both have a point.

Human intuition really does produce systematic errors on many tasks, exactly as the heuristics-and-biases programme showed, and yet those same intuitions are often remarkably well adapted to the natural problems of real life, exactly as the ecological view insists.

The disagreement is less about the facts of behaviour, which both sides largely accept, than about which standard of good thinking we should hold people to - and that, fittingly for a chapter on judgment under uncertainty, remains genuinely open.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ A judgment query, the quantity or probability to be estimated, delivered by language comprehension or by an internal goal.

◦ Case descriptions and category prototypes, supplied by semantic memory for similarity computation.

◦ Retrieval fluency signals, the speed and volume with which examples surface from episodic memory.

◦ Candidate anchors, any numbers present in the recent input stream.

◦ Base rate and sample size information, available in the input but frequently unread.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Probability and quantity estimates, consumed by decision making, planning, and communication.

◦ A confidence signal attached to each estimate, consumed by metacognition and by other people.

◦ Risk feelings, affective weightings of possible outcomes, consumed by choice and avoidance behaviour.

◦ Updated memories of past predictions, written back to memory and vulnerable to hindsight rewriting.

• STATE.

◦ The current anchor value held in the estimation register.

◦ The accessible sample of remembered instances feeding availability.

◦ Prototype representations of categories feeding representativeness.

◦ The stored record of prior predictions, which hindsight bias silently overwrites.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Similarity gain, how strongly resemblance drives probability judgments.

◦ Fluency gain, how strongly ease of recall drives frequency judgments.

◦ Adjustment stopping threshold, the plausibility level at which anchoring adjustment halts.

◦ Base rate weight, the read strength on prior frequencies, near zero under pure representativeness.

◦ Confidence offset, the standing gap between stated confidence and hit rate.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Heuristic judgment latency: intuitive estimates arrive within about 1 to 2 seconds, faster than deliberate calculation.

◦ Availability sampling window: the first seconds of memory search dominate frequency impressions.

◦ Anchoring persistence: anchor effects survive across the whole judgment episode and are documented to persist across delays of days in some studies.

◦ Hindsight consolidation: the knew-it-all-along shift is measurable as soon as the outcome is learned and endures thereafter.

◦ Duration of one adjustment step in anchoring: REFUSED, because the literature measures final estimates and not the internal step time, so no supported value exists.

• MODES.

◦ Heuristic mode, fast proxy-based judgment by similarity, fluency, or anchoring; the default under time pressure, load, or low stakes.

◦ Deliberate mode, slower rule-based calculation that can check and correct the heuristic answer; triggered by detected conflict, high stakes, training, or accountability.

◦ Frequency format mode, reasoning over natural counts such as ten out of a thousand; triggered by input formatted as frequencies, and markedly more accurate than percentage mode.

◦ Calibration mode, explicit tracking of confidence against outcomes; engaged only with feedback and deliberate record keeping, as in trained forecasters.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Base rate neglect, ignoring how common categories are when a description resembles a stereotype.

◦ Conjunction fallacy, rating a conjunction as more probable than one of its parts.

◦ Availability distortion, overestimating vivid, recent, or well-publicised risks.

◦ Anchoring capture, estimates dragged toward arbitrary starting numbers.

◦ Overconfidence, stated certainty exceeding measured accuracy, worst on hard items.

◦ Hindsight rewriting, memory of past predictions bent toward known outcomes.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called base_rate with initial value 0.01, the share of people who have the disease.
Create a number variable called hit_rate with initial value 0.9, the chance the test is positive when the disease is present.
Create a number variable called false_alarm_rate with initial value 0.09, the chance the test is positive when the disease is absent.
Set the intuitive answer to hit_rate, because intuition reads the test's accuracy as the probability of disease.
Calculate the probability of a true positive as base_rate multiplied by hit_rate.
Calculate the probability of a false positive as one minus base_rate, multiplied by false_alarm_rate.
Calculate the Bayesian posterior as the true positive probability divided by the sum of the true positive and false positive probabilities.
Report the intuitive answer and the Bayesian answer.
Simulate ten thousand random people, giving each the disease with probability base_rate and a test result according to the rates.
Count the simulated people who test positive, and count those who test positive and truly have the disease.
Report the simulated frequency answer as the second count divided by the first count.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Load the random module for the natural frequency simulation.
import random

# Create the base rate, the share of people who have the disease.
base_rate = 0.01
# Create the hit rate, the chance the test is positive when the disease is present.
hit_rate = 0.9
# Create the false alarm rate, the chance the test is positive when the disease is absent.
false_alarm_rate = 0.09

# Set the intuitive answer to the hit rate, mistaking test accuracy for the posterior.
intuitive_answer = hit_rate

# Calculate the probability of a true positive as base_rate times hit_rate.
true_positive = base_rate * hit_rate
# Calculate the probability of a false positive as the healthy share times the false alarm rate.
false_positive = (1 - base_rate) * false_alarm_rate
# Calculate the Bayesian posterior as true positives over all positives.
bayesian_answer = true_positive / (true_positive + false_positive)

# Print the intuitive answer that neglects the base rate.
print("intuitive answer:", round(intuitive_answer, 3))
# Print the correct Bayesian answer that respects the base rate.
print("Bayesian answer:", round(bayesian_answer, 3))

# Seed the random number generator so the run is repeatable.
random.seed(36)
# Set the count of people who test positive to zero.
positives = 0
# Set the count of people who test positive and truly have the disease to zero.
sick_positives = 0

# Simulate ten thousand random people one at a time.
for person in range(10000):
    # Give this person the disease with probability equal to the base rate.
    sick = random.random() < base_rate
    # If the person is sick, the test is positive with probability hit_rate.
    if sick:
        # Draw the test result using the hit rate.
        positive = random.random() < hit_rate
    # Otherwise the test is positive with probability false_alarm_rate.
    else:
        # Draw the test result using the false alarm rate.
        positive = random.random() < false_alarm_rate
    # If the test came out positive, count this person among the positives.
    if positive:
        # Add one to the count of positive tests.
        positives = positives + 1
        # If the person is also truly sick, count them among the sick positives.
        if sick:
            # Add one to the count of sick people with positive tests.
            sick_positives = sick_positives + 1

# Print the natural frequency answer, sick positives over all positives.
print("simulated frequency answer:", round(sick_positives / positives, 3))

CHAPTER 37. DECISION MAKING AND CHOICE (PROCESS)

This chapter is about how people choose.

Every day you face options, and picking one over the others is an act your mind performs constantly, from what to eat to whether to take a new job.

Decision making is the set of mental processes by which a person weighs possible options and settles on one.

Seen as an engineered system, the decision maker is a component that subscribes to a stream of options and evidence, holds a reference point and a set of learned values as state, and publishes a single committed choice along with a confidence signal.

It matters because good decisions protect our money, our health, and our time, and because the ways our choices go wrong are surprisingly regular and can be studied like any other part of nature.

This chapter first lays out the tidy mathematical rules that say what a perfectly rational chooser should do, then turns to the messier and more accurate accounts of what real people actually do, and finally looks at how choices unfold moment by moment.


37.1 The normative theories

A normative theory is a theory of how something ought to be done, as opposed to a description of how it is actually done.

In the study of choice, the normative theories are the clean rules of ideal rationality: they tell us what a flawless decision maker with unlimited patience and no biases would choose.

They matter because they give us a yardstick.

Without a standard for the best possible choice, we could not even say that a real person had made a mistake.

In systems terms, a normative theory is a reference implementation: an idealised algorithm against which the actual, resource-limited implementation in the head can be benchmarked.


37.1.1 Expected value and expected utility

Imagine a gamble: a coin flip that pays you ten dollars for heads and nothing for tails.

Expected value is the long-run average payoff of a gamble, found by multiplying each possible outcome by its probability and adding the results.

For that coin flip the expected value is one half times ten dollars plus one half times zero, which comes to five dollars.

The idea is centuries old and grew out of letters between mathematicians trying to price bets fairly.

For a long time people assumed a rational person should simply pick whatever choice has the highest expected value.

But that rule quickly runs into trouble.

Consider a famous puzzle known as the Saint Petersburg paradox, described by the mathematician Daniel Bernoulli in 1738.

It describes a game whose expected value in dollars is infinite, yet almost nobody would pay more than a few coins to play it.

Bernoulli's fix was to say that what people really value is not raw money but the personal usefulness or satisfaction that money brings, a quantity he called utility.

Utility is the subjective worth of an outcome to a particular person, as distinct from its objective size in dollars or units.

The key insight is that money has diminishing returns: the first thousand dollars matters far more to a poor person than the thousandth thousand matters to a rich one.

So the improved rule is to maximise expected utility, meaning the probability-weighted average of the utility of outcomes rather than of their cash value.

In 1944 the mathematician John von Neumann and the economist Oskar Morgenstern proved something striking.

They showed that if a person's preferences obey a handful of simple consistency rules, such as not preferring A to B, B to C, and then C to A in a circle, then that person behaves exactly as if they were maximising some expected utility.

This turned expected utility theory from a suggestion into the reigning normative standard of rational choice for economics and much of psychology.

As a mechanism, the expected utility rule takes as input a list of options, each a list of outcome and probability pairs, applies a utility function to each outcome, computes a probability-weighted sum per option, and outputs the option with the largest sum; the computation itself is a fixed evaluation loop with no characteristic biological timescale, since it describes the ideal rather than the implementation.


37.1.2 Subjective expected utility and Bayesian decision theory

The theory in the previous section still assumed that the probabilities of outcomes are given to us, as they are with a fair coin.

But in real life we rarely know the true odds.

Subjective expected utility is the version of the theory in which the probabilities are the decision maker's own personal degrees of belief rather than known objective frequencies.

The statistician Leonard Savage laid out this framework in 1954, showing that a rational agent facing genuine uncertainty should act as if they attach a personal probability to each possibility and then maximise expected utility using those personal probabilities.

A degree of belief here just means how confident you are that something is true, expressed as a number between zero and one.

This connects choice to a broader idea called Bayesian decision theory.

Bayesian decision theory is the proposal that a rational mind should start with prior beliefs, update them in light of new evidence using the rules of probability, and then choose the action that maximises expected utility given those updated beliefs.

The word Bayesian honours Thomas Bayes, an eighteenth-century minister whose rule for updating beliefs sits at the centre of the approach.

The attraction of this framework is that it unifies believing and deciding into one clean picture.

In systems terms it is a two-stage pipeline: a belief-update module subscribes to evidence and publishes a posterior probability distribution, and a choice module subscribes to that posterior plus a utility function and publishes an action.

The catch, which the descriptive theories in the next section press hard on, is that ordinary people routinely violate its rules, and they do so in patterned, predictable ways rather than at random.


37.2 The descriptive theories

A descriptive theory tries to capture how people actually decide, warts and all, rather than how they ideally should.

These theories grew from a simple observation.

When researchers watched real people choose, their behaviour departed from expected utility theory so systematically that the departures themselves cried out for explanation.

The descriptive theories in this section are the leading attempts to explain those departures.

In systems language, they are attempts to reverse-engineer the deployed implementation, complete with its shortcuts and its bugs, rather than to restate the specification.


37.2.1 Prospect theory: reference dependence, loss aversion, and probability weighting

Prospect theory is the most influential descriptive theory of choice under risk, introduced by the psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky in 1979.

It earned Kahneman the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics in 2002, after Tversky had died and so could not share it.

The theory rests on three main ideas, each a correction to the older expected utility picture.

The first idea is reference dependence.

Reference dependence means that people judge outcomes as gains or losses relative to a starting point, usually where they currently stand, rather than in terms of their total final wealth.

Winning a hundred dollars feels like a gain measured from now, not like a tiny nudge to your lifetime bank balance, which is how classical theory would frame it.

The second idea is loss aversion.

Loss aversion is the finding that losses feel considerably more painful than equal-sized gains feel pleasant.

In many studies the pain of losing a given amount is roughly twice as strong as the pleasure of gaining the same amount, which is why people often refuse a coin-flip bet that would win them a hundred and ten dollars or lose them a hundred.

The third idea is probability weighting.

Probability weighting means that people do not treat probabilities at face value but instead distort them: they tend to overweight very rare events and underweight very likely ones.

This is why the same person may buy a lottery ticket, overreacting to a tiny chance of winning, and also buy insurance, overreacting to a tiny chance of disaster.

Put together, these three ideas give the theory a distinctive value function that is shaped like a stretched letter S: it is concave for gains, convex for losses, and steeper on the loss side than the gain side.

Read as a system, prospect theory is a preprocessing stage inserted before the expected utility sum: outcomes pass through a reference-subtraction step and a nonlinear value function, probabilities pass through a nonlinear weighting function, and only then are the transformed quantities multiplied and summed; the parameters of the stage are the loss aversion coefficient, commonly estimated near two, and the curvature exponents of the value and weighting functions.

A later refinement called cumulative prospect theory, published by Tversky and Kahneman in 1992, improved the mathematics of the probability weighting so the theory could handle gambles with many possible outcomes.

Prospect theory is now among the most cited works in all of social science and forms the backbone of behavioural economics.


37.2.2 Framing and mental accounting

If people evaluate outcomes relative to a reference point, then how a choice is described should change what people pick, even when the underlying facts are identical.

That is exactly what happens, and the effect is called framing.

A framing effect is a change in preference caused purely by how an option is worded or presented, without any change in its actual content.

In a classic demonstration by Tversky and Kahneman, people were told about a disease and two programmes to fight it.

When the outcomes were framed in terms of lives saved, most people chose the safe, sure option.

When mathematically identical outcomes were framed in terms of lives lost, most people flipped to the risky gamble, because the word loss pushed them toward risk-seeking, just as loss aversion predicts.

In systems terms, framing shows that the reference point is an input parameter set by the description of the problem, not an internal constant: change the wording and you rewrite the state against which every outcome is coded, so the same downstream valuation machinery emits a different choice.

A closely related idea is mental accounting.

Mental accounting, a concept developed by the economist Richard Thaler, who won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics in 2017, describes how people mentally sort their money into separate bins and treat each bin by different rules.

For example, people will happily spend a tax refund on a treat while refusing to touch their savings for the same treat, even though a dollar is a dollar wherever it sits.

People also track sunk costs, the money or effort already spent and gone, and let them wrongly influence choices, as when someone finishes a bad meal just because they paid for it.

Mental accounting is, in effect, a partitioned state store: value is not held in one global register but in labelled accounts, each with its own reference point and its own rules, and transfers between accounts are costly or forbidden.

These effects matter because they show that a decision is not read off from the world directly; it is constructed inside a frame, and the frame can be shifted by wording, packaging, or accounting.


37.3 Value and preference

We often talk as if each of us carries around a fixed, ready-made set of preferences, waiting to be consulted.

The research in this section suggests that picture is largely wrong.

Preferences are frequently built on the spot, shaped by context, time, and feeling.

Understanding how value is assembled is essential to understanding why the same person can seem to want different things in different moments.

In systems terms, preference is better modelled as a value computed at query time from cues and comparisons than as a value read from a stable lookup table.


37.3.1 Constructed preference and preference reversal

Constructed preference is the idea that people often do not have stable, pre-formed preferences but instead assemble them in the moment, using whatever cues and comparisons the situation offers.

The strongest evidence for this comes from a phenomenon called preference reversal.

A preference reversal happens when a person prefers option A to option B under one method of asking, but prefers B to A under a different method, even though nothing about the options themselves has changed.

In the original demonstrations, studied by the psychologists Sarah Lichtenstein and Paul Slovic in the early 1970s, people were shown two bets.

One bet offered a high chance of a small prize, and the other offered a low chance of a large prize.

When asked which bet they would rather play, people often chose the high-chance bet.

But when asked how much money they would sell each bet for, the same people often put a higher price on the low-chance, big-prize bet.

Preferring one but pricing the other higher is logically inconsistent, and it happens because pricing draws attention to the dollar amounts while choosing draws attention to the odds.

The systems reading is that the elicitation method is itself an input that selects which attribute channel gets the most gain: a choice query amplifies the probability channel, a pricing query amplifies the amount channel, and the published preference is the output of whichever weighting the query installed.

The lesson is that the way a question is posed changes which features of the options grab our attention, and that in turn changes what we appear to want.


37.3.2 Intertemporal choice and delay discounting

Many decisions pit a reward now against a larger reward later, such as spending versus saving, or a slice of cake now versus better health for years to come.

Intertemporal choice is the name for any decision whose outcomes arrive at different points in time.

The central finding is delay discounting: the subjective value of a reward shrinks the longer you have to wait for it.

A hundred dollars today is worth more to us than a promise of a hundred dollars next year, and researchers can measure exactly how steeply each person discounts the future.

The interesting wrinkle is the shape of the discounting.

Standard economics assumed people discount the future at a constant rate, a pattern called exponential discounting, which would keep our preferences consistent over time.

But real people appear to follow hyperbolic discounting, meaning the value drops very steeply for short delays and then much more gently for longer ones.

Hyperbolic discounting is the finding that near-term delays are penalised far more heavily than an equivalent delay further out in the future.

As a mechanism, the discounter takes a reward amount and a delay as inputs, divides the amount by one plus a personal discount rate times the delay, and outputs a present value; the discount rate parameter varies widely between individuals, and the function's hyperbolic shape, not any single rate, is the robust finding.

This shape produces a striking effect called preference reversal over time.

Offered a hundred dollars in a year or a hundred and ten in a year and a week, most people happily wait the extra week.

But offered a hundred dollars today or a hundred and ten in a week, many of the same people grab the money now, even though the trade-off is the same one week's wait for ten extra dollars.

This is the mathematical signature of impatience and of failures of self-control, and steep discounting has been linked in studies to smoking, overspending, and other outcomes, though such links are correlations and not simple one-way causes.


37.3.3 The role of affect in decision

Affect is a general term for feeling, including moods and emotions, both mild and intense.

For a long time decision research treated choice as a cold calculation, but it is now clear that feeling is woven right into the process.

One influential proposal is the affect heuristic, described by the psychologist Paul Slovic and colleagues.

The affect heuristic is the mental shortcut of consulting the good or bad feeling an option evokes and using that gut feeling as a fast guide to judgment and choice.

If something feels good we tend to judge its benefits as high and its risks as low, and if it feels bad we do the reverse, even when the feeling and the facts do not match.

In systems terms, affect is a fast, low-resolution evaluation channel: it subscribes to the option representation, publishes a single signed goodness signal within a fraction of a second, and that signal is available long before the slower analytic channels finish.

A related and much-discussed idea comes from the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio, called the somatic marker hypothesis.

The somatic marker hypothesis proposes that bodily feelings, such as a knot in the stomach, become attached to the memory of past outcomes and then flag good or bad options quickly when we face a similar choice again.

Damasio drew this idea partly from patients with damage to a part of the front of the brain called the ventral prefrontal cortex, who could reason about options in the abstract yet made disastrous real-life decisions, seemingly because they had lost the emotional signals that normally steer choice.

The broader point, on which most researchers now agree, is that emotion is not merely noise that corrupts good decisions; it is often a necessary part of making any decision at all.

The open debates concern exactly when feelings help and when they mislead, and the details of Damasio's specific hypothesis remain contested.


37.4 Dynamic and sequential decision

The theories so far mostly treat a decision as a single snapshot: options in, choice out.

But real choosing takes time, and often it involves a string of linked decisions where each one shapes the next.

This section looks at decision making as a process that unfolds in time, and at how we might gently improve it.

In systems terms, we move from a stateless function to a stateful process: an accumulator that integrates evidence moment by moment, and a sequential controller that must trade current reward against future information.


37.4.1 Evidence accumulation and the drift-diffusion model

When you make even a simple, fast decision, your brain does not choose instantly.

It gathers evidence for a fraction of a second and then commits.

Evidence accumulation is the idea that a decision is reached by building up noisy evidence over time until it reaches a threshold that triggers a choice.

The leading mathematical version of this idea is the drift-diffusion model, developed by the psychologist Roger Ratcliff starting in 1978.

The drift-diffusion model pictures the mind as accumulating evidence for one option over another, drifting toward a boundary on each side, and making a choice the moment the accumulated evidence crosses one of the two boundaries.

Three ideas do most of the work in the model.

The drift rate is the average speed and direction of the evidence build-up, and it reflects how clear or strong the evidence is; easy decisions have a high drift rate.

The boundary separation is the distance the evidence must travel before a decision is triggered, and it captures caution; setting the boundaries far apart yields slower but more accurate choices.

The starting point captures any bias toward one option before the evidence even arrives.

As a system, the accumulator subscribes to a noisy evidence stream, holds a single running total as state, is tuned by the drift rate, boundary separation, starting point, and a nondecision time of roughly 300 milliseconds covering sensory encoding and motor output, and publishes both a choice and a response time, with simple decisions typically completing within about 300 milliseconds to 2 seconds overall.

The model is prized because a single mechanism explains not just which option people pick but also how long they take and the exact shape of their distribution of response times, including the awkward fact that errors are often slower than correct answers.

Ratcliff's key technical contribution was to let the drift rate vary a little from trial to trial, which allowed the model to reproduce that pattern of slow errors.

The framework is now widely used across psychology, neuroscience, and clinical research, for example to separate whether a group is slower because they are more cautious or because their evidence is genuinely weaker.


37.4.2 Exploration and exploitation in sequential choice

Imagine you have found a restaurant you like.

Every night you face a small dilemma: return to the familiar favourite, or try somewhere new that might be even better but might be worse.

This is the exploration-exploitation trade-off, one of the deepest problems in all of decision making.

Exploitation means choosing the option that is best according to what you currently know, to collect a sure reward now.

Exploration means choosing a less-known option to gather information that could pay off later.

The tension is unavoidable, because you cannot both cash in on current knowledge and expand it with the same choice, and a good decision maker must balance the two over time.

Researchers study this using tasks such as the multi-armed bandit, named after a row of slot machines, where a person repeatedly picks among options with unknown payoffs and tries to earn the most over many trials.

Human behaviour in these tasks shows two flavours of exploration.

One is directed exploration, where people deliberately choose options they are most uncertain about in order to learn.

The other is random exploration, where people simply add some randomness to their choices, trying different things now and then.

In systems terms, the sequential chooser holds estimated values and uncertainty estimates for each option as state, and exposes an exploration parameter, an uncertainty bonus for directed exploration or a temperature for random exploration, that the controller retunes on the fly.

How people set this balance shifts with age, with mood, and with how much time or how many choices they expect to have left, which is a sensible adjustment, since exploring is worth more when you have a long future in which to use what you learn.


37.4.3 The debiasing of judgment and choice architecture

If our choices are shaped by frames, feelings, and shortcuts, then two hopeful questions follow.

Can we train people to decide better, and can we redesign the situations in which they decide?

Debiasing is the effort to reduce systematic errors in judgment and choice, either by teaching people better strategies or by changing how information is presented.

Debiasing by training has a mixed record.

Simply warning people about a bias often does little, but some approaches show real promise, such as teaching people to think in terms of frequencies rather than percentages, to consider the opposite of their first conclusion, or playing educational games that give repeated practice and feedback.

The second approach, changing the environment, is called choice architecture.

Choice architecture is the deliberate design of the way options are presented, since there is no neutral way to present a choice and every arrangement nudges behaviour somehow.

In systems terms, training modifies the decision maker's internal parameters, while choice architecture modifies the input format and the default state; the empirical record suggests the input side is often the easier lever to pull.

The best-known tool of choice architecture is the nudge, a term made famous by Richard Thaler and the legal scholar Cass Sunstein in their 2008 book.

A nudge is a small change to how choices are offered that steers people in a helpful direction while still leaving them completely free to choose otherwise.

A classic example is the default option: because people tend to stick with whatever is preselected, making enrolment in a retirement savings or organ-donor scheme the default, rather than something you must opt into, dramatically raises participation.

Other nudges arrange healthy food at eye level or send reminders at the right moment.

Nudging has been adopted by governments worldwide, and it also draws honest debate: critics worry about who decides which direction is helpful, and recent large reviews suggest the average effect of nudges is real but often smaller and more variable than early enthusiasm implied.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Option set: a list of candidate actions, each described by possible outcomes and their probabilities or delays, arriving from perception, memory, or an external menu.

◦ Frame and elicitation method: the wording, reference point, and question format supplied by the environment, which set how outcomes are coded.

◦ Evidence stream: for fast perceptual and preferential decisions, a noisy moment-by-moment signal favouring one option over another.

◦ Affective tags: fast signed goodness signals attached to options by the emotion system.

◦ Learned values and uncertainties: estimates from the reward-learning system for options encountered before.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Committed choice: a single selected action, delivered to the motor system or the planning system.

◦ Response time: the observable latency of commitment, used by experimenters to read out the underlying dynamics.

◦ Confidence and post-decision evaluation: a graded signal consumed by learning systems to update values after the outcome arrives.

• STATE.

◦ The current reference point against which outcomes are coded as gains or losses.

◦ A running evidence total for each live decision, held until a boundary is crossed.

◦ Mental accounts: partitioned value stores with their own reference points and rules.

◦ Per-option value and uncertainty estimates carried across a sequence of choices.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Loss aversion coefficient: the multiplier on losses relative to gains, commonly estimated near two.

◦ Value function curvature: the exponent that makes gains concave and losses convex, commonly estimated near 0.88.

◦ Probability weighting curvature: the distortion that overweights rare events and underweights likely ones.

◦ Discount rate: the per-unit-of-delay penalty in intertemporal choice, widely variable across individuals.

◦ Drift rate, boundary separation, and starting point: the evidence quality, caution, and bias settings of the accumulator.

◦ Exploration setting: the uncertainty bonus or choice temperature governing exploration versus exploitation.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Simple two-choice decisions typically complete in about 300 milliseconds to 2 seconds, including a nondecision time of roughly 300 milliseconds for encoding and motor output.

◦ Affective evaluation of an option is available within a few hundred milliseconds, ahead of deliberate analysis.

◦ Deliberate multi-attribute decisions run over seconds to minutes, bounded by working memory rather than by the accumulator.

◦ Discounting timescale: REFUSED, because measured discount rates vary by orders of magnitude across individuals and reward types, so no single honest constant exists.

• MODES.

◦ Gain frame versus loss frame: the coding of outcomes relative to the reference point, switched by wording and context, with the loss frame tipping the system toward risk seeking.

◦ Speed emphasis versus accuracy emphasis: low versus high boundary separation in the accumulator, switched by instructions, time pressure, or stakes.

◦ Exploit versus explore: choosing the best-known option versus an information-gathering option, switched by remaining horizon, uncertainty, and mood.

◦ Snapshot valuation versus sequential control: single isolated choices versus linked runs of choices with carry-over state, switched by whether outcomes feed future options.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Framing effects: preference flips caused purely by re-description of identical options.

◦ Preference reversals: inconsistent orderings across choice and pricing, revealing constructed rather than stored preferences.

◦ Sunk cost errors and mental accounting leaks: past unrecoverable spending wrongly steering present choices.

◦ Impulsive reversal in intertemporal choice: hyperbolic discounting causing the near reward to defeat the objectively better delayed reward.

◦ Ventral prefrontal damage: intact abstract reasoning with disastrous real-life choices, consistent with a severed affective evaluation channel.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called loss aversion with initial value 2.25.
Create a number variable called curvature with initial value 0.88.
Create a number variable called weighting curvature with initial value 0.61.
Define a function called subjective value that takes an outcome amount.
    If the outcome amount is greater than or equal to zero, return the outcome amount raised to the power of curvature.
    Otherwise, calculate the negated outcome amount raised to the power of curvature, multiply the result by the loss aversion, negate that product, and return it.
Define a function called decision weight that takes a probability.
    Calculate the probability raised to the power of the weighting curvature and call it top.
    Calculate one minus the probability, raise it to the power of the weighting curvature, add it to top, and raise that sum to the power of one divided by the weighting curvature, calling the result bottom.
    Return top divided by bottom.
Define a function called prospect value that takes a list of outcome and probability pairs.
    Create a number variable called total with initial value zero.
    For each pair in the list, calculate the product of the subjective value of the pair's outcome and the decision weight of the pair's probability, and add the result to total.
    Return total.
Create a list called gamble containing the pair 110 with probability 0.5 and the pair negative 100 with probability 0.5.
Create a list called refusal containing the pair zero with probability one.
Calculate the prospect value of the gamble and the prospect value of the refusal.
If the prospect value of the gamble is greater than the prospect value of the refusal, print that the model accepts the bet, otherwise print that the model refuses the bet.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for the power function.
import math

# Create a number variable called loss_aversion with initial value 2.25.
loss_aversion = 2.25
# Create a number variable called curvature with initial value 0.88.
curvature = 0.88
# Create a number variable called weighting_curvature with initial value 0.61.
weighting_curvature = 0.61

# Define a function called subjective_value that takes an outcome amount x.
def subjective_value(x):
    # If the outcome amount is greater than or equal to zero, return it raised to the power of curvature.
    if x >= 0:
        return x ** curvature
    # Otherwise, return the negated loss magnitude raised to the curvature, scaled by loss aversion.
    return -loss_aversion * ((-x) ** curvature)

# Define a function called decision_weight that takes a probability p.
def decision_weight(p):
    # Calculate the probability raised to the weighting curvature and call it top.
    top = p ** weighting_curvature
    # Calculate the normalising denominator from p and one minus p, and call it bottom.
    bottom = (p ** weighting_curvature + (1 - p) ** weighting_curvature) ** (1 / weighting_curvature)
    # Return top divided by bottom.
    return top / bottom

# Define a function called prospect_value that takes a list of outcome and probability pairs.
def prospect_value(pairs):
    # Create a number variable called total with initial value zero.
    total = 0.0
    # For each outcome and probability pair in the list, add its weighted subjective value to total.
    for outcome, probability in pairs:
        total = total + subjective_value(outcome) * decision_weight(probability)
    # Return total.
    return total

# Create a list called gamble: win 110 dollars or lose 100 dollars, each with probability one half.
gamble = [(110, 0.5), (-100, 0.5)]
# Create a list called refusal: the sure outcome of zero with probability one.
refusal = [(0, 1.0)]

# Print the prospect value of the gamble, rounded to three decimal places.
print("value of gamble:", round(prospect_value(gamble), 3))
# Print the prospect value of refusing, rounded to three decimal places.
print("value of refusing:", round(prospect_value(refusal), 3))
# If the gamble's value exceeds the refusal's value, print accept, otherwise print refuse.
print("choice:", "accept" if prospect_value(gamble) > prospect_value(refusal) else "refuse")


CHAPTER 38. DUAL-PROCESS THEORY AND THE RATIONALITY DEBATE (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter steps back to ask two big questions raised by everything in the previous chapters.

First, does the mind contain two broadly different styles of thinking, one fast and one slow?

Second, when people break the rules of logic and probability, does that prove they are irrational, or have we been judging them by the wrong standard?

These questions are framed as frameworks rather than as single findings, because they organise how researchers interpret a huge range of results.

In systems terms, the first question asks whether cognition is a single processor with variable settings or a two-channel architecture with an arbitration mechanism, and the second asks which benchmark suite the architecture should be tested against.


38.1 Dual-process theory

Dual-process theory is the broad proposal that human thinking runs on two distinguishable kinds of process, one that is fast and intuitive and one that is slow and deliberate.

The idea has old roots in the intuition-versus-reason contrast, but it became a central organising framework in modern psychology.

It matters because so much of the evidence about biases, reasoning, and self-control seems to fall naturally into a story about two competing modes of thought.

As an architecture, the proposal is a fast, cheap, always-on channel paired with a slow, expensive, capacity-limited channel, with the central engineering question being how their outputs are arbitrated.


38.1.1 System One and System Two

The most famous version of dual-process theory uses the labels System One and System Two, popularised by Daniel Kahneman in his 2011 book Thinking, Fast and Slow.

System One refers to mental processes that are fast, automatic, effortless, and largely outside of awareness, running on association and pattern recognition.

Recognising a friend's face, reading a word, or sensing that two plus two is four all happen through System One, with no feeling of effort.

System Two refers to mental processes that are slow, deliberate, effortful, and consciously controlled, working step by step.

Multiplying seventeen by twenty-four, filling out a tax form, or carefully checking an argument all call on System Two, and they feel like work because they draw on limited attention.

In systems terms, the fast channel delivers an answer within a few hundred milliseconds at near-zero attentional cost, while the slow channel runs serial operations over seconds to minutes and consumes working memory, so its throughput collapses under load.

It is important to be careful about these labels.

Kahneman himself stressed that System One and System Two are not two little people or two places in the brain; they are convenient names for clusters of features, and calling them systems is a storytelling shorthand.

Many researchers now prefer to speak of Type One and Type Two processing to avoid implying there are two neat physical machines.

The core contrast that survives is between processing that is autonomous and cheap and processing that is deliberate and costly, and a great deal of everyday error is blamed on our leaning too readily on the cheap kind.


38.1.2 Default-interventionist and parallel-competitive architectures

Granting that there are two styles of thinking, a further question arises: how do they work together in time?

There are two main proposals.

The default-interventionist architecture, associated especially with the psychologists Jonathan Evans and Keith Stanovich, says the two styles operate in sequence.

In this view the fast style runs first and by default, generating an intuitive answer automatically, and the slow style may then step in to monitor that answer and, if needed, override it with something more carefully reasoned.

The trouble, on this account, is that the slow style is lazy and often fails to intervene, so a wrong gut answer slips through unchecked.

A simple puzzle illustrates this: a bat and a ball cost one dollar and ten cents together, the bat costs a dollar more than the ball, so how much is the ball?

The intuitive answer that leaps to mind is ten cents, but that is wrong; the correct answer is five cents, and getting it right usually requires the slow style to catch and correct the fast one.

The parallel-competitive architecture offers a different picture.

It says the two styles run at the same time, in parallel, each producing an output, and the mind must resolve any conflict between them.

The two architectures make different systems predictions: a strictly sequential design predicts no conflict signal unless deliberation actually runs, while a parallel design predicts a detectable conflict signal, such as slowed responding or lowered confidence, even on trials where the person still gives the intuitive answer.

Recent research, especially by the psychologist Wim De Neys, has complicated the tidy default-interventionist story.

His work suggests that people are often intuitively sensitive to logic, meaning that even fast, gut-level thinking sometimes registers when an answer conflicts with a rule, producing a feeling that something is off before slow deliberation kicks in.

The exact relationship between the two styles is therefore an active and unsettled research question, and the simple sequential story is no longer accepted by everyone.


38.2 The rationality debate

The rationality debate is the long-running argument over what it means to call human thinking rational or irrational, and whether the biases documented by researchers are genuine flaws.

It matters because the answer shapes how we view ourselves.

Are people fundamentally reasonable creatures who slip up now and then, or fundamentally flawed reasoners propped up by a thin layer of logic, or something else entirely?

In systems terms, the debate is over the correct test environment: whether the system should be scored against abstract logic and probability in the laboratory, or against performance in the natural environments the system was tuned for.


38.2.1 Bounded rationality and satisficing

The starting point of the modern debate is the work of Herbert Simon, an extraordinary scholar who won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics in 1978 and helped found the field of artificial intelligence.

Simon coined the term bounded rationality.

Bounded rationality is the idea that real minds are rational but only within limits, because they have finite time, finite memory, and finite computing power, and so cannot possibly weigh every option perfectly.

Instead of the impossible ideal of optimising, which means finding the very best option, Simon argued that people satisfice.

Satisficing is the strategy of searching through options only until you find one that is good enough, meaning it clears some acceptable threshold, and then stopping.

A person hunting for an apartment does not inspect every apartment in the city and rank them all; they look until they find one that meets their needs and sign the lease.

As a mechanism, satisficing is a sequential search loop with an aspiration threshold parameter: options arrive one at a time, each is compared against the threshold, and the loop halts on the first option that clears it, converting an intractable global optimisation into a bounded-time procedure.

Simon captured this with a memorable image he called the scissors.

He said rational behaviour is shaped by two blades, like the two blades of a pair of scissors: one blade is the structure of the environment, and the other is the limited computational power of the mind, and you cannot understand the cut by looking at only one blade.

This reframes rationality as a match between mind and world rather than as pure logic performed in a vacuum.


38.2.2 The distinction between intelligence and rationality

A striking claim in this debate, argued forcefully by the psychologist Keith Stanovich, is that being smart and being rational are not the same thing.

Intelligence, as measured by standard tests, mostly captures raw mental horsepower, such as reasoning speed and memory capacity.

Rationality, in Stanovich's sense, is about actually forming beliefs that fit the evidence and making choices that serve your goals.

Stanovich points out that many people with high intelligence-test scores still fall for the same reasoning traps as everyone else, a mismatch he provocatively named dysrationality, meaning the failure to think rationally despite having adequate intelligence.

His explanation draws on the dual-process framework.

Getting a problem right, he argues, requires three things: the fast system must not be misleading you, the slow system must actually engage rather than stay lazy, and you must possess the relevant rules of good thinking in the first place, which he calls mindware.

In systems terms, intelligence measures the slow channel's raw processing capacity, while rationality depends on two further components: the dispatch policy that decides whether the slow channel is invoked at all, and the installed rule library it runs, and a failure in either produces error regardless of capacity.

Intelligence tests mostly measure the horsepower of the slow system, but they do not measure whether a person bothers to engage it or whether they have learned the right tools, which is why a clever person can still reason poorly.

Stanovich has even proposed that rationality could be measured with its own test, separate from an intelligence test, an idea he calls a rationality quotient.


38.2.3 Whether the biases are defects or adaptations

The deepest question in the debate is what the catalogue of biases actually means.

There are two broad camps, and the disagreement between them is real and ongoing.

The first camp is the heuristics-and-biases tradition of Kahneman and Tversky.

On this reading, the biases are genuine errors: the mind uses quick shortcuts that usually work but systematically misfire in certain situations, and the gap between human choice and the rules of logic and probability reveals real flaws in our reasoning.

The second camp is the ecological rationality tradition, led by the psychologist Gerd Gigerenzer.

Ecological rationality is the view that a strategy is rational or not only relative to a particular environment, and that simple mental shortcuts are well-adapted tools that often perform excellently in the real world.

On this reading, many so-called biases are not flaws at all.

They are the sensible output of fast-and-frugal heuristics, which are simple rules that ignore most information yet make accurate judgments when they are matched to the structure of the environment.

Gigerenzer's group has shown that under real-world uncertainty a simple rule can sometimes match or even beat a complicated statistical model, partly because simple rules avoid a trap called overfitting, meaning they do not get fooled by accidental patterns in past data.

This leads to what are called less-is-more effects, where using less information produces better decisions.

Gigerenzer also argues that some famous biases shrink or vanish when problems are posed in the format the mind evolved to handle, such as natural frequencies like ten out of a thousand rather than abstract percentages.

The two camps make different systems predictions: the heuristics-and-biases camp predicts that errors persist across environments because they come from the algorithm itself, while the ecological camp predicts that errors are input-format effects that disappear when the data arrive in the representation the algorithm was built for.

A fair summary is that both camps have a point.

The shortcuts are real and they can misfire, and the very same shortcuts are also often adaptive and efficient.

The remaining argument is largely about emphasis, and about how kindly or harshly we should read the balance sheet of human reason.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Problem statement: the current question or choice, in whatever surface format the environment supplies.

◦ Associative retrievals: candidate answers delivered automatically by memory and pattern recognition, forming the fast channel's input.

◦ Conflict and error signals: internal alarms indicating that a candidate answer clashes with a known rule or with another cue.

◦ Motivation and load signals: available time, stakes, fatigue, and concurrent working memory demands, which gate whether deliberation is funded.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Intuitive response: the fast channel's default answer, available early and at low cost.

◦ Deliberate response: the slow channel's checked or recomputed answer, which may confirm or override the default.

◦ Confidence signal: a graded sense of rightness, lowered when the two channels disagree, consumed by metacognition.

• STATE.

◦ The currently active default answer awaiting endorsement or override.

◦ Working memory contents holding the intermediate steps of any running deliberation.

◦ Mindware: the stored library of learned rules of logic, probability, and domain knowledge that the slow channel can execute.

◦ The aspiration threshold and search position of any satisficing loop in progress.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Intervention threshold: how much conflict or stake is needed before the slow channel engages.

◦ Cognitive capacity: the working memory and speed resources available to deliberation, the quantity intelligence tests approximate.

◦ Thinking disposition: the standing tendency to reflect rather than accept the default, measured separately from capacity.

◦ Aspiration level: the good-enough cutoff that terminates a satisficing search.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ The fast channel delivers a candidate answer within a few hundred milliseconds of the problem's arrival.

◦ Implicit conflict detection registers within roughly the first second, before or without full deliberation, in conflict-paradigm studies.

◦ Deliberate reasoning runs over seconds to minutes, scaling with the number of serial steps and working memory demands.

◦ Channel switching cost: REFUSED, because the literature offers no agreed single value for the time to hand a problem from the intuitive to the deliberate channel, and estimates depend heavily on task.

• MODES.

◦ Default acceptance versus intervention: the intuitive answer is endorsed as-is, or deliberation engages to check it, switched by detected conflict, stakes, and available capacity.

◦ Sequential versus parallel operation: whether deliberation begins only after intuition finishes or the two channels run concurrently, the unresolved architectural question of the field.

◦ Optimising versus satisficing: exhaustive comparison of options versus threshold-terminated search, switched by time pressure and option abundance.

◦ Benchmark mode: scoring behaviour against abstract logic versus against ecological fit, a mode of evaluation rather than of processing, switched by the researcher's framework.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Miserly processing: the slow channel fails to engage, so a fluent wrong intuition is published unchecked, as in the bat-and-ball problem.

◦ Missing mindware: deliberation engages but lacks the needed rule, producing confident, effortful error.

◦ Dysrationality: high measured intelligence coexisting with systematic reasoning failure, because capacity is intact while dispatch or mindware is not.

◦ Format mismatch: performance collapses when data arrive as abstract percentages rather than natural frequencies, the ecological camp's signature failure pattern.

◦ Overcorrection: deliberation overrides a well-calibrated intuition in domains where the fast channel is actually the better-adapted tool.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Import the random number library.
Create a number variable called drift rate with initial value 0.6.
Create a number variable called boundary with initial value 1.0.
Create a number variable called evidence with initial value negative 0.3, representing the intuitive answer's head start toward the wrong boundary.
Create a number variable called time step with initial value 0.001.
Create a number variable called noise scale with initial value 0.1.
Create a number variable called elapsed with initial value 0.3, representing the nondecision time in seconds.
While the evidence is between the negated boundary and the boundary, repeat the following.
    Draw a random sample from a normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation one, and call it noise.
    Calculate the product of the drift rate and the time step, add the product of the noise scale and the noise, and add the result to the evidence.
    Add the time step to elapsed.
If the evidence is greater than or equal to the boundary, print that deliberation reached the correct answer, otherwise print that the intuitive answer won.
Print the elapsed time as the simulated response time in seconds.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random number library.
import random

# Create a number variable called drift_rate with initial value 0.6, the quality of the deliberate evidence favouring the correct answer.
drift_rate = 0.6
# Create a number variable called boundary with initial value 1.0, the caution setting.
boundary = 1.0
# Create a number variable called evidence with initial value -0.3, the intuitive answer's head start toward the wrong boundary.
evidence = -0.3
# Create a number variable called time_step with initial value 0.001, one millisecond per simulated step.
time_step = 0.001
# Create a number variable called noise_scale with initial value 0.1.
noise_scale = 0.1
# Create a number variable called elapsed with initial value 0.3, the nondecision time in seconds.
elapsed = 0.3

# Seed the random number generator so the run is reproducible.
random.seed(42)

# While the evidence has not yet crossed either boundary, keep accumulating.
while -boundary < evidence < boundary:
    # Draw a random sample from a normal distribution with mean zero and standard deviation one, and call it noise.
    noise = random.gauss(0.0, 1.0)
    # Add the drift contribution and the noise contribution to the evidence.
    evidence = evidence + drift_rate * time_step + noise_scale * noise * (time_step ** 0.5)
    # Add the time step to the elapsed time.
    elapsed = elapsed + time_step

# If the evidence reached the upper boundary, print that deliberation delivered the correct answer.
if evidence >= boundary:
    print("choice: correct deliberate answer")
# Otherwise, print that the intuitive default won the race.
else:
    print("choice: intuitive default answer")
# Print the elapsed time as the simulated response time in seconds, rounded to three decimals.
print("response time in seconds:", round(elapsed, 3))




================================================================================

PART NINE. PROBLEM SOLVING, PLANNING, AND COGNITIVE CONTROL

================================================================================

CHAPTER 39. PROBLEM SOLVING AND INSIGHT (PROCESS)

This chapter is about how the mind gets from a problem to a solution.

A problem exists whenever you have a goal but no obvious, ready-made way to reach it, like a locked door with no key in sight.

Problem solving is the set of mental processes by which a person moves from a starting situation to a desired goal when the path is not immediately obvious.

Seen as an engineered system, the solver subscribes to a problem description, builds an internal representation of states and allowed actions, searches that representation under heuristic guidance, and publishes either a plan of steps or a sudden restructured representation from which the answer falls out.

It matters because it lies at the heart of intelligence, from a child stacking blocks to a scientist cracking a mystery, and because studying it reveals both the power and the traps of human thought.

The chapter covers two great traditions, one that treats problem solving as a methodical search and one that focuses on the sudden click of insight, and then looks at what makes experts so good.


39.1 The problem-space theory

The problem-space theory is the highly influential idea that solving a problem is like finding a path through a maze of possible situations.

It was developed by Allen Newell and Herbert Simon and laid out fully in their landmark 1972 book Human Problem Solving.

Their approach treats the mind as an information processor and gives us a precise vocabulary for describing what solving actually involves, which is why it became a foundation of both cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence.

In systems terms it supplies the data structures of thought: a state representation, a set of legal operators, and a search procedure over the graph they define.


39.1.1 States, operators, and goals

Newell and Simon proposed that any problem can be described using a few basic pieces.

A state is a particular configuration of the problem at some moment, such as the current arrangement of pieces on a chessboard.

The initial state is where you begin, and the goal state is the situation you are trying to reach.

An operator is an action that changes one state into another, such as a legal chess move, and every operator has conditions under which it is allowed.

The problem space is the entire set of states you could reach by applying operators in every possible order, imagined as a vast branching tree of possibilities.

Solving a problem, in this view, means finding a path of operators that leads from the initial state to the goal state through that space.

As a mechanism, the search engine takes the current state as input, applies operator preconditions to generate legal successors, evaluates them, and outputs the next state to move to, cycling at roughly the tempo of a deliberate mental step, on the order of a second or less per considered move in simple puzzles.

The genius of this framework is that it turns a vague notion, thinking hard about a problem, into something concrete that can be mapped, measured, and even programmed into a computer.

Newell and Simon built a computer program called the General Problem Solver to demonstrate that a machine using these ideas could solve the same puzzles people do, in broadly the same way.


39.1.2 Well-defined and ill-defined problems

Not all problems are alike, and one of the most useful distinctions is between well-defined and ill-defined problems.

A well-defined problem is one where the starting point, the goal, and the allowed moves are all clearly specified.

A chess puzzle, a maze, or the instruction solve for x in an equation are well-defined, because you know exactly where you are, exactly what counts as done, and exactly what you may do.

An ill-defined problem is one where the goal, the starting information, or the available moves are vague or open to interpretation.

Writing a good novel, planning a happy life, or designing a fair tax system are ill-defined, because reasonable people disagree about what a solution even looks like.

In systems terms, a well-defined problem arrives with its state format, operator set, and goal test already specified, while an ill-defined problem forces the solver to run a prior representation-building stage whose output is itself uncertain and revisable.

The problem-space theory works most cleanly for well-defined problems, since a fuzzy problem does not have a tidy space to search.

Much of the skill in real-world problem solving lies in the hard first step of turning an ill-defined problem into a well-defined one you can actually work on.

Researchers acknowledge that the neat problem-space framework captures the well-defined case far better than the messy, open-ended problems that fill everyday life, and this is one honest limit of the approach.


39.1.3 Search heuristics: means-ends analysis, hill climbing, working backward

The problem space for anything but a toy puzzle is astronomically large, far too big to search move by move.

The chess game tree, for instance, contains more positions than there are atoms in the observable universe.

So the mind must use heuristics, which are rules of thumb that cut down the search by pointing toward promising moves without any guarantee of success.

Newell and Simon identified several such heuristics.

The most important is means-ends analysis.

Means-ends analysis is the strategy of comparing where you are now with where you want to be, identifying the biggest difference between them, and then choosing an action that reduces that difference.

If a needed action cannot be taken yet, you set up a subgoal to make it possible, and you attack that subgoal the same way, breaking a hard problem into a nest of smaller ones.

As a mechanism, means-ends analysis takes the current state and goal state as inputs, computes a difference, selects an operator indexed to that difference, and, when the operator's preconditions fail, pushes a subgoal onto a goal stack held in working memory, whose limited depth of a few items is the main constraint on how deeply humans can nest subgoals.

Hill climbing is a simpler heuristic: at each step you take whatever move seems to bring you closest to the goal right now.

Hill climbing is fast but shortsighted, because sometimes the only way to reach the goal is to move away from it temporarily, and pure hill climbing will refuse to take that backward step, getting stuck like a hiker who reaches a small hilltop and cannot see the taller mountain nearby.

Working backward is a heuristic in which you start from the goal and reason in reverse toward your current position.

It is especially handy when the goal is clear but the starting options are many, as in some geometry proofs and maze puzzles where the exit is easier to trace back from than the entrance is to trace forward.


39.2 The Gestalt tradition

The Gestalt tradition is an older approach to problem solving that grew out of a school of German psychology in the early twentieth century.

The word Gestalt is German for shape or whole, and these psychologists stressed how the mind organises experience into meaningful wholes.

Where Newell and Simon emphasised step-by-step search, the Gestalt thinkers emphasised sudden shifts in how a whole problem is seen, and their questions about creativity and insight remain alive today.

In systems terms, the two traditions locate the hard work in different modules: search theory locates it in the path-finding engine, while the Gestalt tradition locates it in the representation builder that defines the space being searched.


39.2.1 Insight and restructuring

Insight is the experience of a solution arriving suddenly and completely, often with a feeling of surprise, the classic aha moment.

It contrasts with the gradual, plodding progress of step-by-step search.

The Gestalt psychologists argued that insight comes from restructuring.

Restructuring is a sudden reorganisation of the way a problem is mentally represented, so that elements you had been seeing one way snap into a new arrangement that reveals the answer.

The pioneer here was Wolfgang Kohler, who in the 1910s studied chimpanzees that seemed to solve problems in flashes, for instance suddenly stacking boxes to reach a hanging banana after a period of apparent stuck contemplation.

In systems terms, restructuring is a discrete recompilation event: the state and operator encoding is replaced wholesale, the search resumes in the new space, and the phenomenal suddenness reflects the switch being all-or-none rather than incremental.

Modern researchers have tried to pin down whether insight is truly different from ordinary step-by-step problem solving or just feels different.

The current picture is nuanced: there is real evidence that insight solutions involve a distinct sudden change and are processed somewhat differently from methodical solutions, but the sharp romantic line between the two has softened, and the debate is not fully settled.


39.2.2 Functional fixedness and mental set

The Gestalt tradition also gave us a powerful account of why we get stuck, centred on two related obstacles.

Functional fixedness is the tendency to see an object only in terms of its usual function, which blocks you from using it in a new way that would solve the problem.

The classic demonstration is the candle problem, devised by the Gestalt psychologist Karl Duncker in the 1940s.

People are given a candle, a box of tacks, and matches, and asked to attach the candle to the wall so it can burn without dripping.

The solution is to empty the tack box, tack the box to the wall, and stand the candle in it, but many people fail because they see the box only as a container for tacks and not as a possible shelf.

Mental set is the closely related tendency to keep using a strategy that has worked before, even when a simpler or better approach is now available.

The classic demonstration is Abraham and Edith Luchins's water-jar experiments from the 1940s, in which people learned a complicated formula for measuring out water and then kept applying it even to later problems that had an obvious, much simpler solution right in front of them.

In systems terms, both obstacles are cache failures: the object-to-function mapping and the recently successful procedure are cached for speed, and the cache is not invalidated when the problem changes, so stale entries keep pre-empting a fresh recomputation of the representation.

Both obstacles show the same deep truth: the very habits and past successes that make us efficient can also blind us, because they fix our representation of a problem and keep us from seeing it afresh.


39.2.3 Incubation

Incubation is the everyday experience of stepping away from a problem you are stuck on and then finding, sometimes hours or days later, that the solution suddenly appears.

You put the problem down, go for a walk or sleep on it, and the answer arrives seemingly on its own.

Researchers have confirmed that incubation is a real effect: taking a break can genuinely improve the chance of solving certain problems compared with working straight through.

But why it works is still debated, and there are several competing explanations rather than one agreed answer.

One idea is simple forgetting: the break lets you shed the misleading assumptions and dead-end strategies that had you stuck, so you return with a fresher representation, which fits nicely with the Gestalt emphasis on restructuring.

Another idea is that some unconscious processing continues in the background while you are away, quietly working toward the answer, though evidence for genuine unconscious problem solving is weaker and more contested.

A third, more mundane idea is that the break simply lets you rest and recover from fatigue.

In systems terms, the competing accounts are a cache flush that clears stale representations, a background process that keeps searching off the main thread, and a simple resource recharge, and current data cannot cleanly separate the three.

The honest state of the science is that incubation is real but modest in size, and the mechanisms behind it are not fully resolved.


39.3 Expertise in problem solving

Some people solve certain problems far better and faster than others, not because they are generally smarter but because they know a particular field deeply.

Studying such experts reveals what changes in the mind as skill grows, and it connects problem solving to memory, perception, and learning.

This section asks what actually separates a novice from an expert, and how experts use their past to crack new problems.

In systems terms, expertise moves work from the slow search engine to a fast pattern-recognition front end backed by a large indexed store of past cases.


39.3.1 The novice-expert difference

The difference between a novice and an expert turns out to be less about raw thinking power and more about organised knowledge.

The foundational studies were on chess, begun by the Dutch psychologist Adriaan de Groot and extended by the American researchers William Chase and Herbert Simon in the 1970s.

They found that chess masters were not calculating far more moves ahead than weaker players; instead they instantly recognised meaningful patterns on the board.

The key concept is chunking.

A chunk is a group of individual elements bound together into a single familiar unit through experience, so that it can be handled as one thing.

An expert chess player sees the board not as thirty-two separate pieces but as a handful of familiar configurations, which lets them hold far more of the position in mind at once.

The evidence for this is elegant.

When shown a real game position for a few seconds, masters reproduced it almost perfectly while novices could not, but when shown a board with pieces scattered at random, the masters were no better than beginners, because the random board contained no familiar chunks to recognise.

In systems terms, chunking is a compression codec learned from experience: it re-encodes the input so that a working memory of about four chunks can carry a whole position, and it fails gracefully back to novice capacity when the input does not match the trained statistics.

Experts also differ in how they represent problems: novices tend to focus on surface features, such as the objects mentioned in a physics problem, while experts organise problems by deep principles, such as the law of physics that applies.

The overall lesson is that expertise is built from thousands of stored, organised patterns, not from a faster general-purpose processor.


39.3.2 Analogical problem solving

Analogical problem solving is solving a new problem by noticing its similarity to a problem you already know how to solve and carrying the solution across.

It is one of the most powerful tools of human thought, letting us transport hard-won lessons from one situation to another.

The classic study is by the psychologists Mary Gick and Keith Holyoak in the early 1980s.

They gave people a hard problem: how to use radiation to destroy a tumour without harming the surrounding healthy tissue, when a strong enough beam would damage everything in its path.

Earlier, they had told some participants a story about a general who captured a fortress by splitting his army into small groups that converged from many roads at once.

The story contains the solution by analogy: aim many weak radiation beams from different directions so they converge on the tumour.

The striking finding was that most people did not spontaneously use the story unless they were hinted to think about it, even though they had just read it.

This reveals a central difficulty: the hard part of analogy is not applying it but retrieving it, because people tend to notice surface similarities, such as both problems being about armies, rather than the deep structural similarity that actually matters.

In systems terms, analogy is a two-stage pipeline of retrieval then mapping, and the bottleneck is the retrieval index: memory is keyed by surface features by default, so structurally relevant cases fail to surface unless the store was indexed by deep structure, which is exactly what expertise provides.

Experts are better at analogy precisely because they represent problems by deep structure, so the right past cases come to mind more readily.

This connects directly to the structure-mapping account of analogy discussed elsewhere in this work, and it shows why teaching people the underlying principle, rather than just surface examples, helps them transfer knowledge to genuinely new situations.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Problem description: the stated givens, goal, and constraints, from perception or language.

◦ Current state: the present configuration of the problem, updated after each executed or imagined move.

◦ Stored patterns and past cases: chunks, schemas, and solved problems retrieved from long-term memory.

◦ Hints and feedback: external cues that can trigger retrieval or restructuring.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Next operator: the chosen move, delivered to the motor system or to imagination for further search.

◦ Subgoals: intermediate targets pushed for the control system to pursue.

◦ Restructured representation: a new encoding of the problem, published abruptly at insight.

◦ Solution path and solved-case trace: the completed sequence, stored back to memory as a future analogy source.

• STATE.

◦ The current problem representation: the encoding of states, operators, and the goal test.

◦ A goal stack of pending subgoals held in working memory.

◦ A record of recently visited states and failed attempts, guarding against loops.

◦ The active mental set: the currently loaded strategy and object-function mappings.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Search depth and breadth limits, set by working memory capacity and motivation.

◦ Difference-ordering table: which state differences means-ends analysis treats as most important.

◦ Set strength: how strongly the recent successful procedure is favoured over fresh analysis.

◦ Retrieval similarity weighting: the balance of surface versus structural features in cueing past cases.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Expert pattern recognition of a familiar configuration completes within a few seconds of exposure, as in the chess reproduction studies.

◦ Working memory holds about four chunks, bounding the goal stack and the lookahead horizon.

◦ Deliberate move-by-move search proceeds at roughly one considered step per second or slower in laboratory puzzles.

◦ Incubation benefits appear over breaks ranging from minutes to days, with no single characteristic value.

◦ Duration of the restructuring event itself: REFUSED, because the aha moment is measured only indirectly and the literature offers no agreed value for the switch time.

• MODES.

◦ Search mode versus insight mode: incremental path-finding within a fixed representation versus discrete re-representation, switched when the current space is exhausted or an impasse is detected.

◦ Forward search versus working backward: expanding from the current state versus from the goal, switched by which end of the problem is more constrained.

◦ Novice mode versus expert mode: general-purpose weak-method search versus pattern-indexed retrieval, switched by domain familiarity.

◦ Focused work versus incubation: active search versus offline consolidation and set decay, switched by impasse plus disengagement.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Functional fixedness: stale object-function cache entries blocking novel uses, as in the candle problem.

◦ Mental set: a previously successful procedure pre-empting a simpler available one, as in the water-jar problems.

◦ Hill-climbing traps: refusal to move temporarily away from the goal, stalling on local maxima.

◦ Retrieval failure in analogy: the relevant solved case never surfaces because memory was indexed by surface features.

◦ Combinatorial overwhelm: search abandoned or degraded when the space exceeds the depth the goal stack can support.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Define a function called move tower that takes a count of disks, a source peg, a target peg, and a spare peg.
    If the count is zero, return without doing anything.
    Note the difference between the current state and the goal: the largest of the count disks is not yet on the target peg.
    To reduce that difference, set a subgoal to clear the disks above it by moving count minus one disks from the source peg to the spare peg, using the target peg as spare, by calling move tower on them.
    Print a line saying to move the disk numbered count from the source peg to the target peg.
    Add one to the global move counter.
    Set a subgoal to restore the cleared disks by moving count minus one disks from the spare peg to the target peg, using the source peg as spare, by calling move tower on them.
Create a number variable called move counter with initial value zero.
Call move tower with three disks, source peg A, target peg C, and spare peg B.
Print the move counter as the total number of moves.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a number variable called move_counter with initial value zero.
move_counter = 0

# Define a function called move_tower that takes a disk count, a source peg, a target peg, and a spare peg.
def move_tower(count, source, target, spare):
    # Declare that the function updates the global move counter.
    global move_counter
    # If the count is zero, there is no difference left to reduce, so return.
    if count == 0:
        return
    # Subgoal one: clear the count minus one smaller disks from the source peg onto the spare peg.
    move_tower(count - 1, source, spare, target)
    # Apply the key operator: move the largest remaining disk from the source peg to the target peg.
    print("move disk", count, "from", source, "to", target)
    # Add one to the move counter.
    move_counter = move_counter + 1
    # Subgoal two: bring the count minus one smaller disks from the spare peg onto the target peg.
    move_tower(count - 1, spare, target, source)

# Call move_tower with three disks, source peg A, target peg C, and spare peg B.
move_tower(3, "A", "C", "B")
# Print the move counter as the total number of moves, which should be seven for three disks.
print("total moves:", move_counter)


CHAPTER 40. PLANNING AND SEARCH (PROCESS)

This chapter is about thinking ahead.

Planning is the mental process of working out a sequence of actions in advance in order to reach a goal, before committing to any of them in the real world.

Seen as an engineered system, the planner subscribes to a goal and a world model, simulates candidate action sequences internally, and publishes a plan to the execution system, trading simulation time and working memory for the avoided cost of real-world mistakes.

It matters because it is one of the things that most sets human cognition apart: we can imagine future situations, try out actions in our heads, and choose a course before we act, sparing ourselves the cost of learning only from real mistakes.

The chapter connects planning to the idea of searching through possibilities, and to a modern view that treats planning as a kind of reasoning under uncertainty.


40.1 Planning

Planning, at its core, is search carried out in the imagination.

Rather than trying actions in the world and seeing what happens, a planner explores possible action sequences using an internal model of how the world works, and picks a promising one to actually carry out.

This section looks at how the mind tames the huge number of possible plans, and at the classic laboratory tasks used to study planning.


40.1.1 Hierarchical planning and subgoaling

The number of possible action sequences for any real goal explodes so quickly that considering them all is hopeless.

The mind's main defence is to plan in layers, an approach called hierarchical planning.

Hierarchical planning is the strategy of breaking a large goal into smaller subgoals, and those into smaller steps still, so that you plan at a coarse level first and fill in the details later.

A subgoal is an intermediate target that is not the final goal but that clears the way toward it.

To take a trip abroad, you do not plan every footstep at once; you first set high-level subgoals such as book a flight, pack, and get to the airport, and only later work out the fine details of each.

This layering is enormously powerful because it shrinks an impossible search into a series of small, manageable ones.

In systems terms, the hierarchy is a stack of planners, each taking a goal from the level above as input and publishing subgoals downward as outputs, with abstraction level as the key parameter: high levels search a tiny coarse space cheaply, and only the currently active branch is ever expanded in detail.

Subgoaling has been a central idea in both artificial intelligence planning systems and psychological accounts of problem solving since Newell and Simon, and it links directly to the means-ends analysis described in the previous chapter, where reaching a blocked goal spawns a subgoal to unblock it.

The brain's frontmost regions, the prefrontal cortex, are strongly implicated in holding and managing this hierarchy of goals and subgoals while a plan is carried out.


40.1.2 The classic planning tasks

To study planning in the laboratory, researchers need puzzles that are simple to state but demand real forethought, and a few have become standard tools.

The most famous is the Tower of Hanoi.

The Tower of Hanoi is a puzzle with three pegs and a stack of different-sized disks, where you must move the whole stack to another peg while never placing a larger disk on a smaller one and moving only one disk at a time.

It is prized because solving it efficiently requires you to plan several moves ahead and often to make a move that appears to go backward in order to make progress, which defeats shortsighted strategies.

A close cousin is the Tower of London, designed by the neuropsychologist Tim Shallice in 1982 specifically to measure planning ability in people with brain injuries.

It uses colored beads on pegs and asks the solver to reach a goal arrangement in as few moves as possible, and it is widely used in clinics to assess the planning functions of the frontal lobes.

Other classic tasks include the missionaries-and-cannibals problem and various river-crossing puzzles, where objects must be ferried across in a way that never violates a constraint.

In systems terms, these tasks work as instruments because their state spaces are small and fully known, so the experimenter can log the solver's every move against the optimal path, reading out lookahead depth from pre-move pauses, which typically stretch to several seconds when genuine multi-move planning is under way.

These tasks matter because they let researchers measure how far ahead people look, where their plans break down, and how planning changes with age, expertise, or brain damage.


40.2 Search and simulation

Underneath planning lies a common engine: the mind explores possible futures by simulating them.

This section makes that engine explicit, looking first at planning as a deliberate internal search and then at a newer and more surprising idea that treats planning as a form of probabilistic inference.

In systems terms, the engine's inputs are a current state and a world model, its state is the growing tree of imagined futures, and its output is the first action of the best simulated branch.


40.2.1 Model-based planning as internal search

To plan, you need an internal model of the world.

An internal model is a stored representation of how actions lead to outcomes, a kind of mental map that lets you predict what would happen if you did something, without actually doing it.

Model-based planning is decision making that uses such an internal model to simulate the consequences of possible actions and choose among them, as opposed to just repeating whatever worked before out of habit.

This is often contrasted with model-free control, which learns the value of actions through trial and error and picks the one with the highest stored value, quickly but rigidly.

Model-based planning is flexible: because it reasons from a model, it can adjust immediately when goals or circumstances change, imagining a new route the moment a road is closed.

But that flexibility is expensive, demanding time, attention, and working memory, which is why people often fall back on cheaper habits, especially when tired or rushed.

In systems terms, model-based and model-free control are two controllers publishing action recommendations to one arbiter: the model-free controller answers in a fraction of a second from a cached value table, the model-based controller answers in seconds after tree simulation, and the arbiter weights them by their expected accuracy and the current load.

Searching a model means growing a tree of possibilities in the imagination, considering what might follow each action, then what might follow that, and so on, exactly the kind of search described for problem spaces.

Because the tree grows explosively, the mind must prune it, exploring only the most promising branches to a limited depth, and studies show people adaptively adjust how deeply they plan depending on how much it is worth.


40.2.2 Planning as inference

Planning as inference is a modern and initially surprising idea: that choosing what to do can be recast as a problem of reasoning about probabilities, the same kind of inference the brain uses to interpret its senses.

The trick is to turn the question around.

Instead of asking what sequence of actions has the highest value, you assume that the goal will be achieved and then ask which actions were probably the ones that achieved it, treating good outcomes as evidence and inferring the actions backward.

This may sound like a strange reversal, but it is mathematically powerful, because it lets the brain reuse the very same probabilistic machinery for perceiving, learning, and acting rather than needing a separate special system for planning.

In systems terms, the reformulation swaps a value-maximisation module for a conditioning operation on the existing inference engine: the goal is clamped as observed input, and the posterior distribution over action sequences becomes the published plan.

Researchers have shown that this framework can capture how people solve puzzles like the Tower of Hanoi, including not just their successes but also the characteristic mistakes they make, which a purely optimal planner would not produce.

Planning as inference sits within a broader movement in cognitive science that views the brain as fundamentally an engine of probabilistic inference, connecting planning to Bayesian perception, predictive processing, and active inference discussed elsewhere in this work.

It is an active and promising research area rather than a finished theory, and how literally the brain implements it remains an open question.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Goal specification: the target state or state description, from the motivational and executive systems.

◦ Current state: the present situation as delivered by perception.

◦ Internal world model: stored action-to-outcome mappings used to simulate futures without acting.

◦ Cost and reward estimates: predicted values of outcomes, supplied by the valuation system, used to rank branches.

◦ Load and urgency signals: fatigue, time pressure, and stakes, which set how much simulation the arbiter will fund.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Plan: an ordered sequence of intended actions, delivered to the execution and control systems.

◦ Subgoal stream: intermediate targets published downward through the planning hierarchy.

◦ Predicted outcomes: the simulated end state of the chosen branch, consumed by monitoring to detect plan failure during execution.

◦ Next action: in receding-horizon use, only the first step of the best branch is released, and planning resumes from the new state.

• STATE.

◦ The partially grown search tree or frontier of states under consideration.

◦ A visited-state record preventing circular plans.

◦ The goal and subgoal hierarchy currently being pursued, maintained by prefrontal cortex.

◦ The plan under execution, retained for comparison against unfolding reality.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Planning depth: how many steps ahead simulation runs before evaluation, adaptively tuned to stakes.

◦ Branching allowance: how many candidate actions per state are simulated rather than pruned.

◦ Abstraction level: the coarseness of the state description at each layer of the hierarchy.

◦ Controller weighting: the arbiter's balance between model-based recommendations and model-free habit.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ A single elementary cognitive step, such as one production-rule firing in cognitive architectures, runs on the order of 50 milliseconds, setting the floor cost of each simulated step.

◦ Pre-move planning pauses in tower tasks run to several seconds when multi-move lookahead is engaged.

◦ Habitual model-free responses are emitted within a fraction of a second, which is why habits win under time pressure.

◦ Plan retention during execution spans minutes to hours for everyday plans, supported by prospective memory.

◦ Maximum human planning horizon: REFUSED, because measured lookahead depth varies with task, incentive, and expertise, and the literature supports no single value.

• MODES.

◦ Model-based versus model-free control: deliberate simulation versus cached habit, switched by novelty, stakes, cognitive load, and fatigue.

◦ Coarse planning versus detail filling: searching the abstract layer versus expanding the active branch, switched by hierarchy position.

◦ Plan-then-execute versus receding horizon: committing to a full plan versus replanning after each step, switched by environmental volatility.

◦ Value maximisation versus inference formulation: classical tree search versus goal-clamped probabilistic inference, a modelling-level distinction whose neural reality is unsettled.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Combinatorial explosion: unpruned search exhausting time and working memory, producing shallow or abandoned plans.

◦ Habit capture: the model-free controller overriding a better model-based plan under load, stress, or fatigue.

◦ Stale model errors: simulating with an outdated world model, so the plan fails on contact with changed reality.

◦ Goal-stack loss: frontal lobe damage degrading subgoal maintenance, measured clinically as poor Tower of London performance.

◦ Myopic moves: refusal of temporarily backward steps in tower puzzles, the planning analogue of hill climbing.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a dictionary called model that maps each state name to the list of states reachable from it in one action.
Create a text variable called start with initial value the name of the starting state.
Create a text variable called goal with initial value the name of the goal state.
Create a list called frontier containing one path, which is a list containing only the start state.
Create a set called visited containing the start state.
While the frontier is not empty, repeat the following.
    Remove the first path from the frontier and call it the current path.
    Set the current state to the last state of the current path.
    If the current state equals the goal, print the current path as the plan and stop.
    For each neighbour state reachable from the current state according to the model, do the following.
        If the neighbour is not in the visited set, add the neighbour to the visited set, create a new path by appending the neighbour to the current path, and append the new path to the end of the frontier.
If the loop ends without reaching the goal, print that no plan exists.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a dictionary called model that maps each state to the states reachable from it in one action.
model = {
    # From home you can reach the bus stop or the garage.
    "home": ["bus stop", "garage"],
    # From the bus stop you can reach the station or return home.
    "bus stop": ["station", "home"],
    # From the garage you can reach the road.
    "garage": ["road"],
    # From the road you can reach the station or the shop.
    "road": ["station", "shop"],
    # From the station you can reach the airport.
    "station": ["airport"],
    # From the shop you can only return to the road.
    "shop": ["road"],
    # The airport is the terminal state with no modelled exits.
    "airport": [],
}

# Create a text variable called start with initial value home.
start = "home"
# Create a text variable called goal with initial value airport.
goal = "airport"

# Create a list called frontier containing one path, which contains only the start state.
frontier = [[start]]
# Create a set called visited containing the start state.
visited = {start}
# Create a variable called plan with initial value None, meaning no plan found yet.
plan = None

# While the frontier is not empty, keep expanding the shallowest unexplored path.
while frontier:
    # Remove the first path from the frontier and call it path.
    path = frontier.pop(0)
    # Set the current state to the last state of the path.
    current = path[-1]
    # If the current state equals the goal, store the path as the plan and stop searching.
    if current == goal:
        plan = path
        break
    # For each neighbour state reachable from the current state according to the model, consider extending the path.
    for neighbour in model[current]:
        # If the neighbour has not been visited, mark it visited and enqueue the extended path.
        if neighbour not in visited:
            visited.add(neighbour)
            frontier.append(path + [neighbour])

# If a plan was found, print it as a sequence of states, otherwise report failure.
if plan is not None:
    print("plan:", " then ".join(plan))
else:
    print("no plan exists")

CHAPTER 41. EXECUTIVE FUNCTION AND COGNITIVE CONTROL (PROCESS)

This chapter is about the part of the mind that acts like a manager.

Most of what we do runs on autopilot, but every now and then we have to stop, think, hold a goal in mind, resist a habit, and steer ourselves on purpose.

That steering is what psychologists call executive function, or cognitive control, and it is the subject of this chapter.

Executive function matters because it is the difference between drifting along on old habits and doing the deliberate, flexible, goal-directed thing a situation actually needs.

Viewed as an engineered system, cognitive control is a supervisory layer: it takes goals and performance signals as input, and its output is a bias applied to the ordinary processing pathways underneath it.

We will look at what executive function is made of, at the brain machinery proposed to run it, at how the mind notices when it is getting things wrong, and at why this kind of control feels effortful and gets used sparingly.


41.1 The structure of executive function

Before we can study something, we have to ask what its parts are.

This section asks whether executive function is one single ability or a family of related but distinct abilities, and it lays out the small set of core control processes that researchers keep finding.


41.1.1 The unity and diversity of executive functions

Executive functions are the mental skills you use to control and coordinate your own thinking, rather than the thinking itself.

A useful way to picture the difference is this: solving a puzzle is thinking, but deciding to start, keeping the goal in mind, and stopping yourself from guessing wildly is executive control of that thinking.

The central scientific question is whether this control is one thing or many things.

In the year 2000 the psychologist Akira Miyake and his colleagues published a landmark study that has shaped the field ever since, and it has become the most cited model of executive function.

They used a statistical technique called latent variable analysis, which means they gave many people many different control tasks and then used the pattern of correlations to estimate the small number of hidden abilities that the tasks share.

Their answer was captured in a memorable phrase: unity and diversity.

Unity means the different control abilities are correlated, so a person who is good at one tends to be somewhat good at the others, which suggests a shared common ingredient.

Diversity means those correlations are far from perfect, so the abilities are also separable and are not just one single thing wearing different masks.

In plain terms, executive function is like a small team of related specialists rather than a single all-purpose worker or a crowd of complete strangers.

In systems terms, the two sides of this debate predict different architectures: a pure unity view predicts one shared control module whose capacity limits every control task at once, while a pure diversity view predicts independent modules that can fail separately, and the data support a hybrid with a shared core plus separable components.

It is worth being honest that this picture is still argued over.

Some later researchers have questioned whether the separate factors are truly stable abilities or partly reflect quirks of the specific tasks used, because individual executive tasks are often unreliable when measured one person at a time.

The safest current summary is that unity plus diversity is the best available working model, not a settled and final fact.


41.1.2 Inhibition, updating, and shifting

Miyake and colleagues named three core executive functions, and these three names now appear throughout the field, so they are worth learning carefully.

The first is inhibition, which means deliberately stopping a strong or habitual response so that a more appropriate one can happen instead.

An everyday example of inhibition is stopping yourself from saying the color of the ink when a task asks you to read the word, or holding your tongue when a rude reply leaps to mind.

The second is updating, which means keeping the contents of working memory current by adding new relevant information and dropping information that is no longer useful.

Working memory here means the small amount of information you can actively hold and manipulate in the moment, like keeping a phone number in mind while you look for a pen.

An everyday example of updating is following a running tally, such as keeping track of the latest score in a game as points come in and letting the old score fall away.

The third is shifting, which means flexibly switching between tasks, rules, or mental settings rather than getting stuck in one.

An everyday example of shifting is sorting a deck of cards by color one moment and then, when the rule changes, sorting the same cards by shape, which requires you to release the old rule and adopt a new one.

As mechanisms, the three have clean interface descriptions: inhibition takes a prepotent response signal as input and outputs a suppression command within a few hundred milliseconds; updating takes a stream of new items as input and outputs a refreshed working memory buffer of about four chunks; shifting takes a rule-change signal as input and outputs a reconfigured task set, paying a switch cost of a few hundred milliseconds.

These three, inhibition, updating, and shifting, are the components that the unity and diversity model rests on.

One nuance from the later work is that inhibition, as a separate factor, sometimes fails to stand apart from the shared common ingredient, so some versions of the model treat a general common executive ability plus specific updating and shifting factors.

The plain takeaway is that stopping, refreshing, and switching are three recurring jobs the mind's manager has to do.


41.2 The control architecture

If executive function is a set of jobs, the next question is what kind of machine performs them.

This section describes two influential proposals for how control is arranged: an older boxes-and-arrows model of a supervisory system, and a more mechanistic account grounded in the front of the brain.


41.2.1 The supervisory attentional system

One of the first clear theories of cognitive control was proposed by Donald Norman and Tim Shallice in the 1980s, and it remains a helpful starting picture.

Their idea begins with a simple observation: most routine behaviour can run itself.

They proposed that familiar actions are governed by ready-made routines, sometimes called schemas, which compete with one another and are triggered by the situation through a process they named contention scheduling.

Contention scheduling is just an automatic traffic-control system that lets the most strongly triggered routine win, and for well-practised life it works fine without any oversight.

The problem is that pure automatic triggering fails exactly when life is not routine.

Norman and Shallice argued that a second system is needed for situations that are novel, dangerous, tempting, or that require planning and overcoming a habit.

They called this second system the supervisory attentional system, or SAS.

The supervisory attentional system does not carry out actions itself; instead it biases the competition among routines, boosting the routine that fits the current goal and suppressing the habitual one when the habitual one is wrong.

Read as a system, the design is two layers: a fast contention-scheduling layer whose input is the current situation and whose output is the winning routine, and a slower supervisory layer whose input is the goal and whose output is an additive bias on routine activations, engaged only when routine and goal disagree.

An everyday example is driving a familiar route home when you actually meant to stop at the shop, where autopilot would carry you past the shop and it takes a deliberate supervisory nudge to turn off.

The strength of this model is that it cleanly separates automatic habit from effortful control and explains why patients with damage to the front of the brain can behave normally in routine settings yet fail badly when a situation demands flexible oversight.

Its main limitation, often noted, is that it can feel like a homunculus, meaning a little person in the head who does the supervising, which relabels the mystery of control rather than fully explaining it.

Later theories, in the next sub-section, try to remove that homunculus by giving a more mechanical account.


41.2.2 Guided activation and the role of prefrontal cortex

The prefrontal cortex is the region at the very front of the brain, sitting roughly behind the forehead, and it is the area most consistently linked to cognitive control.

A leading modern theory of how it works was put forward by Earl Miller and Jonathan Cohen in 2001, and it is usually called the guided activation theory.

The core idea is that the prefrontal cortex holds and actively maintains representations of goals and of the rules for reaching them.

These maintained goal representations then send signals to the rest of the brain that bias the flow of activity along the pathways needed to accomplish the goal.

The vivid metaphor its authors use is a set of railroad switches, where the prefrontal cortex does not move the trains but sets the switches so that activity flows down the right tracks toward the goal instead of down the habitual tracks.

This is why the theory is called guided activation: control is achieved by guiding, or biasing, the pattern of activity elsewhere, not by a separate agent grabbing the controls.

In interface terms, the prefrontal controller subscribes to the current goal and to context cues, holds the goal as sustained activity over seconds to minutes, and publishes a continuous bias signal to posterior pathways, so its critical state variable is simply which goal pattern is currently being maintained.

The theory explains the manager's power in terms of ordinary neural machinery, which sidesteps the homunculus problem of the older supervisory model.

It also fits the evidence that the prefrontal cortex is needed most when a task requires holding a goal in mind against distraction or habit, and less when behaviour can run on well-worn routines.

Supporting this, the prefrontal cortex is exactly where the sustained goal-holding activity discussed in the working memory literature is found, so goal maintenance and cognitive control are two faces of the same mechanism.

A fair caution is that the prefrontal cortex is large and does many things, and no single tidy map assigns each executive function to its own patch, so this remains an active and somewhat unsettled area.


41.3 The monitoring of conflict

A good manager needs to know when things are going wrong so it can apply more effort.

This section is about the mind's error and conflict detector, the proposed signal that tells the control system to try harder, and about the lively scientific debate over whether the classic evidence for it really means what it was thought to mean.


41.3.1 Conflict monitoring and the adjustment of control

If control is costly, the brain should not apply it constantly; it should apply more of it right when it is needed.

The conflict monitoring theory, proposed by Matthew Botvinick, Jonathan Cohen, Cameron Carter and colleagues around 2001, offers a mechanism for that timing.

Conflict here means the situation in which two competing responses are activated at once, so that the mind is briefly pulled in two directions.

The theory has two parts working together in a loop.

One brain region, the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, which sits on the inner surface of the frontal lobes, is proposed to act as a detector that monitors how much response conflict is present.

When it senses high conflict, it sends a signal to the prefrontal cortex, which then increases cognitive control on the following moments, for instance by paying closer attention to the relevant information and less to the distraction.

As a feedback loop, the interface is precise: the monitor's input is the momentary co-activation of competing responses, its output is a scalar conflict signal, and the controller integrates that signal across trials, so the loop operates on a trial-to-trial timescale of roughly one to a few seconds.

A classic piece of supporting evidence is the pattern in tasks where distracting information sometimes clashes with the target.

People are typically slower right after a clashing trial in a way that looks like they braced themselves, meaning the previous conflict seems to have triggered a boost in control, which is exactly what the theory predicts.

So the appealing picture is a self-regulating thermostat: conflict is the temperature, the cingulate is the sensor, and the prefrontal cortex turns up the control when the reading is high.


41.3.2 The critique of the congruency-sequence evidence

The neat thermostat story ran into a serious problem, and this sub-section explains it plainly, because it is a good lesson in how a famous finding can be reinterpreted.

The key evidence for conflict monitoring was the congruency sequence effect, sometimes called conflict adaptation, which is the finding that people handle a conflicting trial better when the trial just before it was also conflicting.

The trouble is that the very trial sequences used to show this effect contain other differences that could produce the same result without any conflict monitoring at all.

Two rival explanations became prominent.

The first is feature integration, which says that when a stimulus and a response repeat or partly repeat from one trial to the next, the mind reuses a stored trace, and this reuse alone speeds or slows responses in a pattern that mimics conflict adaptation.

The second is contingency learning, which says people quietly learn which stimuli tend to go with which responses, and these learned statistical associations can produce the same pattern without any moment-to-moment adjustment of control.

In systems terms the accounts predict different mechanisms behind the same behaviour: conflict monitoring predicts an online gain adjustment driven by the previous trial's conflict signal, while the associative accounts predict a memory lookup driven by repeated stimulus and response features, with no control gain changing at all.

When researchers designed careful experiments to strip out these confounds, the pure conflict-driven effect often shrank, and some reviews concluded that much of the classic evidence could be explained away.

An updated review of the literature argued that the evidence for genuine conflict monitoring and adaptation is much weaker than it first appeared once these confounds are controlled.

The honest current state is a genuine and unresolved dispute.

Some carefully controlled studies still find a residual effect that looks like real control adjustment, while others do not, and the debate between the conflict-monitoring account and the associative-learning accounts remains open.

The broader lesson for a newcomer is important: an attractive brain-based story can rest on evidence that turns out to have simpler explanations, and good science means testing those simpler alternatives before believing the grand one.


41.4 The cost of control

Controlling yourself feels like work, and you cannot do it all day without tiring.

This section takes that everyday feeling seriously and treats the effort of control as a real cost that the mind budgets and spends carefully.


41.4.1 Switch costs and the effort of control

One of the cleanest laboratory demonstrations that control is costly is the switch cost.

A switch cost is the extra time and extra errors people show when they have to change from one task to another compared with repeating the same task.

For example, if you alternate between adding and subtracting numbers, you are reliably slower on the trials where the operation just changed than on the trials where it stayed the same.

That extra slowness is a measurable price paid for reconfiguring the mind from one set of rules to another, and it is direct evidence that shifting, one of the core executive functions, does not come for free.

Measured as a system latency, switch costs are typically a few hundred milliseconds, and even with time to prepare a residual cost of very roughly 100 to 200 milliseconds commonly remains, which is the signature of a reconfiguration step that cannot be fully completed in advance.

Part of the switch cost seems to come from actively setting up the new task, and part seems to come from the lingering pull of the old task that has to be overcome, and researchers still debate the exact mix.

More broadly, cognitive control is experienced as effortful, and people tend to avoid it when they can, a tendency sometimes described as a preference for the least mentally taxing option.

This raises a natural question: if control is so useful, why does the mind treat it as expensive and ration it, and the next sub-section gives the leading answer.


41.4.2 The expected value of control

The expected value of control is a theory that treats the mind's manager as an economist deciding whether a given act of control is worth its cost.

It was proposed by Amitai Shenhav, Matthew Botvinick, and Jonathan Cohen in 2013, and it tries to unify the many roles of the anterior cingulate cortex under a single idea.

The theory says the control system weighs three things before it commits effort.

The first is the payoff it expects to gain if it applies control and succeeds.

The second is how much control would have to be invested to get that payoff.

The third is the cost of the mental effort itself, since effort is treated as intrinsically aversive, meaning the mind dislikes spending it.

Putting these together gives the expected value of control, and the proposal is that the brain allocates control only when the expected benefit outweighs the effort cost, and it also chooses which specific control to apply and how intensely.

As a mechanism, this is a resource allocator: its inputs are estimated payoff, required control intensity, and effort cost, its output is the identity and intensity of the control signal to deploy, and it re-evaluates on roughly the timescale of tasks and decisions, from seconds upward.

This elegantly explains everyday facts, such as why you can summon fierce concentration for a high-stakes exam but not for a boring chore, since the expected payoff changes the calculation even when the task difficulty does not.

It also reframes so-called laziness or low motivation not as a simple failure but sometimes as a reasonable decision that the effort was not worth the expected reward.

A useful caution is that this is a normative theory, meaning it describes what an ideally rational controller should do, and real people only approximate it, so it is best read as a principled yardstick rather than a literal description of every choice.

Still, it ties this whole chapter together: control is a limited, costly, valuable resource, and much of executive function is the ongoing job of spending it wisely.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Current goal representation, as an actively maintained pattern, from working memory and motivational systems.

◦ Task context cues, as perceptual signals indicating which rules apply, from the perception systems.

◦ Response conflict signal, as a scalar co-activation measure, from the response system via the anterior cingulate monitor.

◦ Error and feedback signals, as discrete outcome events, from action monitoring and the environment.

◦ Estimated payoff and effort cost, as value signals, from reward and motivation systems.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Top-down bias signals, as continuous gain adjustments on task-relevant pathways, consumed by perception, memory, and action systems.

◦ Task-set configuration commands, as discrete rule selections, consumed by response selection.

◦ Inhibition commands, as suppression signals on prepotent responses, consumed by the motor system.

◦ Control intensity setting, as a scalar gain, consumed by the controller's own next cycle.

• STATE.

◦ The currently maintained goal and rule set.

◦ The current control intensity or gain level.

◦ A running estimate of recent conflict and error rate.

◦ The identity of the previously active task set, whose lingering trace produces switch costs.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Baseline control gain and its upper bound.

◦ Conflict-to-control gain, meaning how strongly a unit of conflict raises control.

◦ Control decay rate back toward baseline when conflict is absent.

◦ Effort cost weight in the expected value of control computation.

◦ Working memory capacity for goals, about four chunks.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Switch cost, a few hundred milliseconds, with a residual component of very roughly 100 to 200 milliseconds after preparation.

◦ Conflict-driven control adjustment, expressed on the next trial, roughly one to a few seconds later.

◦ Error-related monitoring signal, peaking within about 100 milliseconds of an error response.

◦ Goal maintenance duration, seconds to minutes of sustained activity, refreshed as needed.

◦ Long-term recalibration of effort allocation, REFUSED, because the literature gives no single characteristic value for how quickly effort policies adapt across days.

• MODES.

◦ Automatic mode, in which contention scheduling lets the strongest routine run; this is the default when situation and goal agree.

◦ Controlled mode, in which the supervisory system biases processing; triggered by novelty, danger, temptation, conflict, or error.

◦ Proactive control, in which the goal is maintained in advance of the stimulus; favoured when incentives are high and working memory is available.

◦ Reactive control, in which control is recruited only after conflict is detected; favoured when maintenance is too costly, and the trigger for switching between proactive and reactive is the expected value of sustained maintenance.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Goal neglect and capture errors, where a habit runs despite a contrary intention, as in driving past the shop on the familiar route home.

◦ Perseveration, meaning failure to shift away from an old rule, classically seen after prefrontal damage.

◦ Distractibility and loss of goal maintenance under load or stress.

◦ Overconservative control, where effort is spent on control that the task does not need.

◦ Apparent laziness, where a rational but miscalibrated cost-benefit computation withholds control that the situation actually warranted.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called control with initial value zero point two.
Create a number variable called conflict gain with initial value zero point five.
Create a number variable called decay with initial value zero point one.
Create an empty list called reaction times.
For each trial in the trial list, do the following.
    Get the trial type of the current trial, which is either congruent or incongruent.
    If the trial type is incongruent, set a number variable called conflict to one minus control.
    Otherwise, set conflict to zero.
    Calculate the reaction time as a base time of four hundred, plus conflict times three hundred, plus random noise.
    Append the reaction time to the reaction times list.
    Increase control by conflict gain times conflict.
    Decrease control by decay times control.
    If control is greater than one, set control to one.
Return the reaction times list.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Load the random module for noise generation.
import random

# Define a function that simulates a conflict monitoring control loop over a list of trials.
def conflict_monitoring_loop(trials):
    # Create a number variable called control with initial value zero point two.
    control = 0.2
    # Create a number variable called conflict_gain with initial value zero point five.
    conflict_gain = 0.5
    # Create a number variable called decay with initial value zero point one.
    decay = 0.1
    # Create an empty list called results.
    results = []
    # For each trial type in the trial list, do the following.
    for trial_type in trials:
        # If the trial is incongruent, set conflict to one minus the current control level.
        if trial_type == "incongruent":
            # Higher control leaves less residual conflict.
            conflict = 1.0 - control
        # Otherwise, set conflict to zero because the responses do not compete.
        else:
            # Congruent trials produce no response conflict.
            conflict = 0.0
        # Calculate the reaction time as four hundred plus conflict times three hundred plus gaussian noise.
        rt = 400.0 + conflict * 300.0 + random.gauss(0.0, 20.0)
        # Append the trial type, the control level, and the reaction time to the results list.
        results.append((trial_type, round(control, 3), round(rt, 1)))
        # Increase control by conflict_gain times conflict, so conflict raises control on later trials.
        control = control + conflict_gain * conflict
        # Decrease control by decay times control, so control relaxes toward baseline.
        control = control - decay * control
        # If control is greater than one, set control to one.
        control = min(control, 1.0)
    # Return the results list.
    return results

# Create a trial list that alternates runs of congruent and incongruent trials.
trial_list = ["congruent"] * 3 + ["incongruent"] * 3 + ["congruent"] * 2 + ["incongruent"] * 2
# Run the simulation on the trial list.
for row in conflict_monitoring_loop(trial_list):
    # Print each trial's type, control level before the trial, and reaction time.
    print(row)




================================================================================

PART TEN. METACOGNITION, CONSCIOUSNESS, AND AWARENESS

================================================================================

CHAPTER 42. METACOGNITION, CONFIDENCE, AND MONITORING (PROCESS)

This chapter is about thinking about your own thinking.

Metacognition is the mind's ability to watch and judge its own mental states, for example knowing that you know an answer, sensing that you have forgotten a name, or feeling unsure whether you studied enough.

It matters enormously because a mind that can judge its own reliability can decide when to trust itself, when to check again, when to keep studying, and when to ask for help.

As a system, metacognition is a second-order process: its inputs are signals about first-order cognition, and its outputs are confidence estimates and control commands that redirect that cognition.

We will look at how metacognition is structured, at how it applies to memory in particular, at how confidence is measured scientifically, and at how monitoring turns into the control of study and action, including the crucial ability to hold back when unsure.


42.1 The structure of metacognition

This section lays out the basic anatomy of metacognition: the kinds of knowledge and regulation it involves, and the simple two-level picture that organises the whole field.


42.1.1 Metacognitive knowledge and metacognitive regulation

The term metacognition was popularised by the developmental psychologist John Flavell in the 1970s, and it literally means cognition about cognition.

It is standard to split metacognition into two broad parts, and the split is easy to grasp.

The first part is metacognitive knowledge, which is what you know about how minds and memory work, including your own.

Metacognitive knowledge includes beliefs like knowing that you personally remember faces better than names, or that spreading study out over several days beats cramming, or that noisy rooms hurt your concentration.

The second part is metacognitive regulation, which is what you actually do to manage your thinking as it happens.

Metacognitive regulation includes planning how to approach a task, monitoring how well it is going, and adjusting your strategy when it is going badly.

A simple way to hold the two apart is that knowledge is what you believe about thinking, while regulation is the live steering of thinking in the moment.

In systems language, knowledge is long-term stored state that changes slowly over weeks and years, while regulation is a fast online loop operating within a task, taking moment-to-moment monitoring signals as input and producing strategy adjustments as output within seconds.

The two are connected, because accurate knowledge helps you regulate well, but they can also come apart, since someone may know the right strategy in the abstract yet fail to use it under pressure.


42.1.2 The meta-level and object-level framework

The most influential single framework for metacognition was set out by Thomas Nelson and Louis Narens in 1990, and it gives the whole field a clean skeleton.

They proposed that a mind can be divided into two levels.

The object level is the part that does the basic work of perceiving, learning, and remembering, that is, the ordinary cognition.

The meta-level is a part that holds a model of the object level, meaning a rough internal picture of what the object level is doing and how well.

Two channels of information connect the levels, and this is the heart of the idea.

Monitoring is the flow of information upward, from the object level to the meta-level, telling the meta-level how well things are going, for example a feeling that an answer is shaky.

Control is the flow of information downward, from the meta-level to the object level, changing what the object level does, for example a decision to slow down and re-read.

This is exactly the architecture engineers call a supervisory control loop: a plant, meaning the object level, a model-holding supervisor, meaning the meta-level, an upward sensor channel, and a downward command channel.

A powerful insight from this framework is that monitoring and control can dissociate, meaning they do not always work together.

A system might monitor without controlling, receiving the signal that it is unsure but doing nothing about it, or it might control without monitoring, applying a blanket rule without knowing whether it is right.

This two-level picture with upward monitoring and downward control has proven so useful that it is now applied well beyond human memory, including to attempts to give artificial systems the ability to judge their own reliability.


42.2 Metamemory

Metamemory is metacognition aimed specifically at memory, that is, judging what you know, what you have learned, and what you will be able to recall later.

This section covers the main memory judgments people make and the leading account of where those judgments come from.


42.2.1 Judgments of learning and feeling of knowing

Two judgments have been studied more than any others, and both are things you have surely experienced.

A judgment of learning is a prediction, made while or just after studying something, about how likely you are to remember it on a later test.

For instance, after reading a pair of foreign words you might feel confident you will recall them tomorrow, and that feeling is a judgment of learning.

A feeling of knowing is a different judgment, made when you cannot recall something right now, about whether you would recognise the answer or eventually retrieve it.

The classic case is a fact on the tip of your tongue, where you cannot produce the name but feel certain you know it and would spot it in a list.

Researchers care about these judgments because they can be compared against what the person actually remembers later, which lets us measure how accurate a person's self-knowledge really is.

Each judgment is a small predictor module: its input is whatever evidence is available at judgment time, its output is a probability-like rating, and its quality is scored later against the actual test outcome.

One reliable and initially surprising finding concerns timing.

Judgments of learning made after a delay are usually more accurate than those made immediately after studying, a result known as the delayed judgment of learning effect.

The reason is that an immediate judgment can lean on information that is only fleetingly available right after study, which is misleading, whereas a delayed judgment forces you to actually try to retrieve the item, and how that retrieval goes is a much better guide to later memory.

The timescale matters here: the misleading surface information fades within seconds to minutes, so a judgment made minutes or longer after study is forced to sample the durable trace, which is the one that predicts the later test.


42.2.2 The cue-utilisation account of monitoring

A natural but wrong assumption is that when you judge your own memory, you somehow read off the true strength of the memory directly, like checking a fuel gauge.

The cue-utilisation account, developed by Asher Koriat in 1997, argues that this is not how it works, and it is the leading theory of where memory judgments come from.

Koriat's central claim is that people have no direct access to the strength or durability of their memory traces.

Instead, they infer how well they know something by noticing and using various cues, which are indirect clues that happen to be available.

Koriat grouped these cues into three kinds.

Intrinsic cues are features of the material itself, such as how easy or hard a set of words looks to learn.

Extrinsic cues are features of the study situation, such as how many times you have gone over the material or the conditions you studied under.

Mnemonic cues, sometimes called internal cues, are signals from your own mind during the attempt, such as how quickly and fluently an answer comes to you.

In systems terms this makes the monitor an inference engine rather than a sensor: its inputs are cues correlated with memory strength, its output is an estimated strength, and its accuracy is bounded by how well those cues actually correlate with the hidden variable.

Because judgments are built from cues rather than read directly from memory, they can be systematically fooled.

For example, information that feels fluent and easy in the moment can create a false sense of having learned it, which is why students often overestimate how well they know material they have merely re-read.

This account is important because it explains both when self-monitoring is accurate and when it reliably misleads us, and the delayed judgment of learning effect from the previous sub-section fits it neatly, since a delay changes which cues are available to use.


42.3 Confidence and metacognitive sensitivity

Confidence is the feeling of being right, and this section explains how scientists have learned to measure the quality of that feeling rigorously, separating a good self-monitor from a merely confident or merely accurate person.


42.3.1 Type-one and type-two performance

To measure metacognition precisely, researchers separate two layers of performance, and the labels type one and type two are worth learning.

Type-one performance is how well you do the actual task, for example whether you correctly detect a faint signal or answer a question right.

Type-two performance is how well your confidence tracks your type-one performance, that is, whether you feel more confident when you are actually correct and less confident when you are actually wrong.

The key point is that these two can come apart.

A person could be very accurate at the task yet have poor insight, feeling equally confident whether right or wrong, or a person could be less accurate yet have excellent insight, reliably knowing which of their answers to trust.

Good metacognition is precisely good type-two performance: confidence that discriminates your correct responses from your incorrect ones.

In interface terms, the type-one channel outputs a decision, the type-two channel outputs a confidence rating attached to that decision usually within a second or so of it, and the two channels can be scored independently, which is what lets researchers study self-knowledge as its own ability rather than confusing it with plain skill at the task.


42.3.2 Calibration, resolution, and the measurement of insight

Once we treat confidence as measurable, we can ask in what specific ways it can be good or bad, and there are two main qualities to distinguish.

Calibration is whether your confidence matches your actual accuracy on average.

A well-calibrated person who says they are seventy percent sure is right about seventy percent of the time, whereas a poorly calibrated person might be right only fifty percent of the time when they say seventy, which is overconfidence.

Resolution, also called metacognitive sensitivity, is whether your confidence distinguishes your correct answers from your incorrect ones on a case-by-case basis.

Good resolution means your high-confidence answers really are more often correct than your low-confidence ones, so your confidence carries useful information about which specific judgments to trust.

Calibration and resolution are different: you could be perfectly calibrated on average yet have zero resolution if you give the same confidence to everything, so both matter.

As measurements, calibration compares the mean of the confidence output stream to the mean of the accuracy stream, while resolution asks whether the confidence output covaries with accuracy trial by trial, and the code sample at the end of this chapter computes a simple version of each.

A serious measurement problem is that naive measures of resolution get contaminated by two nuisances: how good the person is at the task itself, and their general tendency to be cautious or bold in reporting confidence, which is called response bias.

To solve this, Brian Maniscalco and Hakwan Lau in 2012 introduced a measure called meta-d-prime, built within signal detection theory, which is a mathematical framework for separating true sensitivity from mere bias.

Meta-d-prime estimates how much of the information the person had was actually used by their confidence judgments, and by comparing it to their raw task ability it yields a purer index of metacognitive efficiency that is not fooled by how cautious or how skilled the person is.

The practical upshot for a beginner is that measuring insight well is genuinely hard, and modern methods exist precisely to avoid mistaking a bold guesser, or simply a good performer, for a person with real self-knowledge.


42.4 The control side of metacognition

Monitoring is only half the story; the point of watching your own mind is to do something with what you learn.

This section covers how metacognitive monitoring feeds back into action, from deciding what to study to the deep ability to withhold a response when you are not sure.


42.4.1 The allocation of study and effort

The clearest place to see monitoring turn into control is studying.

When you study, you are constantly making small decisions about where to put your effort, and metacognition is what guides those decisions.

The general finding is that people use their sense of how well they know each item to decide what to work on next, spending more time on material that feels unlearned and less on material that feels mastered.

This links directly back to the Nelson and Narens framework, where monitoring, such as a low judgment of learning for a hard item, drives control, such as choosing to restudy that item.

As a scheduler, the mechanism takes per-item learning estimates as input and outputs a study-time allocation, updating the allocation each time an item is revisited, on a timescale of seconds per decision.

There is an interesting wrinkle, though, because how people allocate effort depends on the situation and on their goals.

When time is short or material is very hard, people sometimes sensibly abandon the hardest items and pour effort into the ones that are still within reach, rather than throwing good time after lost causes.

The broad and practical lesson is that accurate monitoring is valuable mainly because it enables good control, and a student whose sense of their own learning is miscalibrated will misallocate study time even if they work hard.


42.4.2 Metacognition as the mechanism by which a system declines to act

The deepest function of metacognition may be a simple and powerful one: knowing when not to act.

An intelligent system that could not tell its reliable judgments from its unreliable ones would have to treat every hunch as equally trustworthy, which is dangerous.

Metacognition provides the brake, because a confidence signal that is low can be used to withhold a response, to gather more evidence, to defer to someone else, or to say honestly that you do not know.

This is often described in terms of an optional response, where a person or system is allowed to opt out of answering when its own monitoring says it is likely to be wrong, and good metacognition shows up as opting out mostly on the items it would have gotten wrong.

Mechanically, this is a threshold gate on the output channel: the confidence signal is compared to a criterion, and responses below the criterion are routed to withholding, evidence gathering, or deferral instead of action.

The ability to decline is what turns raw competence into trustworthy behaviour, since being right when confident and quiet when unsure is far more useful than being loudly certain all the time.

This point reaches well beyond human psychology and into artificial intelligence, where a growing concern is building systems that can reliably judge and report the limits of their own knowledge rather than answering everything with the same false confidence.

For a mind of any kind, then, metacognition is the faculty that makes self-restraint and honest uncertainty possible, which is why it closes this chapter and opens naturally onto the questions of awareness that follow.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Object-level performance signals, such as retrieval fluency, response speed, and partial recall, from the perception, memory, and decision systems.

◦ Cues about the material and situation, such as apparent difficulty and number of study repetitions, from perception and episodic memory.

◦ Decision evidence traces, meaning the strength of the evidence behind each first-order response, from the decision system.

◦ Task goals and deadlines, from the executive control system.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Confidence ratings and probability-like judgments, consumed by the decision system, by other people, and by the experimenter.

◦ Judgments of learning and feelings of knowing, consumed by the study-allocation controller.

◦ Control commands, such as restudy this item, slow down, gather more evidence, or withhold the response, consumed by the object level.

◦ Opt-out decisions, consumed by the response system as a declined answer or an honest do-not-know.

• STATE.

◦ The meta-level model of the object level, meaning the current estimate of how well each task or item is going.

◦ Stored metacognitive knowledge about one's own strengths, weaknesses, and strategies.

◦ The current confidence criterion for responding versus declining.

◦ A record of recent judgments and outcomes used to recalibrate.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ The confidence criterion, meaning how sure the system must be before acting.

◦ Cue weights, meaning how heavily intrinsic, extrinsic, and mnemonic cues count in a judgment.

◦ Metacognitive efficiency, meaning how much of the available first-order evidence the confidence channel actually uses.

◦ Study-time allocation policy, from spend effort on the hardest items to triage toward the reachable ones.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Confidence report latency, typically well under one second after the first-order decision.

◦ The misleading immediate-judgment window after study, seconds to minutes, which the delayed judgment of learning effect exploits by waiting beyond it.

◦ Study-allocation decisions, made in seconds per item during self-paced learning.

◦ Recalibration of metacognitive knowledge, REFUSED, because the literature reports no single characteristic timescale for how quickly self-knowledge updates from feedback.

• MODES.

◦ Monitoring-dominant mode, where the meta-level passively tracks the object level; the default during fluent performance.

◦ Control-engaged mode, where low confidence or detected trouble triggers restudy, slowing, or strategy change.

◦ Respond mode versus opt-out mode, switched by the confidence criterion: above criterion the system answers, below it the system declines or defers.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Overconfidence, especially from fluency illusions, as when re-read material feels learned but is not.

◦ Underconfidence and needless checking, where a sound object level is not trusted.

◦ Zero resolution, where confidence no longer distinguishes right from wrong answers, making the monitor useless even if calibrated on average.

◦ Monitoring-control dissociation, where the system feels unsure yet acts anyway, or applies blanket control without insight.

◦ Clinical breakdowns of insight, as in anosognosia, the unawareness of one's own deficit.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called total confidence with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called total accuracy with initial value zero.
For each trial in the trial list, add the trial confidence to total confidence and add the trial accuracy to total accuracy.
Calculate the calibration gap as total confidence divided by the trial count, minus total accuracy divided by the trial count.
Create a number variable called concordant with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called comparisons with initial value zero.
For each pair made of one correct trial and one incorrect trial, do the following.
    Add one to comparisons.
    If the correct trial's confidence is greater than the incorrect trial's confidence, add one to concordant.
    If the two confidences are equal, add zero point five to concordant.
Calculate the sensitivity as concordant divided by comparisons.
Return the calibration gap and the sensitivity.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Define a function that scores confidence calibration and metacognitive sensitivity.
def score_metacognition(trials):
    # Calculate the mean confidence across all trials.
    mean_conf = sum(conf for conf, correct in trials) / len(trials)
    # Calculate the mean accuracy across all trials.
    mean_acc = sum(correct for conf, correct in trials) / len(trials)
    # Calculate the calibration gap as mean confidence minus mean accuracy.
    calibration_gap = mean_conf - mean_acc
    # Create a list of the confidences given on correct trials.
    conf_correct = [conf for conf, correct in trials if correct == 1]
    # Create a list of the confidences given on incorrect trials.
    conf_wrong = [conf for conf, correct in trials if correct == 0]
    # Create a number variable called concordant with initial value zero.
    concordant = 0.0
    # Create a number variable called comparisons with initial value zero.
    comparisons = 0.0
    # For each confidence from a correct trial, do the following.
    for c_hit in conf_correct:
        # For each confidence from an incorrect trial, do the following.
        for c_miss in conf_wrong:
            # Add one to the comparison count.
            comparisons = comparisons + 1.0
            # If the correct trial's confidence is higher, count the pair as concordant.
            if c_hit > c_miss:
                # Add one to the concordant count.
                concordant = concordant + 1.0
            # If the two confidences are tied, count the pair as half concordant.
            elif c_hit == c_miss:
                # Add zero point five to the concordant count.
                concordant = concordant + 0.5
    # Calculate the sensitivity as the share of concordant pairs, or zero point five if no pairs exist.
    sensitivity = concordant / comparisons if comparisons > 0 else 0.5
    # Return the calibration gap and the sensitivity.
    return calibration_gap, sensitivity

# Create a small data set of trials as pairs of confidence and correctness.
data = [(0.9, 1), (0.8, 1), (0.7, 1), (0.9, 0), (0.6, 1), (0.4, 0), (0.3, 0), (0.7, 0), (0.8, 1), (0.5, 0)]
# Score the data set.
gap, sens = score_metacognition(data)
# Print the calibration gap, where positive means overconfidence.
print("calibration gap:", round(gap, 3))
# Print the sensitivity, where zero point five means no insight and one means perfect insight.
print("sensitivity:", round(sens, 3))


CHAPTER 43. AUTOMATICITY AND UNCONSCIOUS PROCESSING (PROCESS)

This chapter is about how much of the mind runs by itself, out of sight of awareness.

A great deal of skilled behaviour, from reading a word to riding a bicycle, happens fast, effortlessly, and without conscious guidance, and a great deal of information gets processed without our ever noticing it.

This matters because it shows that consciousness is only the tip of a very large iceberg, and it forces us to ask what awareness actually adds.

In systems terms, the chapter contrasts two processing regimes, a slow serial controlled pipeline and a fast parallel automatic one, and examines what practice does to move a task from the first regime to the second.

We will look at the difference between automatic and controlled processing, at the evidence for genuinely unconscious perception and thought, and at the tricky business of measuring what a person is and is not aware of.


43.1 Automatic and controlled processing

This section draws the basic contrast between mental processes that run on their own and those that need effortful supervision, and describes how the first kind grows out of the second through practice.


43.1.1 The criteria of automaticity

An automatic process is one that runs quickly and by itself, without needing much attention or conscious effort.

A controlled process, by contrast, is slow, effortful, deliberate, and demands the limited resource of attention.

The classic experiments distinguishing the two were done by Walter Schneider and Richard Shiffrin in 1977, and they gave the field a working checklist of what automaticity means.

By their classical account, a process counts as automatic to the degree that it has a cluster of features.

It is fast and does not draw on limited attentional capacity, so it can run even while you are busy with something else.

It runs in parallel, meaning several automatic processes can happen at once without slowing each other much.

It is hard to stop or ignore, so it tends to run whether or not you want it to.

And it can operate without conscious awareness or deliberate intention.

Stated as system properties, an automatic process has a flat load curve, meaning its response time barely grows as items are added, while a controlled process has a rising load curve, gaining time for every extra item it must handle serially.

A famous illustration is skilled reading, since a fluent reader cannot look at a familiar word in their own language and not read it, which is why the meaning of the word interferes when you are asked to name the ink colour instead.

A useful caution from modern work is that these features do not always come as a neat all-or-none package.

A process can be automatic in some respects, such as being fast and effortless, while still being partly controllable, so researchers now often speak of degrees and dimensions of automaticity rather than a hard line.


43.1.2 The development of automaticity with practice

Automaticity is mostly not something we are born with; it is something we build through repetition.

The key finding from Schneider and Shiffrin was that automatic detection develops with consistent practice, meaning that when the same stimulus always calls for the same response, that pairing gradually becomes automatic.

Consistency is the crucial ingredient.

When the mapping from stimulus to response is consistent across many trials, performance speeds up, becomes effortless, and stops draining attention, which is the birth of an automatic process.

When the mapping keeps changing, so that a stimulus is sometimes a target and sometimes not, this automatisation does not happen, and the task stays effortful and controlled no matter how much you practise.

As a mechanism, practice with a consistent mapping gradually compiles a lookup: the input is the stimulus, the output is the response, the per-item serial step is bypassed, and the speedup follows the well-documented power law of practice, with large early gains that shrink over hundreds to thousands of trials.

This explains a familiar arc of learning a skill.

A beginning driver must consciously think about every action, using slow controlled processing, but after enough consistent practice the routine parts become automatic and free up attention for conversation or planning the route.

The general principle is that practice moves a task from the effortful controlled mode into the fast automatic mode, which is enormously useful but also has a cost, since automatic habits can be triggered at the wrong time and are hard to suppress, connecting back to the need for inhibition discussed in the executive function chapter.


43.2 The unconscious

This section takes up the stronger claim that information can be perceived and can influence us even when we are not aware of it at all, and it treats this claim with the care it deserves, because it has a history of overstatement.


43.2.1 Subliminal perception and priming

Subliminal perception means perceiving a stimulus that is too weak, too brief, or too hidden to be consciously seen, yet which still affects the mind.

The main laboratory tool for studying it is priming, which means showing one stimulus and measuring how it changes the response to a later one.

In a typical masked priming experiment, a word is flashed very briefly and then immediately covered by a jumble of symbols called a mask, so that the person reports seeing nothing, yet that hidden word can still speed up the recognition of a related word afterward.

The timing here is tight and worth stating: masked primes are typically shown for only tens of milliseconds, roughly 30 to 50 milliseconds in many studies, and the measured effect is a response speedup of a few tens of milliseconds on the following target.

Work by Stanislas Dehaene and others has shown that such masked words can be processed surprisingly deeply, including at the level of meaning, and not merely as visual shapes.

This is genuinely important evidence that a good deal of processing happens before and without consciousness.

However, this is an area where healthy scepticism is essential, and the science has become more careful over time.

A recurring problem is that experiments meant to hide a stimulus completely often fail to do so, and participants may have had a faint, above-chance awareness that was not properly measured.

Recent meta-analyses of subliminal linguistic priming have found evidence of weak statistical power and of residual awareness in many classic studies, which means some famous subliminal effects are smaller or less certain than they were once claimed to be.

The balanced conclusion is that unconscious processing of simple, well-learned stimuli is real, but that dramatic claims about the unconscious mind absorbing complex hidden messages are not well supported, and measuring true unawareness is the hard part.


43.2.2 Implicit cognition and the dissociations that reveal it

Implicit cognition refers to mental processes that influence our thoughts, feelings, and actions without our being aware of the process or sometimes even of its results.

The main way researchers argue that something is implicit is by finding a dissociation, which means a gap between two measures.

A dissociation occurs when a person shows an effect on one measure, such as behaving as if they learned something, while showing nothing on another measure, such as being unable to report or explain what they learned.

In systems language, a dissociation is evidence that a signal reached one output channel, behaviour, while never reaching another output channel, verbal report, which implies at least two separable pathways carrying the information.

A well-known example comes from amnesia, where patients with severe memory loss can improve on a skill or show priming from earlier exposure while sincerely denying any memory of the training, revealing that the influence is real but the awareness of it is absent.

Similar dissociations appear in healthy people in tasks where they pick up on a hidden regularity and use it to respond faster while being unable to state what the regularity was.

These dissociations are the central evidence that memory and learning are not single conscious things but include processes that operate below awareness.

A fair caution, echoing the previous sub-section, is that a dissociation is only convincing if the awareness measure is sensitive enough, because a weak test of awareness can make ordinary conscious knowledge look unconscious, so the strength of these claims depends heavily on how carefully awareness is assessed.


43.3 The measurement of awareness

Everything in this chapter depends on being able to tell what someone is and is not aware of, and that turns out to be one of the thorniest problems in the field, which this section confronts directly.


43.3.1 Objective and subjective thresholds

To claim that something was processed unconsciously, you must define the line below which a stimulus counts as unseen, and there are two very different ways to draw that line.

An objective threshold is defined by performance: a stimulus is treated as unconscious only if the person cannot do better than chance at any forced choice about it, for example cannot guess above chance whether a word was present.

A subjective threshold is defined by report: a stimulus is treated as unconscious if the person says they did not see it and reports no experience of it, even if their behaviour shows some sensitivity.

These two thresholds usually do not sit in the same place, and the gap between them is scientifically revealing.

People often can make above-chance forced-choice guesses about stimuli they sincerely report not seeing, which means that by the subjective criterion the stimulus is unconscious while by the objective criterion it is not.

In measurement terms, the two thresholds are two different acceptance tests on the same input channel, one reading the behavioural output and one reading the report output, and because the report channel is the stricter bottleneck the subjective threshold sits at a higher stimulus strength than the objective one.

Which threshold you choose changes your conclusions dramatically, because the loose subjective criterion makes unconscious perception look powerful and common, while the strict objective criterion makes it look rarer and weaker.

There is no fully agreed answer about which threshold is correct, and this choice is one of the main reasons that estimates of how much the unconscious can do vary so widely between researchers.


43.3.2 The process-dissociation procedure and the no-report paradigms

Because simple awareness measures are so slippery, researchers have developed cleverer methods to separate conscious from unconscious influences, and two are especially important.

The first is the process-dissociation procedure, introduced by Larry Jacoby in 1991.

Its clever idea is to set conscious and unconscious influences against each other by giving people two kinds of instruction: sometimes to use a memory and sometimes deliberately to avoid using it.

If a memory keeps influencing behaviour even when the person is trying hard not to use it, that influence must be automatic and unconscious rather than deliberately controlled, and by comparing the two conditions the method estimates the size of the conscious and the unconscious contributions separately rather than assuming a task is purely one or the other.

As a measurement design, it treats behaviour as the sum of two signal sources and uses an inclusion condition and an exclusion condition as two equations that let the two source strengths be solved for separately.

The second development is the family of no-report paradigms, which come mostly from consciousness research.

The problem they solve is that asking someone to report what they experienced adds extra mental steps, such as making a decision and pressing a button, and those steps have their own brain activity that can be mistaken for the brain activity of consciousness itself.

No-report paradigms try to infer what a person is experiencing without asking them to report it, for instance by using eye movements or physiological signals that naturally track perception, so that the measured brain activity reflects the experience more purely.

This matters because some brain activity once thought to be the signature of consciousness, particularly in the prefrontal cortex, turned out to shrink when the report requirement was removed, suggesting it reflected the act of reporting rather than the experience.

At the same time, this fix is not perfect, since a completely report-free method makes it harder to be sure what the person actually experienced, so the field is still working out how to have it both ways, which leads naturally into the study of consciousness itself.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Stimulus features, including very brief or masked stimuli, from the sensory systems.

◦ Stimulus-to-response mapping history, meaning how consistently a stimulus has called for the same response, from procedural learning.

◦ Attention allocation, as a limited-capacity resource signal, from the attention system, required by controlled processing and largely bypassed by automatic processing.

◦ Task instructions and intentions, from the executive control system.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Fast automatic responses and priming effects, as behaviour, consumed by the motor system with or without awareness.

◦ Slow controlled responses, as deliberate behaviour, consumed by the motor system under attentional supervision.

◦ Report-channel output, meaning what the person can say they perceived or learned, consumed by experimenters and by the person's own reasoning.

◦ Interference signals, as when an automatic reading response collides with a colour-naming goal, consumed by the conflict monitor of the executive system.

• STATE.

◦ The compiled stimulus-to-response associations built by consistent practice.

◦ The current degree of automatisation of each practised task, from fully controlled to fully automatic.

◦ Residual activation from recent primes, which decays quickly.

◦ Implicitly learned regularities that are not available to report.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Mapping consistency, the key training parameter: consistent mappings automatise, varied mappings do not.

◦ Amount of practice, with speedups following a power law of practice.

◦ Masking strength and prime duration, which set how much unconscious processing can occur.

◦ The awareness criterion in use, objective or subjective, which sets where unconscious begins.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Masked prime presentation, typically tens of milliseconds, roughly 30 to 50 milliseconds in classic designs.

◦ Priming effect sizes on response time, typically a few tens of milliseconds.

◦ Automatisation, built over hundreds to thousands of consistent trials, with power-law diminishing returns.

◦ Decay of masked-prime influence, well under one second in most designs.

◦ The exact lifetime of an implicit learning trace, REFUSED, because reported durations range from minutes to months depending on the task and no single characteristic value is supported.

• MODES.

◦ Controlled serial mode, engaged for novel or inconsistent tasks: slow, effortful, capacity-limited, one item at a time.

◦ Automatic parallel mode, engaged for well-practised consistent tasks: fast, low effort, flat load curve.

◦ The transition trigger is accumulated consistent practice, and the reverse transition, de-automatisation, is triggered by changed mappings, injury, or deliberate retraining, and is slow.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Habit capture, where an automatic routine fires in the wrong context and cannot easily be stopped, as in the ink-colour interference effect.

◦ Loss of flexibility, since compiled routines resist modification when the rules change.

◦ Illusory unconsciousness in research, where insensitive awareness measures make conscious knowledge look unconscious.

◦ Overclaiming, the historical failure mode of the field, in which weak subliminal effects were inflated into dramatic stories about hidden persuasion.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called serial step time with initial value two hundred.
Create a number variable called parallel time with initial value fifty.
Create a number variable called automatisation with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called learning rate with initial value zero point zero two.
For each practice block from one to the block count, do the following.
    Create a number variable called block time with initial value zero.
    For each item in the display set, do the following.
        Calculate the item time as automatisation times parallel time plus one minus automatisation times serial step time.
        Add the item time to block time.
    If the mapping is consistent, increase automatisation by learning rate times one minus automatisation.
    Record the block number and the block time.
Return the recorded block times.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Define a function that simulates the growth of automaticity with practice.
def practice_simulation(blocks, set_size, consistent):
    # Create a number variable called serial_step for the controlled time per item in milliseconds.
    serial_step = 200.0
    # Create a number variable called parallel_time for the automatic time per display in milliseconds.
    parallel_time = 50.0
    # Create a number variable called automatisation with initial value zero.
    automatisation = 0.0
    # Create a number variable called learning_rate with initial value zero point zero two.
    learning_rate = 0.02
    # Create an empty list called history.
    history = []
    # For each practice block, do the following.
    for block in range(1, blocks + 1):
        # Calculate the serial component as the set size times the serial step time.
        serial_cost = set_size * serial_step
        # Calculate the parallel component as a single flat time regardless of set size.
        parallel_cost = parallel_time
        # Blend the two regimes according to the current degree of automatisation.
        block_time = automatisation * parallel_cost + (1.0 - automatisation) * serial_cost
        # Append the block number and the rounded block time to the history.
        history.append((block, round(block_time, 1)))
        # If the stimulus-to-response mapping is consistent, move automatisation toward one.
        if consistent:
            # Increase automatisation by the learning rate times the remaining distance to one.
            automatisation = automatisation + learning_rate * (1.0 - automatisation)
    # Return the history of block times.
    return history

# Simulate one hundred blocks of consistent-mapping practice with four items per display.
consistent_run = practice_simulation(100, 4, True)
# Simulate one hundred blocks of varied-mapping practice with four items per display.
varied_run = practice_simulation(100, 4, False)
# Print the first, middle, and last block times for the consistent condition.
print("consistent:", consistent_run[0], consistent_run[49], consistent_run[99])
# Print the first, middle, and last block times for the varied condition.
print("varied:", varied_run[0], varied_run[49], varied_run[99])


CHAPTER 44. CONSCIOUSNESS: CONCEPTS, MEASURES, AND THEORIES (CONTEXT)

This chapter is about consciousness itself, the fact that there is something it is like to be you, to see red, to feel pain, to have an inner life.

It is placed as context because consciousness is the deepest and least settled topic in the science of mind, where careful researchers still disagree about basic questions, and honesty about that disagreement is part of the lesson.

Consciousness matters here for a very practical reason too: as machines grow more capable, questions about what could be conscious, and how we would ever tell, stop being purely philosophical.

Because this is a context chapter, its systems treatment models the leading functional proposal, the global workspace, rather than claiming to model experience itself.

We will separate the key concepts, survey the main scientific theories, look at how the field tries to test them, including a remarkable experiment where rival camps agreed in advance how to be proven wrong, and consider what consciousness might actually be for.


44.1 The concepts

Before theorising, we need to carve the vague word consciousness into sharper pieces, because much confusion comes from people using the one word for several different things.


44.1.1 Access and phenomenal consciousness

The philosopher Ned Block drew a distinction in the 1990s that has organised much of the field, between access consciousness and phenomenal consciousness.

Access consciousness is information being available to the rest of the mind, meaning it can be used to guide reasoning, speech, memory, and action.

Something is access-conscious if you can report it, think about it, and act on it, so access consciousness is defined by what information does for the wider system.

Phenomenal consciousness is the raw felt quality of experience itself, the what-it-is-likeness, such as the actual redness of red or the actual hurt of pain.

The distinction matters because it is at least conceivable that these two come apart, for instance that there could be felt experience that is not fully available for report, or availability without any accompanying feel.

In systems terms, access consciousness is a specification an engineer could test, namely that a signal is readable by reasoning, language, and memory modules, whereas phenomenal consciousness names a property that no input-output test straightforwardly captures, which is precisely the difficulty.

Some thinkers argue the two always go together in practice, and others insist they are genuinely separate, and this disagreement is not merely verbal, because it shapes what one thinks a theory of consciousness even has to explain.

A useful way for a newcomer to hold it is that access consciousness is about function, what the information can be used for, while phenomenal consciousness is about feeling, what the experience is like from the inside.


44.1.2 The hard problem

The hard problem of consciousness is a phrase coined by the philosopher David Chalmers in 1995, and it names why consciousness is uniquely difficult to explain.

Chalmers separated the easy problems from the hard problem.

The easy problems, which are not really easy but are tractable, are about explaining functions and behaviours, such as how the brain integrates information, focuses attention, controls behaviour, or reports its own states.

The hard problem is the question of why any of that physical processing is accompanied by subjective experience at all, rather than going on in the dark with no inner feel.

Put simply, even if we fully explained every function the brain performs, it seems we could still ask why all that functioning feels like something, and that leftover question is the hard problem.

In systems terms the split is clean: the easy problems ask for mechanisms with inputs, outputs, and state, exactly the kind of description this book gives everywhere, while the hard problem asks why any such mechanism is accompanied by experience, a question that no interface diagram answers.

This is genuinely contested territory.

Some researchers think the hard problem is a real and possibly permanent limit on scientific explanation, some think it will dissolve as the easy problems are solved, and some think it rests on a confusion, so a beginner should understand it as a live and respectable dispute rather than a settled truth.

The main practical effect of the hard problem is that it divides theories of consciousness into those that try to confront felt experience head-on and those that focus on the functions and set the felt quality aside.


44.1.3 Level against content of consciousness

A third useful distinction separates two different questions that the word consciousness runs together.

The level of consciousness is how conscious a creature is overall, its global state, ranging from full alert wakefulness down through drowsiness, dreaming sleep, dreamless sleep, general anaesthesia, and coma.

The content of consciousness is what a conscious creature is conscious of at a given moment, that is, the particular experiences filling awareness right now, such as this page, a background hum, or a passing thought.

Keeping these apart is important because they can vary somewhat independently and involve different brain mechanisms.

In systems language, level is a global operating mode of the whole machine, set by arousal systems on a timescale of minutes to hours, while content is the moment-to-moment selection of which signals occupy awareness, changing on a timescale of hundreds of milliseconds.

Studying level asks what makes the difference between being awake and being under anaesthesia, which is largely about broad brain states and arousal systems.

Studying content asks why, at a fixed level of wakefulness, you become aware of one thing rather than another, which is the question behind many perception experiments.

Much of the experimental work on consciousness holds the level fixed at ordinary wakefulness and manipulates content, for instance by making a stimulus sometimes seen and sometimes not, in order to isolate what changes in the brain when something enters awareness.


44.2 The theories

This section surveys the leading scientific theories of consciousness, which disagree not only on the answers but on what the central question is, and it presents them plainly without pretending one has won.


44.2.1 Global workspace and global neuronal workspace

Global workspace theory begins with a simple and appealing metaphor.

The mind is pictured as a theatre in which many unconscious processes work in the dark, and consciousness is like a spotlight on a stage that makes selected information available to the whole audience of other processes.

The original version was proposed by Bernard Baars, and the idea is that a piece of information becomes conscious when it is broadcast widely across the mind so that many separate systems can use it at once.

Stanislas Dehaene and Jean-Pierre Changeux developed a brain-based version called the global neuronal workspace theory.

In their account, information becomes conscious when it is amplified and broadcast across a network of long-range connections, especially involving the prefrontal and parietal regions, in a sudden nonlinear surge they call ignition.

Before ignition, a stimulus can be processed locally and unconsciously, but once it triggers this global broadcast it becomes consciously accessible and reportable.

The mechanism is crisply system-like: many specialised processors compete, coalitions of mutually supporting signals accumulate strength, and when one coalition crosses an ignition threshold, typically around 200 to 300 milliseconds after the stimulus in the supporting experiments, its content is written to a shared workspace readable by all modules, which is the algorithm modelled in this chapter's code sample.

The great strength of this theory is that it directly explains access consciousness and connects neatly to experiments on report, attention, and the sudden all-or-none way stimuli often pop into awareness.

Its main perceived weakness is that critics say it explains the functional access to information but says little about phenomenal feel, so it is often accused of setting the hard problem aside rather than answering it.


44.2.2 Higher-order theories

Higher-order theories start from a different intuition: that a mental state becomes conscious only when the mind represents itself as being in that state.

In plainer words, seeing red is not enough to be conscious of red; there must also be a higher-order representation, a kind of inner awareness that you are seeing red.

The lower-order state is the ordinary perception, and the higher-order state is a representation of that perception, and consciousness on this view lives in the relationship between them.

This is why these are called higher-order theories, because the crucial ingredient is a thought or representation about another mental state, one level up.

Architecturally, this adds a monitoring layer whose input is the first-order state and whose output is a representation of that state, so the theory predicts that consciousness fails whenever the monitoring layer fails, even if the first-order processing is intact, which is a different failure prediction than the workspace account makes.

A strength of this approach is that it takes seriously the introspective sense that being conscious involves a kind of self-awareness, and it fits evidence that the prefrontal cortex, associated with such self-monitoring, is involved in consciousness.

A common objection is that it seems to demand a lot of sophisticated self-representation for what feels like simple sensory experience, and critics ask whether a creature must really represent its own mind in order to simply feel pain.

Higher-order theories also connect closely to the metacognition of the previous chapters, since the higher-order representation is a kind of monitoring of one's own states.


44.2.3 Integrated information theory

Integrated information theory, developed by Giulio Tononi starting around 2004, takes the boldest and most unusual approach, and it is worth explaining slowly.

Rather than starting from the brain, it starts from the felt properties of experience itself and asks what any physical system would need to have those properties.

Its central claim is that consciousness just is integrated information, meaning the extent to which a system's parts form a unified whole that is more than the sum of the parts and cannot be cleanly divided without loss.

It proposes a quantity, written with the Greek letter phi, that is meant to measure how much integrated information a system has, and it holds that the amount of consciousness corresponds to phi.

In systems terms this theory is unusual because it defines consciousness not by inputs and outputs at all but by the internal causal structure of the mechanism, so two systems with identical behaviour could differ in consciousness, a claim the more functional theories reject.

A striking consequence is that consciousness becomes a matter of degree and of a system's causal structure, so that any sufficiently integrated system could have some consciousness, a view with panpsychist leanings that many find either profound or troubling.

The theory tries to face the hard problem directly by tying phenomenal experience to a precise structural property, which its supporters see as its great ambition.

It is also heavily criticised, however.

Some critics argue that phi is effectively impossible to calculate for real brains, that the theory makes few testable predictions, and that its claim about which systems are conscious can seem counterintuitive, and in 2023 a large group of researchers publicly argued that the theory was, in their words, unproven and possibly untestable, a charge its defenders dispute.

For a newcomer, the key point is that integrated information theory is genuinely radical, taken seriously by many, and sharply contested by many others.


44.2.4 Recurrent processing and predictive-self accounts

A further family of theories locates consciousness not in a global broadcast or a higher-order thought but in a particular style of local brain activity.

The recurrent processing theory, associated with Victor Lamme, proposes that consciousness arises when signals do not merely flow forward through the sensory system but loop back, with higher areas sending activity back down to lower ones in sustained back-and-forth exchanges.

The idea is that a fast, purely forward sweep of processing can occur unconsciously, and that it is the recurrent, looping activity that turns processing into experience, even without any global broadcast to the front of the brain.

In systems terms the dividing line is dataflow topology: a purely feedforward pipeline is unconscious no matter how deep, and experience begins when the pipeline acquires feedback connections, with the first forward sweep completing within very roughly 100 to 150 milliseconds and recurrence developing after it.

A related and broader family are the predictive-self accounts, which grow out of the idea that the brain is fundamentally a prediction machine constantly generating a model of the world and of the body.

On these views, consciousness is bound up with the brain's best current model, and in particular with its model of itself as an embodied agent, so that the felt self is a kind of controlled construction the brain builds to make sense of its own states.

These accounts are attractive because they connect consciousness to the wider predictive-processing framework used elsewhere in cognitive science, and because they naturally include the body and the emotions in the story.

They remain, like all the theories here, incomplete and debated, and part of their value is in widening the range of serious options beyond the two or three most famous theories.


44.3 The empirical programme

Theories are only science if they can be tested against evidence, and this section describes how researchers hunt for the fingerprints of consciousness in the brain and how they have tried to referee the disputes between theories fairly.


44.3.1 The search for the neural correlates of consciousness

A neural correlate of consciousness is the minimal brain activity that is sufficient for a specific conscious experience.

The research strategy, pioneered in part by Francis Crick and Christof Koch in the 1990s, is to hold everything else fixed and find just the brain events that differ when a person is aware of something versus not aware of it.

A favourite tool is to use a stimulus that stays physically constant but is sometimes seen and sometimes not, such as an image shown so briefly it is caught only on some trials, or rivalrous images that flip in and out of awareness, and then to compare brain activity between the aware and unaware cases.

The goal is to subtract away everything that is the same and leave only the neural signature of the experience itself.

In systems terms this is differential debugging: the experimenter holds the input constant, observes the internal trace on aware and unaware runs, and diffs the traces to isolate the component that co-varies with awareness rather than with the input.

This programme has been productive but also harder than it first looked, and a major complication is exactly the report problem discussed in the previous chapter: some of the brain activity that seemed to mark consciousness turned out to reflect the act of reporting or attending rather than the experience, which is why no-report methods became so important.

As a result, researchers now try hard to distinguish the true correlates of an experience from its mere preconditions, such as attention, and its consequences, such as thinking about it and reporting it, and this refinement is a real advance even though a definitive neural correlate has not been pinned down.


44.3.2 Adversarial collaboration as a method for a contested field

When a field is full of committed rival camps, ordinary studies rarely change anyone's mind, because each side interprets ambiguous results in its own favour.

Adversarial collaboration is a method designed to break that deadlock, and it is a genuinely admirable piece of scientific practice worth understanding.

In an adversarial collaboration, the proponents of competing theories sit down together, in advance, and agree on exactly what experiment to run and, crucially, on what results would count as a point for each theory and what results would embarrass it.

Because the predictions and their interpretation are locked in before any data are collected, in a public preregistration, neither side can move the goalposts afterward.

A large effort of this kind, run by a consortium called Cogitate, pitted global neuronal workspace theory against integrated information theory, with the theories' own leading advocates helping design the test.

Around two hundred and fifty six participants viewed images while their brain activity was recorded with several methods at once, and the results, published in the journal Nature in 2025, were mixed for both theories rather than a clean victory for either.

The findings included evidence that information about what a person was consciously seeing could be decoded from the back of the brain, and a relative lack of the sustained prefrontal ignition that the global workspace theory had predicted, which was awkward for that theory, while integrated information theory was challenged by the absence of the sustained posterior synchronisation it had predicted.

In systems terms the two camps had committed to different observable signatures, a frontal broadcast event for the workspace theory and sustained posterior synchronisation for the integration theory, and the recorded traces matched neither signature cleanly.

Neither theory was confirmed or refuted outright, and that ambiguous outcome is itself instructive, because it shows how genuinely unsettled the science of consciousness remains.

The deeper lesson for a beginner is about method: when a question is hard and opinions are entrenched, agreeing in advance on how you could be proven wrong is one of the most honest things science can do.


44.4 The functions of consciousness

Having asked what consciousness is and how to study it, this final section asks what it is good for, that is, what jobs awareness might do that unconscious processing cannot, while remembering that even this is debated.


44.4.1 Access, flexible control, and integration

The most widely supported view of what consciousness does is that it makes information globally available so the whole mind can use it flexibly.

Unconscious processes, as earlier chapters showed, tend to be specialised, fast, and rigid, each doing its own narrow job, whereas consciousness seems to pool information from many sources into a common form that any system can draw on.

This pooling is thought to support flexible, novel, and deliberate behaviour, the kind that cannot run on a fixed habit, which fits the global workspace idea that broadcasting is the core function.

Consciousness is also linked to integration, the binding together of many separate features, such as a colour, a shape, a sound, and a meaning, into a single unified experience of one object or scene rather than a jumble of disconnected parts.

In systems terms the proposed function is a shared bus: specialised modules that normally cannot read each other's outputs gain a common channel, at the price of a severe bandwidth limit, since the workspace holds roughly one content at a time.

On this account, the value of being conscious of something is that it becomes usable by reasoning, language, memory, and planning together, so awareness is the shared workspace where otherwise isolated processes meet.

An important honesty check remains, though, because so much turns out to be doable unconsciously that some researchers question how much extra work consciousness really performs, and pinning down its unique contribution is still an open problem rather than a solved one.


44.4.2 Volition and the sense of agency

The last topic is the feeling that you are the author of your own actions, which is one of the most personally important aspects of conscious life.

The sense of agency is the experience that you are the one causing your actions, that it is you who decides to raise your hand and you who moves it.

This feeling became scientifically famous through experiments by Benjamin Libet in the 1980s.

Libet asked people to make a simple spontaneous movement whenever they felt like it and to note the moment they were first aware of the urge, while he recorded a slow build-up of brain activity called the readiness potential.

His striking result was that the readiness potential seemed to begin before the reported moment of conscious intention, which many took to mean the brain had already started the action before the person consciously decided, appearing to threaten the idea of conscious free will.

The reported timings are worth stating plainly: in Libet's data the readiness potential began roughly 550 milliseconds before the movement, while the reported conscious urge came only about 200 milliseconds before it, leaving a gap of roughly 350 milliseconds in which the brain seemed already under way.

These experiments provoked decades of argument, and the modern verdict is much more cautious than the original headlines.

Later work questioned what the readiness potential actually is, with some evidence suggesting it may partly reflect ordinary background fluctuations in brain activity rather than a specific decision command, and questioned whether the timing of a fuzzy inner urge can be measured accurately at all.

Some studies also found that the readiness potential appears before arbitrary, unimportant choices but not clearly before deliberate, considered decisions, which weakens the leap from Libet's simple finger movements to meaningful human choice.

The careful conclusion today is that Libet's experiments revealed something real and interesting about the timing of awareness and action, but they did not settle the deep questions of free will, and the confident early claim that they disproved conscious agency has not held up.

It is fitting that this outline of cognition ends here, at the sense of agency, because the feeling of being a self who chooses is where the machinery of the mind and the mystery of the person meet, and it is exactly the frontier where the science of human cognition begins to matter for how we think about minds we might one day build.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Candidate contents, as activated representations from perception, memory, emotion, and inner speech, each carried by a coalition of processors.

◦ Attention signals, which amplify some coalitions and weaken others, from the attention system.

◦ Arousal and neuromodulatory state, which sets the global level of consciousness, from brainstem and thalamic systems.

◦ Predictions and self-model signals, from the predictive machinery, on the predictive-self accounts.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ The broadcast content, meaning the currently conscious representation, readable by reasoning, language, memory, planning, and voluntary action.

◦ Verbal and behavioural reports of experience, consumed by other people and by experimenters.

◦ A sense of agency signal accompanying self-caused actions, consumed by self-monitoring and social cognition.

◦ Global state indicators, such as being awake, dreaming, or anaesthetised, observable in physiology.

• STATE.

◦ The current occupant of the workspace, roughly one integrated content at a time.

◦ The current global level, from alert wakefulness through sleep stages to anaesthesia and coma.

◦ The ongoing self-model, including body and agency representations.

◦ The strengths of the competing coalitions not currently broadcast.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ The ignition threshold that a coalition must cross to achieve global broadcast.

◦ Workspace capacity, severely limited, roughly one content at a time.

◦ Amplification gain from attention on candidate coalitions.

◦ The arousal setting that scales all workspace activity, from full wakefulness to none.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Ignition and reportable access, typically around 200 to 300 milliseconds after stimulus onset in the supporting experiments.

◦ The unconscious feedforward sweep preceding any recurrence, very roughly 100 to 150 milliseconds.

◦ In Libet's paradigm, readiness potential onset roughly 550 milliseconds before movement and the reported conscious urge about 200 milliseconds before it.

◦ Changes of global level, minutes to hours for sleep and anaesthesia transitions.

◦ The duration of a single conscious moment, REFUSED, because proposals range from tens to hundreds of milliseconds and the field has not converged on one value.

• MODES.

◦ Wakeful broadcast mode, where competition and ignition run normally; the default alert state.

◦ Dreaming mode, where internally generated coalitions win access with the senses gated; triggered by rapid eye movement sleep physiology.

◦ Reduced or absent modes, in dreamless sleep, anaesthesia, and coma; triggered by arousal system shutdown or disruption.

◦ Within wakefulness, seen versus unseen processing of a given stimulus, switched by whether its coalition crosses the ignition threshold.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Failures of access, as in masking, inattentional blindness, and the attentional blink of about 200 to 500 milliseconds, where content is processed but never broadcast.

◦ Disorders of consciousness, including the vegetative and minimally conscious states, where level is pathologically reduced.

◦ Neglect and blindsight, where content influences behaviour without entering awareness.

◦ Illusions of agency and alien-limb phenomena, where the authorship signal is attached wrongly or missing.

◦ At the level of theory, the field's own failure mode: mistaking the machinery of reporting for the machinery of experiencing.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a dictionary called coalitions mapping each coalition name to its starting activation.
Create a number variable called ignition threshold with initial value one.
Create a variable called broadcast with initial value none.
For each time step from one to the step limit, do the following.
    For each coalition in the dictionary, do the following.
        Increase the coalition's activation by a small self-excitation proportional to its activation.
        Decrease the coalition's activation by a small inhibition proportional to the total activation of the other coalitions.
        Add small random noise to the coalition's activation.
        If the coalition's activation is less than zero, set it to zero.
    Find the coalition with the highest activation.
    If that coalition's activation is greater than the ignition threshold, set broadcast to that coalition's name and stop the loop.
If broadcast is none, report that no content reached awareness.
Otherwise, report that the broadcast content is available to all modules.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Load the random module for noise generation.
import random

# Define a function where competing coalitions race for access to a global workspace.
def workspace_race(coalitions, steps=200):
    # Create a number variable called threshold for ignition with value one.
    threshold = 1.0
    # For each time step up to the step limit, do the following.
    for step in range(1, steps + 1):
        # Calculate the total activation across all coalitions.
        total = sum(coalitions.values())
        # For each coalition name in the dictionary, do the following.
        for name in coalitions:
            # Increase the coalition's activation by ten percent self-excitation.
            gain = 0.10 * coalitions[name]
            # Decrease the coalition's activation by inhibition from its rivals.
            loss = 0.04 * (total - coalitions[name])
            # Add small gaussian noise to the coalition's activation.
            noise = random.gauss(0.0, 0.01)
            # Update the coalition's activation and keep it at zero or above.
            coalitions[name] = max(0.0, coalitions[name] + gain - loss + noise)
        # Find the name of the coalition with the highest activation.
        leader = max(coalitions, key=coalitions.get)
        # If the leader's activation crosses the ignition threshold, broadcast it.
        if coalitions[leader] > threshold:
            # Return the winning content and the time step of ignition.
            return leader, step
    # If no coalition ignited within the step limit, return none.
    return None, steps

# Seed the random generator so the run is repeatable.
random.seed(7)
# Create three competing coalitions with different starting activations.
contenders = {"face_percept": 0.30, "inner_speech": 0.25, "background_hum": 0.20}
# Run the race for access to the workspace.
winner, when = workspace_race(contenders)
# If a coalition ignited, print the broadcast content and its ignition time step.
if winner is not None:
    # Announce the globally broadcast content.
    print("broadcast:", winner, "at step", when)
# Otherwise, print that no content reached awareness.
else:
    # Announce the failure of access.
    print("no content reached awareness")


================================================================================

PART ELEVEN. HOT COGNITION: EMOTION, MOTIVATION, AND THE SOCIAL MIND

================================================================================

CHAPTER 45. EMOTION AND AFFECTIVE SCIENCE (PROCESS)

This chapter is about feelings, and about the surprising fact that scientists still argue over what a feeling actually is.

Emotions are the states we all know from the inside: fear, joy, anger, sadness, disgust, love, and the many shades between them.

They matter for a science of the mind because they are not separate from thinking; they steer what we notice, what we remember, and what we decide.

Affective science is simply the organised study of emotion, mood, and feeling, and the word "affective" just means "having to do with feelings".

Seen as an engineered system, an emotion is a fast evaluative subsystem: it takes in a stream of events and bodily signals, computes what the current situation means for the organism's goals, and broadcasts a coordinated package of outputs to the body, the face, attention, and memory.

In this chapter we will look at the main theories of where an emotion comes from, and then at the parts an emotion is made of.


45.1 The theories of emotion

The central puzzle here is the order of events inside an emotion.

When something frightening happens, does your body react first and your feeling follow, or does your mind judge the situation first and your body follow?

In systems terms, the theories disagree about the wiring diagram: which module fires first, which signals feed which, and where the label "fear" gets attached.

Different theories give different answers, and each answer has shaped decades of research.

This section lays out the main contenders so you can see what each one claims.


45.1.1 Appraisal theories

An appraisal theory says that an emotion begins with an evaluation, a quick mental sizing-up of what a situation means for you.

The word "appraisal" here simply means a judgment of significance: is this good or bad for me, and can I cope with it?

The key idea is that the event itself does not fix the emotion; your interpretation of the event does.

The same loud knock at the door can bring joy if you expect a friend or terror if you fear an intruder, and appraisal theory says the difference lives entirely in the interpretation.

Richard Lazarus, an American psychologist who developed this view through the second half of the twentieth century, proposed that appraisal happens in stages.

In what he called primary appraisal, you judge whether a situation touches your goals and wellbeing at all.

In what he called secondary appraisal, you judge whether you have the resources to cope with it.

A looming deadline you believe you can meet produces a very different emotion from the same deadline you believe you cannot meet, and that difference is a difference in secondary appraisal.

Later appraisal theorists, notably Klaus Scherer, a Swiss researcher, broke the evaluation into a longer checklist of dimensions, such as novelty, pleasantness, goal relevance, who or what is to blame, and how much control you have.

As a system, an appraisal engine takes an event description plus the agent's current goals as input, runs a cascade of evaluative checks, and outputs a labelled emotional state plus response commands; appraisal theorists hold that the fast automatic form of this cascade completes within a few hundred milliseconds, while a deliberate re-evaluation can take seconds.

The attraction of appraisal theory is that it explains why the same event yields many different emotions in different people, and why an emotion can change the instant your interpretation changes.

The main criticism is that a full, deliberate evaluation seems too slow to explain how fast some emotions arrive, though appraisal theorists reply that appraisal can be rapid and automatic rather than conscious and effortful.


45.1.2 The two-factor theory

The two-factor theory, proposed by Stanley Schachter and Jerome Singer in 1962, says that an emotion is built from two ingredients combined.

The first ingredient is physiological arousal, meaning a general bodily stirring such as a racing heart, faster breathing, or a jolt of energy.

The second ingredient is a cognitive label, meaning the name your mind gives to that arousal based on what is happening around you.

The striking claim is that the bodily arousal by itself is vague and undirected; it does not come pre-labelled as fear or excitement.

Your mind looks around for a cause, and the cause it settles on determines which emotion you feel.

In their famous experiment, participants were given an injection of adrenaline, a hormone that produces arousal, and those who did not know it would stir them up caught the mood of a nearby actor, feeling either euphoric or annoyed depending on how that actor behaved.

This is why the theory is sometimes summarised as arousal plus a label equals emotion.

In systems terms this is a two-input architecture: one channel carries an unlabelled arousal signal from the body, the other carries a situational interpretation from perception and memory, and the emotion is the output of a labelling stage that binds the two; the bodily channel is slow, since a visible arousal response such as sweating takes roughly 1 to 3 seconds to appear, while the labelling stage can be revised in a moment.

The two-factor theory built directly on an older insight from William James and Carl Lange, who argued in the late nineteenth century that we feel afraid because we tremble, rather than trembling because we feel afraid.

Schachter and Singer added the crucial second step: the same trembling can become different emotions depending on the interpretation.

The theory has not held up cleanly in every replication, and modern researchers see it as an important early move rather than the final word, but its core lesson survives.

That lesson is that a bodily state and a mental interpretation work together to produce what we call a feeling.


45.1.3 Basic-emotion against dimensional and constructionist accounts

Here the field splits into three large camps over the most basic question of all: how many emotions are there, and are they built into us?

The basic-emotion view, associated above all with Paul Ekman, holds that there is a small set of biologically wired emotions that all humans share.

Ekman's classic list has six: happiness, sadness, fear, anger, surprise, and disgust, each with its own signature facial expression.

His evidence famously included a 1971 study among the Fore people of Papua New Guinea, a group with little contact with the outside world, who nonetheless matched the same expressions to the same situations as Westerners did.

On this view each basic emotion is like a distinct, inherited program that fires as a whole.

The dimensional view, developed by James Russell and others, rejects the idea of a few discrete kinds and instead places every emotion on a map with two axes.

One axis is valence, meaning how pleasant or unpleasant the feeling is, and the other is arousal, meaning how activated or calm you are.

This map is called the circumplex model, because the emotions arrange themselves in a rough circle around the two axes, with excitement in the pleasant-and-activated quarter and depression in the unpleasant-and-calm quarter.

On this view fear and anger are not separate species; they are nearby points that share high arousal and unpleasant valence.

The constructionist view, argued most forcefully by Lisa Feldman Barrett in her theory of constructed emotion, goes further still.

It says the brain starts with only general raw ingredients, chiefly a body-based sense of pleasantness and arousal, and then constructs a specific emotion on the spot using concepts learned from your culture and language.

On this account there is no fixed fear circuit waiting in the brain; "fear" is a category your mind assembles, much as it assembles the category "chair" from many different objects.

This is a debate rather than a single mechanism, so it helps to state what each side predicts in systems terms: the basic-emotion view predicts a small set of dedicated output programs, each triggered as a unit with its own bodily and facial signature; the dimensional view predicts a continuous two-dimensional state variable with no natural category boundaries; and the constructionist view predicts that the category labels are computed late, from learned concepts, so that they should vary across cultures and languages while the underlying valence and arousal signals do not.

The debate is genuinely unsettled, and it is fair to say the tide has moved against the strongest form of the basic-emotion claim.

Barrett's large reviews of the evidence concluded that you cannot reliably read a specific emotion off a facial expression, because people scowl when angry only some of the time and scowl for many other reasons too.

Defenders of basic emotions reply that the wiring shows up more in the body and brain than on the face, so the argument continues.

For a builder of thinking machines the practical takeaway is caution: treating the six-expression list as settled fact would be building on contested ground.


45.2 The components of an emotion

Whatever their disagreements, most researchers agree that a full-blown emotion is not a single thing but a bundle of parts that usually move together.

This section names those parts and then looks closely at one of them, the felt sense of the body, which has become a hot topic in recent science.

Seeing an emotion as a bundle helps explain why the parts can sometimes come apart, for example when your heart pounds but you do not feel afraid.


45.2.1 Physiology, expression, feeling, and action tendency

An emotion is usually described as having four loosely coupled components, and it helps to take them one at a time.

The first is physiology, meaning the changes in your body, such as heart rate, sweating, hormone release, and muscle tension, driven largely by the part of the nervous system that runs automatic functions.

The second is expression, meaning the outward signs others can read, chiefly in the face and voice but also in posture.

The third is feeling, meaning the subjective experience, the "what it is like" from the inside that only you have direct access to.

The fourth is action tendency, a term from the Dutch psychologist Nico Frijda, meaning the urge to do something particular, so that fear carries a pull toward escape and anger carries a pull toward confrontation.

Frijda captured this with the memorable idea that emotions are states of action readiness, poised urges to approach, avoid, attack, or attend.

In systems terms these four components are four output channels driven by one appraisal event, each with its own latency and decay: expression and action tendency are fast channels that can shift within a second, bodily arousal is a slower channel that rises over seconds and can take minutes to settle, and the reported feeling integrates over all of them.

The reason to break an emotion into these four components is that they do not always agree.

You can hide the expression while the feeling rages, or your body can show arousal that you do not consciously feel, and these mismatches are exactly what different theories try to explain.

Thinking of emotion as a coordinated bundle rather than one indivisible thing is one of the most useful ideas in the whole field.


45.2.2 Interoception and the construction of feeling

Interoception is your sense of the internal state of your own body, the perception of signals such as your heartbeat, your breathing, the fullness of your stomach, and the tension in your gut.

The word is built to parallel "exteroception", which is perception of the outside world; interoception is perception turned inward.

The reason it matters for emotion is a growing belief that the felt part of an emotion is largely built out of these bodily signals.

The neuroscientist Arthur Craig, often called Bud Craig, traced a pathway carrying signals about the body's condition up into a brain region called the insula, a patch of cortex folded deep in the side of the brain.

He proposed that these signals are refined along the insula from back to front, and that the front tip, the anterior insula, produces a unified feeling of the sentient self, a "global emotional moment".

More recent accounts, associated with Lisa Feldman Barrett and Sahib Khalsa among others, add a predictive twist.

On this view the brain does not passively wait for bodily signals; it constantly predicts what the body's state should be and compares that prediction against the incoming signals.

A feeling, on this account, is largely the brain's best guess about the state of the body, corrected by the actual sensations arriving from it.

As a system, interoception is a sensor-fusion loop: its inputs are visceral signals from the heart, lungs, gut, and skin plus the brain's own predictions of those signals, its output is a running estimate of bodily state that feeds the construction of feeling, and it operates on the timescale of the bodily rhythms it tracks, from the roughly one-second heartbeat cycle to breathing cycles of several seconds.

This fits neatly with the constructionist theory of emotion from the previous section, because it supplies the raw bodily ingredient that a specific emotion is then constructed from.

There is real evidence that people who are better at sensing their own heartbeat also tend to report more intense emotions, which supports a link between interoception and feeling.

At the same time the details are still debated, and no one claims that every emotion is only a story the brain tells about the gut, so the honest summary is that the body is now seen as a central author of feeling rather than a mere bystander.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Event stream: a description of what is happening, delivered by perception and by memory-based expectation.

◦ Goal state: the agent's current goals and concerns, delivered by the motivational system, against which relevance is judged.

◦ Interoceptive signals: heartbeat, breathing, gut and skin state, delivered by visceral sensors through the insula pathway.

◦ Conceptual knowledge: learned emotion categories and situational scripts, delivered by semantic memory and culture.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Emotion label and intensity: a categorical or dimensional state estimate, consumed by attention, memory, decision making, and verbal report.

◦ Autonomic commands: heart rate, sweating, and hormone release instructions, consumed by the body.

◦ Expressive commands: face, voice, and posture settings, consumed by the motor system and read by other agents.

◦ Action tendency: a prioritised urge such as escape, attack, or approach, consumed by the action-selection system.

• STATE.

◦ The current appraisal of the situation, held so it can be revised when the interpretation changes.

◦ The current arousal and valence levels of the body-state estimate.

◦ Recent event history, needed to judge novelty and to attribute arousal to a cause.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Appraisal weights: how strongly each checklist dimension, such as goal relevance or coping potential, contributes to the outcome.

◦ Arousal gain: how strongly an appraised event drives the bodily response.

◦ Labelling threshold: how much evidence is needed before a specific emotion category is asserted.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Fast automatic appraisal: brain responses discriminating emotional from neutral stimuli appear within roughly 100 to 300 milliseconds.

◦ Visible autonomic response: a skin conductance change follows a stimulus by roughly 1 to 3 seconds.

◦ Emotion episode duration: REFUSED, because reported episodes range from seconds to hours depending on the event and the person, and no single characteristic value is supported.

◦ Mood duration: REFUSED, because moods are defined only loosely as lasting from minutes to days, with no agreed central value.

• MODES.

◦ Automatic mode: fast, unbidden appraisal and response, triggered by sudden goal-relevant events.

◦ Deliberate mode: slow re-evaluation of the situation, triggered by reflection, instruction, or a regulation goal.

◦ Mood mode: a sustained low-intensity background state with no single triggering object, entered when arousal and valence persist after their cause has passed.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Misattribution of arousal, in which bodily stirring from one source is labelled as an emotion about another, as in the two-factor experiments.

◦ Component decoupling, in which body, face, and feeling disagree, complicating any attempt to read emotion from one channel alone.

◦ Clinical extremes, in which appraisal is biased toward threat as in anxiety disorders, or valence is locked low as in depression, or interoceptive signals are misread as catastrophic as in panic.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called rules that will hold appraisal rules.
Add to rules a rule stating that if goal relevance is low, the emotion is calm.
Add to rules a rule stating that if the event is unpleasant, blame falls on another agent, and control is high, the emotion is anger.
Add to rules a rule stating that if the event is unpleasant, blame falls on oneself, and control is low, the emotion is sadness.
Add to rules a rule stating that if the event is unpleasant, the outcome is uncertain, and coping potential is low, the emotion is fear.
Add to rules a rule stating that if the event is pleasant and goal relevance is high, the emotion is joy.
Define a procedure called appraise that accepts an event described by its pleasantness, goal relevance, blame, control, coping potential, and certainty.
    For each rule in rules, in order, check whether the event matches all of the rule's conditions.
        If the event matches, return the rule's emotion label.
    If no rule matched, return the label surprise, because an unclassified event is treated as novel.
For each event in a test list of events, call appraise on the event and report the event with its emotion label.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a list variable called RULES that will hold appraisal rules.
# Each rule is a pair of a condition dictionary and an emotion label.
RULES = [
    # If goal relevance is low, the emotion is calm.
    ({"relevance": "low"}, "calm"),
    # If the event is unpleasant, blame falls on another agent, and control is high, the emotion is anger.
    ({"pleasant": False, "blame": "other", "control": "high"}, "anger"),
    # If the event is unpleasant, blame falls on oneself, and control is low, the emotion is sadness.
    ({"pleasant": False, "blame": "self", "control": "low"}, "sadness"),
    # If the event is unpleasant, the outcome is uncertain, and coping potential is low, the emotion is fear.
    ({"pleasant": False, "certain": False, "coping": "low"}, "fear"),
    # If the event is pleasant and goal relevance is high, the emotion is joy.
    ({"pleasant": True, "relevance": "high"}, "joy"),
]

# Define a procedure called appraise that accepts an event dictionary.
def appraise(event):
    # For each rule in RULES, in order, check whether the event matches all of the rule's conditions.
    for conditions, label in RULES:
        # Check that every condition key has the required value in the event.
        if all(event.get(key) == value for key, value in conditions.items()):
            # If the event matches, return the rule's emotion label.
            return label
    # If no rule matched, return the label surprise, because an unclassified event is treated as novel.
    return "surprise"

# Create a test list of events, each with a name and appraisal features.
EVENTS = [
    ("a friend knocks at the door", {"pleasant": True, "relevance": "high"}),
    ("a stranger insults you", {"pleasant": False, "blame": "other", "control": "high"}),
    ("you miss a deadline you set", {"pleasant": False, "blame": "self", "control": "low"}),
    ("a strange noise at night", {"pleasant": False, "certain": False, "coping": "low"}),
    ("rain on a day you stay in", {"relevance": "low"}),
    ("an unreadable letter arrives", {"pleasant": False, "certain": True, "coping": "high"}),
]

# For each event in the test list, call appraise on the event and report the result.
for name, features in EVENTS:
    # Print the event name followed by its appraised emotion label.
    print(name, "->", appraise(features))


CHAPTER 46. EMOTION-COGNITION INTERACTION AND MOTIVATION (PROCESS)

This chapter is about the traffic that runs both ways between feeling and thinking, and about what makes us want things in the first place.

For a long time emotion and reason were treated as opposites, with feeling seen as the enemy of clear thought.

The modern picture is very different: emotion and motivation are woven through attention, memory, and judgment at every step.

In systems terms, the emotional state described in chapter 45 is not a sealed module; it publishes signals that bias the priority queues of attention, the encoding and retrieval gains of memory, and the evidence weighting of judgment, while motivation supplies the value signals that decide what is worth computing at all.

Here we look first at how emotion shapes cognition, then at how wanting and curiosity drive us, and finally at how people manage their own feelings.


46.1 The influence of emotion on cognition

This section is about the many ways a feeling changes how the mind works.

An emotion can decide what you look at, what you remember, and how you judge a stranger, often without your noticing.

Understanding these effects is the first step to seeing why a purely cold, feelingless reasoner would not think the way people do.


46.1.1 Emotional capture of attention

Emotional capture of attention means that emotionally charged things grab our focus automatically, before we choose to look.

A snarling face in a crowd, a spider on the wall, or our own name across a noisy room tends to pull attention whether we want it to or not.

Researchers study this with a task called the dot-probe task, in which two pictures flash briefly and then a small target appears where one of them was.

People are reliably faster to respond to the target when it appears where a threatening picture had been, which shows their attention was already parked there.

As a system, emotional capture is a priority interrupt: its input is the emotional significance of items in the perceptual stream, its output is a shift of the attentional spotlight, and it operates fast, with dot-probe experiments typically finding the bias at picture exposures of about 500 milliseconds and threat detection effects appearing within a few hundred milliseconds.

This makes good sense from a survival standpoint, because a mind that ignored threats would not last long.

The effect is especially strong for signals of danger, and it is exaggerated in anxiety, where threatening information captures attention more powerfully and holds it longer.

The lesson is that attention is not a neutral spotlight we aim at will; emotion is constantly nudging the spotlight toward what matters for our wellbeing.


46.1.2 Mood-congruent and arousal-enhanced memory

This sub-section covers two related ways that emotion strengthens and colours memory.

Mood-congruent memory is the tendency to remember material that matches your current mood.

The psychologist Gordon Bower showed in the 1980s that a person in a sad mood more easily recalls sad events, and a person in a happy mood more easily recalls happy ones.

His explanation was that a mood activates a web of related memories, so information that fits the mood receives more attention and richer processing and is later easier to retrieve.

In systems terms, mood acts as a standing bias on the memory retrieval process: the input is a retrieval cue plus the current mood state, the output is a ranking of candidate memories in which mood-matching items get an activation boost, and the bias persists for as long as the mood does, typically minutes to hours.

Arousal-enhanced memory is different: it is the finding that emotionally arousing events, whether pleasant or unpleasant, are usually remembered better than dull ones.

A frightening or thrilling experience tends to be encoded more deeply and to survive longer, an effect linked to stress hormones acting on memory circuits during and just after the event, over a consolidation window that extends from minutes to hours after encoding.

A famous special case is the flashbulb memory, the vivid, confident recollection people have of where they were when they heard shocking news.

Here the science carries an important warning: these memories feel photographic and certain, but studies that checked them against the facts found they drift and distort over time just like ordinary memories, even while confidence stays high.

So the honest summary is that arousal makes memories feel stronger and more vivid, but vividness and confidence are not the same as accuracy.


46.1.3 Affect as information in judgment

The affect-as-information idea says that people often use their current feeling as a quick piece of evidence when making a judgment.

Put simply, we ask ourselves, without noticing we are doing it, "How do I feel about this?", and we read the answer as if it were information about the thing we are judging.

The classic demonstration comes from Norbert Schwarz and Gerald Clore, who found that people report being more satisfied with their lives as a whole on sunny days than on rainy ones.

The twist is that when the good or bad mood was pointed out and explained away, for instance by mentioning the weather, the effect vanished.

That is the tell-tale sign that people were misreading a passing mood as a verdict on their whole life.

As a system, this is a heuristic evidence channel: the input is the current feeling, the output is an evaluative judgment that treats the feeling as data about the target, and a gating signal, the attribution of the feeling to its real source, can switch the channel off in an instant.

This matters because it shows feelings are not just noise inside judgment; they are treated by the mind as a source of data, useful when the feeling really is about the matter at hand and misleading when it is not.

It also explains a lot of everyday error, from shopping decisions made while hungry to harsh judgments made while irritated.


46.2 Motivation and cognition

Motivation is what gets a mind moving toward some things and away from others.

Without it, all the perceiving and remembering in the world would sit idle, because nothing would be worth doing.

This section looks at how value pulls our thinking around, and at curiosity, the special hunger for information itself.


46.2.1 Incentive value and motivated cognition

Incentive value is the pull that a possible reward or punishment exerts on behaviour and thought.

A useful distinction from the neuroscientist Kent Berridge is between "liking" and "wanting", which he showed are separate processes in the brain.

Liking is the pleasure you actually get from something, while wanting, which he calls incentive salience, is the craving or pull toward it, and the two can come apart, as when an addict wants a drug intensely without liking it much.

In systems terms, incentive value is a scalar priority signal attached to represented outcomes: its inputs are learned associations between cues and rewards, its output is a weighting that biases attention, retrieval, and choice toward high-value options, and cue-triggered wanting can spike within a second of a reward cue appearing.

Motivated cognition is the broad finding that what we want shapes what we think, not just what we do.

The psychologist Ziva Kunda described motivated reasoning as the way our goals bias the whole process of thinking, so that we search harder for evidence supporting conclusions we prefer and scrutinise unwelcome evidence more critically.

Importantly, this is not simple lying to oneself; people still feel they are being fair, because the bias operates quietly inside the reasoning.

This is why a fan and a rival can watch the same match and honestly see different fouls.

For a science of mind the key point is that thinking is never fully separate from wanting; goals reach in and tilt the machinery of reason.


46.2.2 Curiosity and information-seeking

Curiosity is the desire to know, the drive that makes information itself feel rewarding.

A leading account comes from George Loewenstein, whose information-gap theory says curiosity arises when we notice a gap between what we know and what we want to know.

On this view the gap feels like a small deprivation, an itch, and closing it by learning the answer brings relief, which is why an unanswered question or an unfinished story can nag at us.

This explains everyday experiences such as needing to know how a film ends or being unable to leave a riddle alone.

Newer work treats curiosity as partly a form of reward-seeking, in which the brain assigns value to the prospect of learning, using some of the same machinery it uses for food or money.

As a system, curiosity is an intrinsic reward generator: its input is an estimate of the gap between current knowledge and desired knowledge, its output is an incentive value attached to information itself, and it drives exploration on whatever timescale the gap persists, from the seconds of a riddle to the years of a research career.

Researchers also distinguish curiosity that is driven by the pleasure of discovery from curiosity that is driven by discomfort at not knowing, and integrative models try to combine the information-gap idea with these reward and appraisal accounts.

The reason this matters for building intelligent systems is that a purely goal-driven agent that never explored for its own sake would learn poorly; curiosity is, in effect, a built-in motive to gather information before you strictly need it.


46.3 Emotion regulation

Emotion regulation is the set of things people do to influence which emotions they have, when they have them, and how strongly they feel and show them.

It is one of the most practical topics in the whole field, because the ability to manage feeling underlies mental health, self-control, and getting along with others.

This section describes the main strategies and then zooms in on the one that has been studied most.


46.3.1 The strategies of regulation

The most influential map of these strategies comes from James Gross, whose process model arranges them by where they act in the timeline of an emotion.

The core insight is that an emotion unfolds over time, from encountering a situation, to attending to it, to interpreting it, to responding, and you can step in at any of these points.

The first strategy is situation selection, meaning you choose which situations to enter or avoid, as when you skip a party you know will upset you.

The second is situation modification, meaning you change the situation you are in, as when you steer a tense conversation to safer ground.

The third is attentional deployment, meaning you shift what you focus on, as when you distract yourself from a needle at the doctor.

The fourth is cognitive change, meaning you change how you interpret the situation, which is the strategy called reappraisal that the next sub-section covers.

The fifth is response modulation, meaning you act on the emotion after it has arisen, as when you take slow breaths to calm down or hide your expression.

In systems terms, the process model describes five control taps placed at successive stages of the emotion pipeline, from input selection through interpretation to output shaping, and the general engineering rule it discovered is that upstream intervention is cheaper and more effective than downstream intervention.

A repeated finding is that strategies that act early, before the emotion has fully formed, tend to work better and cost less than strategies that try to wrestle the emotion down once it is in full flow.

In particular, simply suppressing the outward expression of an emotion often fails to reduce the inner feeling and can even leave the body more stirred up.


46.3.2 Cognitive reappraisal

Cognitive reappraisal means changing how you interpret a situation in order to change how it makes you feel.

It sits in the "cognitive change" family of Gross's model, and it is powerful because it works on the appraisal that, as chapter 45 explained, largely creates the emotion in the first place.

A simple example: if you reframe a pounding heart before a speech as excitement and readiness rather than as dread, the fear can genuinely ease.

Another example: reminding yourself that a rude driver may be rushing to a hospital can dissolve anger that a moment ago felt fully justified.

Because reappraisal steps in early, before the emotion has crested, it tends to reduce the feeling and the bodily arousal together, unlike late suppression which mostly hides the outside while the inside churns on.

As a system, reappraisal is a deliberate rewrite of the appraisal input: its inputs are the current interpretation and a regulation goal, its output is a substituted interpretation that is fed back through the appraisal engine, and because it is an effortful, deliberate operation it works on a timescale of seconds rather than milliseconds.

Studies of the brain link reappraisal to increased activity in the prefrontal cortex, the front region involved in deliberate control, working to turn down activity in emotion-related regions such as the amygdala.

Reappraisal is not a cure-all; it takes effort, it is harder when emotions are intense, and constantly explaining away every feeling would be its own kind of problem.

Still, the ability to re-see a situation in a better light is one of the most reliable tools people have for governing their own emotional lives, and it is a cornerstone of several effective talking therapies.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Current emotional state: valence and arousal from the emotion system of chapter 45.

◦ Retrieval cues and perceptual candidates: the items competing for memory retrieval and attention.

◦ Reward predictions: learned cue-to-outcome value associations from the reinforcement learning system.

◦ Knowledge-gap estimates: comparisons between what is known and what a goal requires, feeding curiosity.

◦ Regulation goals: instructions from the executive system about which emotions to increase or decrease.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Attentional priority weights: consumed by the attention system, tilting the spotlight toward emotional and valued items.

◦ Retrieval and encoding gains: consumed by the memory system, boosting mood-matching and arousing material.

◦ Affective evidence: a feeling-as-data signal consumed by the judgment system.

◦ Incentive and curiosity values: consumed by action selection to drive approach and exploration.

◦ Regulation commands: reinterpretations and response adjustments consumed by the appraisal and motor systems.

• STATE.

◦ The current mood, a sustained valence and arousal level that biases processing.

◦ The current goal and its incentive values over outcomes.

◦ The active interpretation of the ongoing situation, which regulation can rewrite.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Mood-congruence gain: how strongly mood boosts activation of matching memories.

◦ Threat bias: how strongly danger signals capture attention, elevated in anxiety.

◦ Discounting switch: whether a feeling is attributed to the judged target or explained away.

◦ Regulation effort budget: how much executive capacity is available for reappraisal.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Attentional capture by threat: measurable within a few hundred milliseconds, with the dot-probe bias standardly observed at about 500 milliseconds of exposure.

◦ Hormonal memory consolidation window: stress hormones modulate memory over minutes to hours after an arousing event.

◦ Reappraisal deployment: seconds, since it is a deliberate, effortful reinterpretation.

◦ Mood persistence: REFUSED, because moods are defined only as outlasting emotions, from minutes to days, with no agreed characteristic value.

• MODES.

◦ Hot mode: high arousal, strong capture, and strong memory tagging, triggered by emotionally significant events.

◦ Cool mode: low arousal processing in which deliberate goals dominate priorities, the default between emotional episodes.

◦ Regulation mode: executive control actively reshaping the emotion pipeline, triggered by a conflict between the current emotion and a standing goal.

◦ Exploration mode: curiosity-driven information seeking, triggered by a salient knowledge gap when no urgent goal dominates.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Attentional threat bias locked on, as in anxiety, where danger signals capture and hold attention too readily.

◦ Mood-congruent retrieval loops, as in depression, where a sad mood retrieves sad memories that deepen the sad mood.

◦ Affect misattribution, in which incidental feelings such as weather-driven mood contaminate unrelated judgments.

◦ Wanting without liking, the addiction pattern in which incentive salience drives pursuit that no longer brings pleasure.

◦ Suppression backfire, in which hiding expression leaves inner feeling intact and bodily arousal elevated.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called memories, where each memory has a description and a valence score between minus one and plus one.
Create a number variable called mood with initial value zero, where negative means sad and positive means happy.
Create a number variable called congruence_gain with initial value zero point eight.
Define a procedure called retrieve that accepts a mood value and a count of items to recall.
    Create an empty list variable called scored.
    For each memory in memories, calculate a base activation as a random number between zero and one.
        Calculate a congruence bonus as congruence_gain multiplied by the mood value multiplied by the memory's valence.
        Calculate the total activation as the base activation plus the congruence bonus.
        Add the memory and its total activation to scored.
    Sort scored from highest activation to lowest.
    Return the first count memories from scored.
Set mood to minus zero point nine to simulate a sad mood, call retrieve for three items, and report them.
Set mood to plus zero point nine to simulate a happy mood, call retrieve for three items, and report them.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for base activation noise.
import random

# Seed the random generator so the demonstration is repeatable.
random.seed(7)

# Create a list variable called MEMORIES, where each memory has a description and a valence score.
MEMORIES = [
    ("won a prize at school", 0.9),
    ("a sunny holiday by the sea", 0.7),
    ("laughed all night with friends", 0.8),
    ("lost a beloved pet", -0.9),
    ("failed an important exam", -0.7),
    ("argued with a close friend", -0.6),
    ("bought groceries on a plain day", 0.0),
    ("waited quietly for a bus", 0.0),
]

# Create a number variable called CONGRUENCE_GAIN with value zero point eight.
CONGRUENCE_GAIN = 0.8

# Define a procedure called retrieve that accepts a mood value and a count of items to recall.
def retrieve(mood, count):
    # Create an empty list variable called scored.
    scored = []
    # For each memory in MEMORIES, compute a biased activation.
    for description, valence in MEMORIES:
        # Calculate a base activation as a random number between zero and one.
        base = random.random()
        # Calculate a congruence bonus as the gain times the mood times the memory valence.
        bonus = CONGRUENCE_GAIN * mood * valence
        # Calculate the total activation as the base activation plus the congruence bonus.
        total = base + bonus
        # Add the memory description and its total activation to scored.
        scored.append((total, description))
    # Sort scored from highest activation to lowest.
    scored.sort(reverse=True)
    # Return the first count memory descriptions from scored.
    return [description for total, description in scored[:count]]

# Simulate a sad mood and report the three most retrievable memories.
print("sad mood recalls:", retrieve(-0.9, 3))

# Simulate a happy mood and report the three most retrievable memories.
print("happy mood recalls:", retrieve(0.9, 3))


CHAPTER 47. SOCIAL COGNITION AND THEORY OF MIND (PROCESS)

This chapter is about the mind's most demanding job: understanding other minds.

Other people are the most complicated objects we ever deal with, because they have hidden thoughts, beliefs, and intentions that we cannot see directly.

Social cognition is the study of how we make sense of other people and of ourselves in relation to them.

In systems terms, social cognition is a modelling subsystem that takes observable behaviour as input and maintains, as state, separate internal models of each agent's beliefs, desires, and character, publishing predictions of what those agents will do next.

Here we look at how we read what others are thinking, how we form impressions of them, and how minds coordinate to act and communicate together.


47.1 Theory of mind

Theory of mind is the everyday ability to attribute mental states to others, to grasp that other people have beliefs, desires, and intentions that may differ from your own and from reality.

The phrase can mislead a newcomer, because it does not refer to a scientist's theory but to the ordinary skill each of us uses to guess what is going on in someone else's head.

It is sometimes called mentalising, and it is the invisible engine behind cooperation, deception, teaching, and simple conversation.

This section looks at how it is tested, at rival explanations of how it works, and at a modern computational account.


47.1.1 The false-belief task and its development

The false-belief task is the classic test of whether someone understands that another person can hold a belief that is wrong.

The most famous version is the Sally-Anne task, introduced by Heinz Wimmer and Josef Perner in 1983 and later used with autistic children by Simon Baron-Cohen and colleagues.

In it, a character named Sally puts a marble in a basket and leaves the room, and while she is gone another character, Anne, moves the marble to a box.

The child is then asked where Sally will look for her marble when she returns.

The correct answer is the basket, because that is where Sally still believes it to be, even though the child watching knows it is really in the box.

To pass, the child must hold two pictures of the world at once: reality, and Sally's false belief about reality.

In systems terms, passing requires maintaining two separate state stores, a world model and a per-agent belief model, and updating the belief model only with events that agent could observe; the developmental time constant is striking, since this capacity typically comes online around the age of four.

The robust developmental finding is that most children begin to pass this test around the age of four, while younger children tend to answer with the true location, seemingly unable yet to separate what they know from what Sally knows.

This age shift is one of the most replicated results in developmental psychology, though researchers debate what changes at four, and some newer studies using looking-time measures suggest that infants show a hint of belief understanding far earlier, before they can talk.

The task also became central to autism research, where difficulties with false-belief reasoning were taken as evidence of differences in mentalising, a view that has since been refined and made less absolute.


47.1.2 Theory-theory against simulation accounts

This sub-section is about two rival explanations of how we actually read other minds.

The first, called the theory-theory, says we understand others by using something like an informal theory of how minds work.

On this account you carry around a set of rules linking situations, beliefs, desires, and actions, and you apply them to predict what someone will do, rather as a scientist applies a theory to predict an experiment.

The second, called the simulation theory, says we understand others not by consulting rules but by imagining ourselves in their shoes.

On this account you run your own mind as a model of theirs, pretending to have their beliefs and desires and seeing what decision your own mind would then produce.

A quick way to feel the difference: to predict a frightened friend's next move, the theory-theory says you apply a rule about fear and flight, while the simulation theory says you imagine being frightened yourself and notice the urge to flee.

Because this is a debate rather than a settled mechanism, it helps to state the two architectures in systems terms: the theory-theory predicts a rule base queried like a knowledge system, so errors should follow gaps in the rules, while the simulation theory predicts that your own decision machinery is re-run with substituted inputs, so errors should follow your own biases leaking into the model of the other person.

Both accounts have support, and many researchers now think the truth is a blend, with simple, fast mind-reading leaning on simulation and complex, unusual cases leaning on theory-like reasoning.

The debate matters for artificial intelligence because it asks whether a machine needs an explicit model of human psychology or whether it could read people by running a copy of a mind.


47.1.3 Mentalising as inverse planning

Inverse planning is a modern, mathematical way of describing what mind-reading does.

The core idea starts from a simple assumption: people usually act to achieve their goals, given their beliefs, in a roughly sensible way.

Ordinary planning goes forward, from a goal to the actions that would reach it.

Inverse planning runs that arrow backward: it starts from the actions you observe and works out which goals and beliefs would best explain them.

If you see someone take a long detour around a fence to reach a spot, you infer they wanted that spot and believed the fence was in the way, because that pairing of desire and belief best explains the path.

Researchers such as Chris Baker, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Rebecca Saxe built formal models that treat this as probabilistic inference, using the mathematics of Bayesian reasoning, which is a principled way of updating beliefs from evidence.

As a system, an inverse planner takes an observed action sequence as input, holds a space of candidate goal-and-belief pairs as state, scores each candidate by how well a rational plan under it would reproduce the observed actions, and publishes a probability distribution over the candidates, updating it observation by observation as the behaviour unfolds.

These models predict people's moment-to-moment guesses about others' goals with real accuracy, which is impressive support for the idea.

This connects theory of mind to the broader theme of the mind as a model-builder, because reading another person becomes a matter of inferring the hidden causes, their goals and beliefs, behind the visible behaviour.

It also gives engineers a concrete recipe, since inverse planning can be programmed, and it is one of the more promising bridges between human social cognition and machine social intelligence.


47.2 Person perception

Person perception is how we form impressions of what other people are like.

Unlike the false-belief task, which is about reading a single hidden thought, this is about building a lasting picture of someone's character.

This section looks at how those impressions form and at the biases, often invisible to us, that shape them.


47.2.1 Impression formation and attribution

Impression formation is the process of combining scraps of information about a person into an overall sense of who they are.

The pioneering work came from Solomon Asch in the 1940s, who showed that we do not simply add up a person's traits like items on a list.

Instead the traits interact, and some traits are central, colouring how we read everything else.

In his famous demonstration, describing a person as "warm" versus "cold", while keeping every other word the same, dramatically changed the whole impression, whereas swapping "polite" for "blunt" changed it far less.

So "warm" and "cold" are central traits that reorganise the entire picture, while others are peripheral.

In systems terms, impression formation takes trait evidence as input and outputs a structured person model rather than a running average, with central traits acting as high-weight parameters that re-tune how every other input is interpreted; first impressions form fast, with trait judgments from faces measurable after exposures of a tenth of a second, and then stabilise.

Attribution is the closely related process of explaining why a person did something, in particular whether we credit it to their character or to their circumstances.

A large and reliable bias here is the fundamental attribution error, our tendency, as observers, to over-explain other people's behaviour by their personality and to under-weight the situation they were in.

When a stranger snaps at a waiter we tend to think "what a rude person", giving little thought to the terrible day that might explain it, yet we readily excuse our own snapping by pointing to our circumstances.

This asymmetry is worth remembering because it quietly distorts everyday judgments of blame and praise, though its strength varies across cultures, being generally weaker in societies that emphasise the group and the situation.


47.2.2 Implicit social cognition and stereotyping

Implicit social cognition is the part of our thinking about people that runs automatically and outside awareness.

The important and sometimes uncomfortable idea is that we can hold attitudes and associations we would sincerely disavow if asked directly.

A stereotype is a generalised belief about the members of a group, a mental shortcut that saves effort but flattens individuals into a category.

Such shortcuts form easily because grouping is a basic feature of how the mind organises the world, but applied to people they can be inaccurate and unfair.

Researchers measure the automatic side of these associations with tools such as the Implicit Association Test (IAT), developed by Anthony Greenwald, Mahzarin Banaji, and colleagues in the late 1990s.

The test measures how quickly a person pairs, for example, faces from a group with pleasant or unpleasant words, on the logic that we are faster to link things that already feel associated in our minds.

In systems terms, the implicit layer is an associative network whose inputs are category cues, whose outputs are automatic evaluations delivered within a few hundred milliseconds, and whose weights are trained slowly by cultural exposure, which is why it can disagree with the person's slower, deliberate, reportable attitudes.

It is important to be careful and honest here, because the science is contested: the test reliably detects average automatic associations across groups of people, but it predicts any single individual's behaviour only weakly, and experts disagree about exactly what it measures.

So the responsible summary is that automatic biases are real and widespread, that they can influence behaviour in ways their holders do not intend, but that no single test reads a person's prejudice off a screen.

For designers of automated systems the deeper lesson is sobering, because machines that learn from human data readily absorb the very stereotypes buried in that data.


47.3 Shared cognition

Shared cognition is about minds working together, coordinating their thoughts and actions toward a common end.

Much of what makes humans distinctive is not what one mind can do alone but what two or more minds can do together.

This section looks at how people share goals and act jointly, and at communication as a cooperative meeting of minds.


47.3.1 Shared intentionality and joint action

Shared intentionality is the capacity to share a goal and a plan with another person, to hold a "we" intention rather than only an "I" intention.

The developmental psychologist Michael Tomasello has argued that this ability is a deep dividing line between humans and other great apes.

His research suggests that even young children readily do things together for a shared purpose, taking turns, sharing attention, and helping a partner meet a joint goal, in ways that chimpanzees largely do not.

A simple example is two people carrying a table that neither could carry alone, each adjusting to the other, each understanding that they are doing this together.

The foundation Tomasello points to is joint attention, the early achievement of an infant and a caregiver both attending to the same thing and each knowing that they are sharing it, an ability that typically emerges around 9 to 12 months of age.

From this shared "we" grows the ability to build common ground, the pool of things two people know that they both know, which turns out to be the bedrock of cooperation and culture.

In systems terms, joint action requires each partner to run a predictive model of the other: the inputs are the partner's observed movements and the shared goal, the outputs are one's own adjusted actions, and the loop must run continuously at the sub-second timescale of real movement for two bodies to mesh.

Joint action, the coordinated activity that shared intentionality makes possible, is studied in tasks where two people must synchronise, and it shows the mind constantly predicting a partner's moves and adjusting to mesh with them.

Tomasello's larger claim is that this cooperative infrastructure, more than raw brainpower alone, is what let humans accumulate culture across generations.


47.3.2 Communication as a cognitive act

This sub-section makes a deceptively simple point: communicating is not just transmitting signals, it is a cooperative act of getting into another mind and being let in.

The philosopher Paul Grice argued that ordinary communication rests on the listener recognising the speaker's intention to be understood, not merely decoding the words.

When a friend says "it is cold in here", they may intend you to close the window, and you grasp the real meaning by inferring their intention rather than by translating the sentence literally.

This is why understanding language leans so heavily on theory of mind, the mind-reading of the earlier sections, because to catch what someone means you must model what they intend.

In systems terms, communication is a two-agent inference loop: the speaker chooses a signal predicted to change the listener's model in the intended way, the listener runs intention inference over the signal plus the common ground, and both update the shared context turn by turn, at the pace of conversation where turns follow one another in well under a second.

Tomasello built on Grice to argue that human communication is unusually cooperative at its root, aimed at genuinely sharing attention and helping the listener, and that it grew out of the same shared intentionality described just above.

Communication also uses ostensive cues, meaning signals such as eye contact, pointing, and a special tone of voice that announce "I have something to tell you, and it is for you".

Infants are especially tuned to these cues and treat information offered with them as general and trustworthy, which makes such signalling a powerful engine of early learning.

The overall lesson is that a message is not a package handed over intact; it is a hint that two cooperating minds use to converge on a shared meaning, which is why truly humanlike communication is such a demanding target for machines.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Observed behaviour: actions, gaze, expressions, and speech of other agents, delivered by perception.

◦ Situational context: the physical layout and events each agent could or could not observe.

◦ Common ground: the running record of what both parties know they share, delivered by memory of the interaction.

◦ Ostensive cues: eye contact, pointing, and addressed speech that flag a communicative intention.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Mental-state attributions: estimated beliefs, desires, and intentions of each tracked agent, consumed by prediction and planning.

◦ Behaviour predictions: expected next actions of others, consumed by one's own action selection and joint-action control.

◦ Person impressions: trait summaries and evaluations, consumed by judgment, approach, and avoidance decisions.

◦ Communicative signals: utterances and gestures chosen to update the partner's model, consumed by other agents.

• STATE.

◦ A world model of the actual situation.

◦ A separate belief store for each tracked agent, updated only by events that agent could observe.

◦ A person model for each known individual, holding trait and evaluation summaries.

◦ The common ground of the current interaction.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rationality assumption: how strictly observed agents are assumed to act sensibly given their beliefs and goals, the key prior of inverse planning.

◦ Trait centrality weights: how strongly central traits such as warm and cold reorganise an impression.

◦ Egocentric leakage: how much one's own knowledge contaminates the model of another's beliefs.

◦ Association strengths: the learned weights of the implicit evaluation network.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ First impressions from faces: trait judgments are measurable after exposures of about 100 milliseconds.

◦ Automatic evaluations: implicit association effects appear in response-time differences of a few hundred milliseconds.

◦ Joint attention onset: emerges developmentally at about 9 to 12 months of age.

◦ Explicit false-belief success: emerges at about 4 years of age.

◦ Full mentalising computation: REFUSED, because the duration of a real-world belief inference varies from an instant glance to minutes of puzzling, with no single supported value.

• MODES.

◦ Fast implicit mode: automatic evaluation and simulation-like prediction, the default for routine interaction.

◦ Deliberate mentalising mode: explicit theory-like reasoning about beliefs and goals, triggered by surprising or high-stakes behaviour.

◦ Joint mode: a "we" frame in which the shared goal and the partner model dominate control, triggered by joint attention and a shared commitment.

◦ Communicative mode: signal choice and intention inference, triggered by ostensive cues.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Egocentric error: answering from one's own knowledge instead of the other's beliefs, the signature failure of children under four on the false-belief task.

◦ The fundamental attribution error: overweighting character and underweighting situation when explaining others.

◦ Stereotype application: substituting a group average for an individual, with automatic associations diverging from endorsed values.

◦ Mentalising differences in autism: false-belief reasoning can be harder, a finding now treated as one difference among many rather than a defining deficit.

◦ Miscommunication: intention inference failing when common ground is misjudged, so the literal message is received but the meaning is lost.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a text variable called world holding the marble's true location, with initial value basket.
Create a dictionary variable called beliefs mapping each agent's name to where that agent thinks the marble is.
Create a list variable called present holding the names of the agents currently in the room.
Define a procedure called handle_event that accepts an event.
    If the event says an agent leaves, remove that agent from present.
    If the event says an agent enters, add that agent to present.
    If the event says the marble moves to a new place, set world to the new place.
        For each agent in present, set that agent's belief to the new place.
Define a procedure called predict_search that accepts an agent's name.
    Return the location stored in beliefs for that agent.
Process the Sally-Anne story: Sally places the marble in the basket, Sally leaves, Anne moves the marble to the box, Sally returns.
Report where Sally will look, using predict_search on Sally.
Report where the marble really is, using world.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a text variable called world holding the marble's true location.
world = "basket"

# Create a dictionary variable called beliefs mapping each agent to where she thinks the marble is.
beliefs = {"Sally": "basket", "Anne": "basket"}

# Create a list variable called present holding the agents currently in the room.
present = ["Sally", "Anne"]

# Define a procedure called handle_event that accepts an event tuple.
def handle_event(event):
    # Declare that this procedure updates the world variable.
    global world
    # Unpack the event into a kind and a value.
    kind, value = event
    # If the event says an agent leaves, remove that agent from present.
    if kind == "leave":
        present.remove(value)
    # If the event says an agent enters, add that agent to present.
    elif kind == "enter":
        present.append(value)
    # If the event says the marble moves, update the world and the beliefs of those present.
    elif kind == "move":
        # Set world to the new place.
        world = value
        # For each agent in present, set that agent's belief to the new place.
        for agent in present:
            beliefs[agent] = value

# Define a procedure called predict_search that accepts an agent's name.
def predict_search(agent):
    # Return the location stored in beliefs for that agent.
    return beliefs[agent]

# Process the Sally-Anne story as a list of events.
STORY = [("move", "basket"), ("leave", "Sally"), ("move", "box"), ("enter", "Sally")]

# For each event in the story, call handle_event on it.
for event in STORY:
    handle_event(event)

# Report where Sally will look for her marble.
print("Sally will look in the:", predict_search("Sally"))

# Report where the marble really is.
print("The marble is really in the:", world)


CHAPTER 48. MORAL COGNITION AND SELF (PROCESS)

This chapter is about two of the most personal parts of the mind: our sense of right and wrong, and our sense of who we are.

Moral cognition is the study of how people judge actions as good or bad and decide what they ought to do.

The self is the study of how a mind represents itself, holds a picture of its own character, and stitches its life into a single continuing story.

In systems terms, both are built from components met earlier in this book: moral judgment combines fast affective evaluation with slow outcome calculation, and the self is a model, maintained like any other model, whose object happens to be the modeller.

Both topics touch on what feels most essentially human, and both turn out to be built from ordinary cognitive parts working in concert.


48.1 Moral cognition

Moral cognition asks how we arrive at judgments like "that was wrong" or "she did the right thing".

For centuries the assumption was that moral judgment is the work of careful reasoning, but recent science has complicated that picture considerably.

This section looks at the influential idea that morality runs on two systems, and at the powerful role of feeling and intuition.


48.1.1 The dual-process account of moral judgment

The dual-process account, developed most prominently by the psychologist and neuroscientist Joshua Greene, says moral judgment draws on two different systems in the mind.

The first is fast, automatic, and emotional, producing gut reactions about what is acceptable.

The second is slow, effortful, and deliberate, producing reasoned calculations about outcomes.

Greene studied this using the trolley problem, a thought experiment in which a runaway trolley will kill five people unless it is diverted or stopped in a way that kills one.

People generally accept flipping a switch to divert the trolley onto a track where it kills one instead of five, a calculation of outcomes.

Yet most people refuse to push a large stranger off a footbridge to stop the trolley, even though the arithmetic of one death versus five is identical.

Greene's proposal is that the up-close, personal act of pushing someone triggers a strong emotional alarm from the fast system, which vetoes it, while the impersonal switch leaves the slow, calculating system free to favour the greater good.

In systems terms, this is a two-channel arbitration architecture: one channel outputs an action-aversion signal within moments of representing the act, the other channel computes outcome utility over seconds of deliberation, and the published judgment is whichever channel wins the weighting; overriding the alarm measurably lengthens response times, though the exact added time varies across studies.

Brain imaging supported this by showing that the personal version stirs more activity in emotion-related regions, and that people who override the alarm to give the calculating answer take longer and engage more of the brain's deliberate-control machinery.

The account remains debated, and some researchers question whether emotion and reason divide up so neatly, but it reshaped the field by showing that feeling is not a contaminant of moral judgment; it is a central part of how moral judgment is made.


48.1.2 Moral emotions and moral intuition

This sub-section deepens the point that much of morality begins with feeling rather than argument.

Moral emotions are feelings tied to right and wrong, including guilt and shame about one's own conduct, anger or indignation at others' wrongs, disgust at what seems degrading, and elevation or gratitude at moral beauty.

These emotions are not side effects of moral thinking; they often are the moral response, arriving fast and pushing us toward blame or praise before we can explain ourselves.

The psychologist Jonathan Haidt captured this with his social intuitionist model, which argues that moral judgments usually come first, as quick intuitions, and that our reasoning mostly follows afterward to justify what we already felt.

He illustrated it with "moral dumbfounding", the state in which people feel sure that some act is wrong yet cannot produce any reason for it, insisting on the wrongness even after every argument they offer is answered.

The word "intuitionist" here just means the model puts intuition, the fast automatic feeling, in the driver's seat, with conscious reasoning acting more like a press secretary than a judge.

In systems terms, the social intuitionist model reverses the assumed data flow: the intuition channel publishes the verdict first, on the timescale of the fast appraisal system, and the reasoning channel consumes that verdict as input and generates justifications afterward, over seconds, revising the verdict only rarely and with effort.

Haidt and Greene broadly agree that emotion and intuition do much of the heavy lifting in moral judgment, though they differ on how much room is left for reasoning to change our minds.

This does not mean morality is merely irrational; it means our moral sense grows from a deep well of social emotions, and reasoning works best as a slower partner that can, with effort, revise the intuitions rather than replace them.


48.2 The self

The self is the mind's model of itself, the answer each of us carries to the question "who am I?".

It is easy to assume the self is a single thing sitting at the centre of the mind, but the science suggests it is more like a construction, assembled and maintained by many processes.

This section looks at how we know ourselves and at how we hold ourselves together across time.


48.2.1 Self-knowledge and self-representation

Self-knowledge is what we know about our own traits, feelings, abilities, and preferences, and self-representation is the mental picture in which that knowledge is stored.

A natural assumption is that we know ourselves directly and infallibly, by simply looking inward, but psychology has found this is only partly true.

Daryl Bem's self-perception theory made the surprising proposal that we often learn our own attitudes and feelings the same way an outside observer would, by watching our own behaviour.

On this view, when our inner signals are weak or unclear, we infer "I must like this, because I keep choosing it", reading ourselves off our actions rather than reading our actions off a clearly felt preference.

In systems terms, the self-model has two input channels, a direct interoceptive readout and an inferential channel that observes one's own behaviour, and the inferential channel takes over whenever the direct signal is weak; the model updates slowly, accumulating evidence over days to years, which is why self-views lag behind changes in behaviour.

This does not mean we are strangers to ourselves, but it does mean self-knowledge is partly inferred and constructed, not simply perceived.

The self-representation we build is also organised and selective, tending to be more positive than the plain facts warrant, a gentle bias that generally supports wellbeing.

The picture that emerges is of a self-model that is genuinely useful and mostly stable, yet assembled from inference and open to error, much like our models of other people.


48.2.2 The self across time and the narrative self

This final sub-section is about what makes you feel like the same person today that you were as a child and will be in old age.

Our bodies and even most of our memories change enormously across a life, so the sense of being one continuous self is a real achievement rather than a given.

A leading answer is the narrative self, the idea that we hold ourselves together by telling an ongoing life story that links our past, present, and imagined future into a single character.

The philosopher Daniel Dennett described the self as a "center of narrative gravity", not a thing you could find in the brain but a useful fiction, the main character of the story the mind keeps telling about itself.

Support for the constructed nature of this narrative comes from studies by Michael Gazzaniga of patients whose two brain hemispheres had been surgically separated.

He found that when one half of the brain acted on information the other half could not see, the speaking half would smoothly invent a plausible reason for the action, confident it was reporting the truth.

Gazzaniga called the mechanism behind this the interpreter, a process in the mind that continually weaves our actions and feelings into a coherent, sensible story, even when it has to make parts of that story up.

In systems terms, the interpreter is a continuous story-maintenance process: its inputs are one's own actions, feelings, and memories, its output is a coherent running narrative, and when an input arrives without an accessible cause the process confabulates one rather than leaving a gap, operating on every timescale from the moment-by-moment explanation of an action to the lifelong revision of the life story.

None of this means the self is a mere illusion with nothing behind it; it means the unified self is something the mind actively builds and maintains, moment by moment and year by year.

This connects back to the whole chapter, for the same mind that constructs its emotions, reads other minds, and feels its way to moral judgments also constructs, out of all these materials, the ongoing sense of being someone.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Action descriptions: the act being judged, its directness, and its harms and benefits, delivered by perception, language, or imagination.

◦ Affective alarms: fast aversion and approval signals from the emotion system, especially for personal, up-close harms.

◦ Social norms: learned rules and expectations from culture and community.

◦ Self-observations: one's own behaviour, feelings, and memories, feeding the self-model and the narrative.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Moral verdicts: judgments of right, wrong, blame, and praise, consumed by decision making, speech, and social sanctioning.

◦ Justifications: post-hoc reasons for verdicts, consumed by communication and self-explanation.

◦ Moral emotions: guilt, indignation, gratitude, and their kin, consumed by the motivational system to steer future conduct.

◦ The self-narrative: an updated life story and self-description, consumed by planning, identity, and autobiographical memory.

• STATE.

◦ The current weighting between the intuitive channel and the deliberative channel.

◦ The stock of internalised norms and learned aversions.

◦ The self-model of traits, preferences, and abilities.

◦ The ongoing narrative linking past, present, and imagined future.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Aversion gain: how strongly a personal, direct harm triggers the emotional veto.

◦ Utility weight: how heavily calculated outcomes count against the alarm.

◦ Revision threshold: how much argument or reflection is needed before an intuition is overturned.

◦ Positivity bias: the degree to which the self-model is tilted favourable.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Intuitive verdict: arrives on the timescale of fast appraisal, within roughly the first second of grasping the act.

◦ Deliberative calculation: seconds, with response times measurably longer when calculation must override the emotional alarm.

◦ Self-model revision: REFUSED, because self-views change over weeks to decades depending on the evidence and the trait, with no single supported value.

◦ Narrative updating: REFUSED, because the interpreter runs continuously and the life story is revised across the whole lifespan, so no characteristic value is honest.

• MODES.

◦ Intuitive mode: the fast affective verdict stands unchallenged, the default for familiar cases.

◦ Deliberative mode: outcome calculation engaged, triggered by dilemmas, conflicting intuitions, or explicit demands for justification.

◦ Introspective mode: the direct readout of one's own states, used when inner signals are strong and clear.

◦ Self-perception mode: inferring one's states from one's behaviour, triggered when inner signals are weak or ambiguous.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Moral dumbfounding: a confident verdict with no producible reason, exposing the intuition-first data flow.

◦ Judgment reversals from irrelevant framing, as when identical outcomes are judged differently because one act is up close and personal.

◦ Motivated justification: reasoning that serves the verdict instead of testing it.

◦ Confabulation: the interpreter inventing plausible but false explanations of one's own actions, seen starkly in split-brain patients.

◦ Distorted self-models: the positivity bias tipping into grandiosity, or collapsing into the harsh negative self-view seen in depression.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called aversion_gain with initial value five point zero.
Create a number variable called utility_weight with initial value one point zero.
Define a procedure called judge that accepts a dilemma with a count of lives saved, a count of lives lost, and a personal force score between zero and one.
    Calculate the outcome utility as utility_weight multiplied by the difference between lives saved and lives lost.
    Calculate the emotional alarm as aversion_gain multiplied by the personal force score multiplied by the count of lives lost.
    Calculate the judgment score as the outcome utility minus the emotional alarm.
    If the judgment score is greater than zero, return the verdict acceptable.
    Otherwise, return the verdict wrong.
Create a list variable called dilemmas holding the switch case, with five saved, one lost, and low personal force, and the footbridge case, with five saved, one lost, and high personal force.
For each dilemma in dilemmas, call judge on it and report the dilemma's name, its utility, its alarm, and its verdict.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a number variable called AVERSION_GAIN with value five point zero.
AVERSION_GAIN = 5.0

# Create a number variable called UTILITY_WEIGHT with value one point zero.
UTILITY_WEIGHT = 1.0

# Define a procedure called judge that accepts lives saved, lives lost, and a personal force score.
def judge(saved, lost, personal_force):
    # Calculate the outcome utility as the utility weight times the net lives saved.
    utility = UTILITY_WEIGHT * (saved - lost)
    # Calculate the emotional alarm as the aversion gain times the personal force times the lives lost.
    alarm = AVERSION_GAIN * personal_force * lost
    # Calculate the judgment score as the outcome utility minus the emotional alarm.
    score = utility - alarm
    # If the judgment score is greater than zero, the verdict is acceptable.
    if score > 0:
        # Return the verdict acceptable together with the utility and the alarm.
        return "acceptable", utility, alarm
    # Otherwise, the verdict is wrong.
    return "wrong", utility, alarm

# Create a list variable called DILEMMAS holding named cases with their features.
DILEMMAS = [
    # The switch case saves five, loses one, with low personal force.
    ("switch case", 5, 1, 0.1),
    # The footbridge case saves five, loses one, with high personal force.
    ("footbridge case", 5, 1, 0.9),
    # A rescue with no harm done saves two, loses none, with no personal force.
    ("harmless rescue", 2, 0, 0.0),
]

# For each dilemma in DILEMMAS, call judge on it and report the results.
for name, saved, lost, force in DILEMMAS:
    # Call judge with the dilemma's features.
    verdict, utility, alarm = judge(saved, lost, force)
    # Print the dilemma name, its utility, its alarm, and its verdict.
    print(name, "utility:", utility, "alarm:", round(alarm, 2), "verdict:", verdict)


================================================================================

PART TWELVE. THE VARIETIES AND ORIGINS OF COGNITION

================================================================================

CHAPTER 49. COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT (PROCESS)

This chapter is about how a human mind grows from the simple starting point of a newborn into the rich thinking of an adult.

Cognitive development is the study of that growth: how knowing, remembering, reasoning, and understanding change across the early years of life.

Viewed as an engineered system, development is a long-running learning process whose inputs are streams of sensory evidence and social interaction, whose outputs are progressively more capable models of the world, and whose state is the child's current stock of concepts, skills, and capacities.

It matters because every adult ability the rest of this book describes had to be built, and watching it being built tells us what the finished machine is really made of.

A newborn cannot talk, plan, or do arithmetic, yet within a few years a child does all three, and the question of how that happens is one of the oldest and deepest in the science of mind.

This chapter walks through the main answers, from the classic stage theories to the modern view of the child as a kind of young scientist.


49.1 The stage and constructivist theories

This section covers the first great theory of how the mind grows, and the theories that grew up to correct it.

The word constructivist here means a view in which the child actively builds their own understanding, rather than simply having knowledge poured in from outside.

The central figure is Jean Piaget, a Swiss thinker whose ideas dominated the field for most of the twentieth century, and whose picture is still the starting point for almost every discussion.

In systems terms, the constructivist claim is that the learner is not a passive store being written to but an active controller that generates predictions, detects mismatches, and rewrites its own data structures.


49.1.1 Piaget's stages and the mechanisms of assimilation and accommodation

Jean Piaget, who worked from the 1920s to the 1970s, proposed that children think in ways that are not just simpler than adult thought but different in kind, and that they pass through a fixed series of stages on the way to maturity.

A stage, in his sense, is a whole way of thinking that colours everything the child does at that age, not just a single skill.

Piaget described four main stages.

The first is the sensorimotor stage, from birth to about two years, in which the baby knows the world only through the senses and through actions such as grasping, sucking, and looking.

The second is the preoperational stage, from about two to seven years, in which the child can use words and images but still reasons in a way tied to how things look.

The third is the concrete operational stage, from about seven to eleven years, in which the child can reason logically about real, concrete objects.

The fourth is the formal operational stage, from about twelve years onward, in which the young person can reason about abstract ideas and hypothetical possibilities.

To explain how a child moves through these stages, Piaget used two key ideas.

The first is a scheme, sometimes written schema, which is a mental pattern or rule for dealing with the world, such as a baby's built-in pattern for grasping anything placed in the hand.

Assimilation is the process of fitting a new experience into an existing scheme, the way a baby who knows how to grasp a rattle will also grasp a spoon by treating it as one more graspable thing.

Accommodation is the opposite and complementary process of changing the scheme to fit a new experience that will not fit as it is, the way the baby must adjust the grip for a large ball that cannot be seized like a rattle.

Piaget believed learning is a constant back and forth between these two, driven by a drive he called equilibration, which is the mind's push to resolve the discomfort it feels when the world does not match its expectations.

That felt mismatch he called disequilibrium, and the resolving of it is what moves the child forward.

Read as a mechanism, the Piagetian learner takes experiences as input, outputs actions and expectations, holds a library of schemes as state, and runs an error-driven update loop: small prediction errors are absorbed by assimilation within milliseconds to seconds, while accumulated errors force accommodation over days to years.

One of Piaget's most famous demonstrations was conservation, the understanding that a quantity stays the same when its appearance changes but nothing is added or taken away.

In the classic task, a child watches water poured from a short wide glass into a tall thin one, and a preoperational child typically says the tall glass now has more, because it looks like more, while an older child knows the amount is unchanged.

Piaget read this as showing that the younger child's thinking is captured by appearances in a way the older child's is not.


49.1.2 The neo-Piagetian and information-processing accounts

Piaget's picture was hugely influential, but later research showed that some of it was wrong, and this sub-section covers the theories built to keep what was right while fixing what was not.

The word neo-Piagetian simply means the newer theories that came after Piaget and revised him, mostly in the 1970s and 1980s.

The main problem these theories addressed is that Piaget consistently underestimated young children.

His tasks often demanded that a child give a spoken answer or perform a fiddly action, and when researchers used simpler tests, children turned out to understand things such as number and hidden objects far earlier than Piaget had claimed.

Development also looked less like a sudden jump between whole stages and more gradual and uneven, so that a child might grasp conservation of number before conservation of liquid rather than switching over all at once.

The neo-Piagetian theorists kept Piaget's core idea that children build their own understanding, but they explained the changes using the language of information processing, which is the approach that treats the mind like a system that takes in, stores, and works on information, much as a computer does.

A leading example is the work of Juan Pascual-Leone, who proposed that what grows with age is the amount of information a child can hold in mind and juggle at once, a kind of mental workspace.

On this view a five-year-old fails the conservation task not because their whole way of thinking is different, but because the task demands holding more pieces of information at once than their still-small working memory can manage.

Working memory here means the small store that holds the handful of things you are actively thinking about right now.

Other neo-Piagetians such as Robbie Case and Kurt Fischer built detailed accounts in which growing processing capacity, faster mental operations, and practice together explain the orderly march of development.

In systems terms the two camps predict differently: Piaget predicts a wholesale change of algorithm between stages, while the information-processing view predicts the same algorithm running with slowly rising capacity and speed parameters, so that apparent stages fall out of continuous parameter growth crossing task thresholds.

The lasting lesson is that the broad sequence Piaget saw is real, but its engine is better described as the gradual growth of memory, speed, and control than as the replacement of one whole logic by another.


49.2 Core knowledge and nativism

This section covers a different and more recent tradition that asks what, if anything, a baby knows before experience has had a chance to teach it.

Nativism is the view that some knowledge or ability is built in from birth rather than learned, and it stands opposite to the older idea of the infant mind as a blank slate.

The modern evidence, gathered by carefully watching where babies look and how long they look, suggests that the newborn mind is far from blank.

In systems language, the debate is about the factory settings: nativism claims the system ships with pre-installed special-purpose modules, while empiricism claims it ships with general learning routines and little pre-loaded content.


49.2.1 The core systems of object, agent, number, and space

The core knowledge view, developed above all by the psychologist Elizabeth Spelke and her colleagues from the 1990s onward, holds that human thought is founded on a small set of ancient, built-in systems that are present in early infancy and shared with other animals.

A core system is a specialised bit of mental machinery dedicated to one kind of information, that works automatically and is present long before language.

Researchers usually name four such systems.

The first is a system for objects, which lets even young babies expect that a solid thing moves as a connected whole, does not pass through other solid things, and continues to exist when it goes out of sight.

Babies reveal this by looking longer at an event that violates these expectations, such as one solid object appearing to pass through another, and longer looking is taken to mean the baby found the event surprising.

As a measurement interface, the violation-of-expectation method takes an event as input and reads out looking time in seconds as its output, treating extra seconds of gaze as a surprise signal from the infant's internal model.

The second is a system for agents, which lets babies treat some things as goal-directed actors that move on their own and respond to others, and to expect such agents to act efficiently toward their goals.

The third is a system for number, which gives babies a rough, wordless sense of quantity, so that they can tell a small set of items from a clearly larger one without counting.

The fourth is a system for space and geometry, which lets babies and young children find their way using the shape of their surroundings.

Some researchers add a fifth system for social partners, dealing with who belongs to one's own group.

The claim is not that babies are born knowing facts, but that they are born with these narrow, reliable ways of parsing the world that give learning something to build on.


49.2.2 Conceptual change and bootstrapping

If the mind starts with only a few narrow core systems, a hard question follows: how does it ever reach the rich, abstract concepts of an adult, such as the exact counting numbers, that the core systems alone cannot supply.

This sub-section covers the leading answer, developed above all by the psychologist Susan Carey.

Conceptual change means a genuine reorganisation of what a person knows, in which new concepts appear that could not simply be assembled from the old ones, rather than just more facts being added.

Carey argued that human development includes several such deep reorganisations, so that a child's early theory of the world is sometimes replaced, not merely extended, much as science itself sometimes overturns an old picture.

Her key mechanism is bootstrapping, named for the image of pulling oneself up by one's own bootstraps, which is the idea that a learner can use structures they already have, together with a system of external symbols such as the count words, to build a genuinely new concept that goes beyond the starting materials.

The favourite example is learning to count.

Carey proposed that a child first learns the count words as a meaningless ordered list, like a rhyme, then slowly maps the first few words onto their built-in sense of small quantities, and finally makes a leap to grasp the rule that each next word means exactly one more, which is a concept neither core system contained on its own.

In systems terms, bootstrapping is a process that takes an external symbol list plus the outputs of two internal modules as input, and outputs a new representational format, with the mapping built up over months to years of practice with counting.

Spelke and others agree that language, by letting the child combine the outputs of separate core systems, plays a central role in creating these new concepts.

There is real and ongoing debate here: some theorists see the counting concept as truly new, built by bootstrapping, while others argue it was latent in the child's innate resources all along, and the field has not fully settled the question.

The two sides predict differently in systems terms: the bootstrapping view predicts a discontinuous jump in what the child's representations can express once the mapping completes, while the latent-knowledge view predicts continuous unmasking of an ability that was measurable in weaker forms all along.


49.3 The child as scientist

This section covers a modern framework that captures how children learn about the causal structure of the world, the hidden ways in which one thing makes another happen.

The guiding image is that a young child behaves rather like a scientist, forming ideas about how things work, running little experiments through play, and revising those ideas in light of the evidence.

The framework brings together developmental psychology with the mathematics of probability, and its leading figure is the psychologist Alison Gopnik.


49.3.1 Children's causal learning

Causal learning means figuring out what causes what, for example that flipping a switch is what makes a light come on rather than the two events just happening together by chance.

Research from the 1990s onward showed that even toddlers are surprisingly good at this, and do not simply notice that two things occur together but work out the underlying cause.

In a well-known style of study, children watch which objects, when placed on a special machine, make it light up and play music, and they use the pattern of what happens to infer which object is the true cause, even distinguishing a real cause from a mere coincidence.

Children learn causes in several ways: by watching how events line up over time, by acting on the world themselves and seeing what changes, and by observing and imitating what other people do.

Their spontaneous play turns out to be full of informal experiments, and children tend to explore an object more when its workings are surprising or unclear, exactly as someone gathering evidence would.

As a mechanism, causal learning takes event sequences and the outcomes of the child's own interventions as input, outputs a graph of believed cause and effect links, and updates that graph trial by trial, each observation arriving on a timescale of seconds.

These findings have been demonstrated in children from around sixteen months to four years of age.


49.3.2 Rational constructivism and development as inference

Rational constructivism is the name Gopnik and colleagues gave to their overall theory, and this sub-section explains it.

The word rational here signals that the child's learning follows the sound logic of probability, and constructivism, as before, signals that the child actively builds their own understanding.

The framework uses Bayesian inference, which is the mathematically correct way to update your beliefs when new evidence arrives, weighing how likely the evidence would be under each of the possibilities you are considering.

The claim is that a child faced with the buzzing confusion of experience behaves, in effect, as a good Bayesian: they start with some hypotheses about how the world works, see how well the incoming evidence fits each one, and shift their confidence toward the hypotheses the evidence favours.

Over time this process lets the child build abstract models of the causal structure of the world out of the concrete particulars of what they see and do.

In systems terms the learner's state is a probability distribution over hypotheses, its input is each new observation, its output is the current best hypothesis and the actions chosen to test it, and its update rule multiplies each hypothesis's prior belief by the likelihood of the evidence and renormalises.

This view is sometimes called the theory theory, the somewhat awkward name for the idea that children hold something like informal scientific theories and revise them as a scientist revises a theory.

Rational constructivism is attractive because it is at once constructivist, in Piaget's spirit, and mathematically precise, and because the same Bayesian tools describe adult learning, tying development to the rest of cognitive science.

It is not without critics, who question whether children really carry out anything like the heavy computation the models assume, but it is one of the most active and productive frameworks in the field today.


49.4 The development of the particular faculties

The earlier sections looked at development in general, but each specific mental faculty also has its own developmental story, and this section samples two of the most important.

The point is that the growth of the mind is not one single process but many overlapping ones, each with its own timetable.

The two chosen here, control of attention and understanding of other minds, are chosen because they are pillars on which much later thinking rests.


49.4.1 The development of attention and executive control

This sub-section is about how children gain command over their own minds, the ability to hold a goal, resist distraction, and switch flexibly between tasks.

Executive control, also called executive function, is the umbrella term for these self-directing abilities, the mental manager that keeps behaviour aimed at a goal.

Researchers commonly split it into three related parts.

Inhibition is the ability to stop an automatic or tempting response, such as not blurting out an answer or not grabbing a treat.

Working memory, met earlier, is the holding and updating of goal-relevant information in mind.

Shifting, also called cognitive flexibility, is the ability to switch between tasks or rules rather than getting stuck on one.

These abilities begin to appear in infancy and grow most dramatically during the preschool years, from about three to five, which is why a two-year-old struggles mightily to wait while a five-year-old manages far better.

A classic demonstration is a card-sorting game in which young children are asked first to sort cards by colour and then by shape: three-year-olds typically keep sorting by the old rule even when told the new one, while by around age five children switch smoothly, revealing the growth of shifting.

As a mechanism, executive control takes the current goal and the stream of stimuli as input, outputs a gating signal that selects or suppresses responses, and operates on a timescale of hundreds of milliseconds per control act while its capacity matures over years.

Attention and executive control are closely linked, because holding attention on what matters and away from distraction is much of what the executive does, though careful studies show the two are related yet not identical.

This development continues well beyond childhood, with the executive abilities reaching their peak only in early adulthood, which is part of why teenagers can reason well yet still act impulsively.


49.4.2 The development of theory of mind

This sub-section is about how children come to understand that other people have minds of their own, with beliefs, wishes, and views that may differ from the child's own and from reality.

Theory of mind is the everyday but remarkable ability to attribute mental states to others and to use them to explain and predict what people do.

The most famous test is the false-belief task, which checks whether a child understands that someone can hold a belief that is false.

In one version a child watches a puppet put a marble in a basket and leave, then sees the marble moved to a box while the puppet is away, and is asked where the puppet will look for it on returning.

To pass, the child must say the basket, the place the puppet still wrongly believes the marble to be, rather than the box where it truly is.

Most children begin to pass this test between about three and five years of age, with a fairly reliable shift around age four.

Development follows an orderly sequence: children first grasp that people can want different things, then that people can know or not know things, and only later that people can hold beliefs that are outright false.

In systems terms, theory of mind takes observed behaviour and scene history as input, maintains a separate belief store for each tracked agent as state, and outputs predictions of that agent's actions computed from the agent's stored beliefs rather than from the world's true state.

There is an important and unresolved wrinkle, however, for some studies using looking-time measures suggest that infants as young as fifteen months already show a hint of sensitivity to others' false beliefs, long before they can pass the spoken test.

Whether this early sensitivity is genuine understanding or something simpler is debated, and the honest position is that the timing of when true theory of mind arrives is still contested.

The rich reading predicts that the infant maintains a genuine belief store for the other agent, while the lean reading predicts a shallower rule about agents and locations that should break on tasks requiring the belief content itself.

Later in childhood the ability deepens into second-order reasoning, thinking about what one person believes about another person's beliefs, which underlies the understanding of complex social situations.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Sensory event stream: continuous multimodal observations of objects, agents, quantities, and places, from the perceptual systems.

◦ Intervention outcomes: the observed results of the child's own actions and play experiments, from the motor system and perception.

◦ Social input: demonstrations, speech, count lists, and teaching signals from caregivers and peers, via language and social perception.

◦ Prediction error: the mismatch between expected and observed events, computed internally and fed back as the main learning trigger.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Expectations: predicted next events, readable experimentally as looking time in violation-of-expectation studies, consumed by attention and by the learning update itself.

◦ Actions and exploratory play: interventions chosen to reduce uncertainty, consumed by the motor system and the world.

◦ Revised world model: updated schemes, causal graphs, and concepts, consumed by every downstream cognitive faculty.

◦ Verbal reports: answers in tasks such as conservation and false belief, consumed by experimenters and social partners.

• STATE.

◦ The current library of schemes and concepts, including any bootstrapped structures such as the exact-number system.

◦ A probability distribution of belief across candidate hypotheses about how the world works.

◦ Capacity registers: current working memory span, processing speed, and inhibitory strength, all of which grow with maturation.

◦ Per-agent belief stores for theory of mind.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Prior strength: how much evidence is needed to move belief away from the current favourite hypothesis.

◦ Accommodation threshold: how much accumulated prediction error triggers restructuring rather than assimilation.

◦ Workspace capacity: the number of items the child can hold and relate at once, rising with age.

◦ Exploration drive: the bonus placed on surprising or confusable objects during play.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ A single learning observation or looking-time trial unfolds over seconds, with infant looking measured in seconds per event.

◦ Piaget's stage spans are years: birth to about 2, about 2 to 7, about 7 to 11, and about 12 onward.

◦ The false-belief transition centres near age 4, within a window of about 3 to 5 years.

◦ Executive control growth is steepest from about 3 to 5 years and continues into early adulthood.

◦ The exact time course of a single accommodation event: REFUSED, because restructuring is identified after the fact and the literature supports no honest single value.

• MODES.

◦ Assimilation mode, the default, in which new input is fitted to existing schemes; switched to accommodation mode when prediction error accumulates beyond threshold.

◦ Exploit mode, using the current best theory to act; switched to explore mode, playful hypothesis testing, when uncertainty or surprise is high.

◦ Verbal-report mode versus implicit-looking mode, selected by the response channel the task allows, which is why infants can show sensitivity years before they can pass spoken tests.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Conservation errors and appearance-based judgments when workspace capacity is exceeded.

◦ The A-not-B error, reaching to a previously rewarded location despite visible evidence, when inhibition and working memory are immature.

◦ Perseveration on an old rule in card sorting, a shifting failure.

◦ False-belief errors before about age 4, answering from reality rather than from the other's belief store.

◦ Overly strong priors producing slow or absent conceptual change, and atypical developmental trajectories in conditions affecting executive function and social cognition.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called hypotheses containing the names of the candidate hiding rules.
Create a list variable called beliefs containing one prior probability for each hypothesis.
Create a number variable called accommodation threshold with initial value zero point nine five.
For each trial in the experiment list, do the following.
    Read the observed outcome of the trial.
    For each hypothesis, calculate the likelihood of the observed outcome under that hypothesis.
    For each hypothesis, multiply its belief by that likelihood.
    Calculate the sum of all beliefs.
    For each hypothesis, divide its belief by the sum so the beliefs total one.
    Find the hypothesis with the largest belief and call it the favourite.
    If the belief in the favourite is greater than the accommodation threshold, then declare a stage-like shift to the favourite rule.
    Predict the next reach location from the favourite hypothesis.
Report the favourite hypothesis and the trial on which the shift occurred.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for generating noisy evidence.
import random

# Set the random seed to one so the run repeats exactly.
random.seed(1)

# Create a list of two hypotheses: the object is where it was hidden, or where reaching was rewarded before.
hypotheses = ["object_is_where_hidden", "object_is_where_I_reached_before"]

# Create the beliefs list with a strong infant prior on the old reaching habit.
beliefs = [0.2, 0.8]

# Create a number called shift_trial with initial value minus one to record when the stage-like shift happens.
shift_trial = -1

# Repeat for forty trials of hiding the toy at the new location B.
for trial in range(40):
    # The true outcome: searching at B succeeds with probability zero point nine.
    outcome_b = random.random() < 0.9
    # The hidden-location hypothesis predicts success at B with probability zero point nine.
    like_hidden = 0.9 if outcome_b else 0.1
    # The old-habit hypothesis predicts success at B with probability zero point two.
    like_habit = 0.2 if outcome_b else 0.8
    # Multiply each belief by its likelihood, the Bayesian update.
    beliefs = [beliefs[0] * like_hidden, beliefs[1] * like_habit]
    # Calculate the sum of the two beliefs.
    total = beliefs[0] + beliefs[1]
    # Divide each belief by the sum so the beliefs total one.
    beliefs = [b / total for b in beliefs]
    # If the hidden-location belief first exceeds zero point nine five, record the shift trial.
    if beliefs[0] > 0.95 and shift_trial < 0:
        # Store the current trial number as the moment of the stage-like shift.
        shift_trial = trial
    # Predict the reach: location B if the hidden-location belief leads, else the old location A.
    reach = "B" if beliefs[0] > 0.5 else "A"
    # Every tenth trial, print the trial, the belief, and the predicted reach.
    if trial % 10 == 0:
        # Print the trial number, the rounded belief, and the reach choice.
        print("trial", trial, "belief_hidden", round(beliefs[0], 3), "reach", reach)

# Print the trial at which graded evidence produced an abrupt, stage-like change in behaviour.
print("stage-like shift at trial", shift_trial)


CHAPTER 50. INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES, INTELLIGENCE, AND AGING (CONTEXT)

This chapter is about the ways in which minds differ from one another, and how a single mind changes across the span of an adult life.

Everywhere else this book describes cognition as if all minds were the same, but of course they are not: some people reason faster, remember more, or learn more easily than others.

In systems terms this chapter is about parameter variation: the same cognitive architecture running with different capacities, speeds, and knowledge stores, and about how those parameters drift over the adult lifespan.

The study of these differences, and especially of what we call intelligence, is one of the oldest and most controversial parts of the field, and this chapter treats it plainly.

It also covers what happens to thinking as we grow old, which is a question every reader has a personal stake in.


50.1 The structure of intelligence

This section asks a basic question: when we say one person is more intelligent than another, is there one thing we are measuring, or many.

The answer that emerged over a century of research is subtle: there seems to be both a single broad factor and many separate abilities, layered together.

This section lays out the layered picture that most researchers now accept.


50.1.1 General intelligence and the positive manifold

The starting fact that every theory of intelligence must explain is called the positive manifold, and this sub-section explains it.

The positive manifold is the well-established observation that people who do well on almost any one mental test tend also to do well on almost any other, whether the tests involve words, numbers, shapes, or memory.

The word manifold here just means the whole web of positive relationships among the tests.

The British psychologist Charles Spearman first noticed this pattern in 1904 and proposed that it points to a single underlying general ability, which he labelled g, short for general intelligence.

General intelligence, or g, is the idea of one broad mental power that contributes to performance on every kind of cognitive task, so that having more of it helps with everything at once.

It is important to be careful here: g is a statistical summary of the fact that abilities go together, and saying it exists does not by itself tell us what in the brain or mind produces it, which remains an open question.

In systems terms, the measurement pipeline takes a battery of test scores as input and outputs a correlation matrix; g is the first shared component extracted from that matrix, a compression of the data rather than a direct reading of a mechanism.

Still, g is one of the most reliable and replicable findings in all of psychology, and it predicts real outcomes such as school and job performance to a modest but genuine degree.


50.1.2 Fluid and crystallised intelligence and the Cattell-Horn-Carroll synthesis

While g captures what all mental abilities share, researchers also found that intelligence is not entirely uniform, and this sub-section covers the most important division within it.

The psychologists Raymond Cattell and his student John Horn, working from the 1940s through the 1960s, argued that general intelligence splits into two broad kinds.

Fluid intelligence, written Gf, is the ability to reason, solve novel problems, and see patterns in unfamiliar material, without relying on stored knowledge, the kind of raw thinking you use on a puzzle you have never seen.

Crystallised intelligence, written Gc, is the store of knowledge, facts, and skills you have built up over a lifetime, such as vocabulary and general information.

In systems terms, fluid intelligence behaves like the quality of the processor and its working memory, while crystallised intelligence behaves like the contents of long-term storage, and the two therefore follow different lifespan curves.

The two behave very differently across life: fluid intelligence tends to peak in early adulthood and slowly decline, while crystallised intelligence keeps growing well into middle age and beyond, which is why an older person may reason a little slower yet know far more.

Decades later this Cattell and Horn picture was merged with the work of John Carroll, who in 1993 analysed hundreds of data sets and mapped out the abilities in careful detail.

The merger, credited largely to the psychologist Kevin McGrew in the 1990s, is called Cattell-Horn-Carroll theory, or CHC theory, and it is now the most widely accepted account of the structure of human abilities and the basis of most modern intelligence tests.


50.1.3 The three-stratum model and its rivals

This sub-section covers the shape that the CHC picture takes, and the main disagreement inside it.

A stratum here means a layer, and the model is called three-stratum because it arranges abilities into three layers of a pyramid.

At the top, the third stratum, sits general intelligence g, the single broad factor.

In the middle, the second stratum, sit about ten broad abilities, including fluid reasoning, comprehension and knowledge, visual processing, working memory, and processing speed, which is simply how quickly a person can carry out basic mental operations.

At the base, the first stratum, sit more than seventy narrow, specific abilities, such as vocabulary knowledge or memory span, each feeding into the broad ability above it.

The chief disagreement among the theory's founders was about the very top layer.

Carroll placed g firmly at the apex, holding that a single overarching ability is real, while Cattell and Horn doubted this and preferred to see the broad abilities, especially fluid and crystallised intelligence, as the highest real level, with no single g above them.

In systems terms the sides predict differently: a real g predicts one shared resource whose improvement or damage should move every ability together, while the no-g view predicts that interventions can move broad abilities independently, with the top-level correlation arising elsewhere.

This is not a settled matter, and some current researchers argue that treating g as a real thing rather than a statistical convenience overstates what the data show, which leads directly to the rival accounts in the next section.


50.2 The mechanisms behind the differences

The previous section described the pattern of intelligence differences, but a description is not an explanation, and this section asks what actually produces those differences.

The question is what, in the workings of the mind, makes one person score higher than another, and why the abilities hang together in a positive manifold at all.

Two broad kinds of answer are covered, one pointing to a specific bottleneck ability and one denying that any single thing is responsible.


50.2.1 Working memory, attention control, and their link to fluid intelligence

This sub-section covers the influential idea that the engine behind fluid intelligence is the control of attention and working memory.

Recall that working memory is the small store holding what you are actively thinking about, and that attention control is the ability to keep the mind focused on what matters and away from distraction.

Beginning in the 1990s, researchers such as Randall Engle and colleagues found that how much a person can hold and manage in working memory correlates strongly with their fluid intelligence, the ability to reason about novel problems.

Their proposal is that the crucial ingredient is not raw storage but executive attention, the ability to keep goal-relevant information active and shielded from interference, especially when distractions push against it.

On this view, the reason some people reason better is partly that they can hold the pieces of a problem steady in mind while working on it, without losing the thread.

As a mechanism, executive attention takes the goal and competing inputs, outputs a maintained and shielded set of active representations, and must refresh them against interference on a timescale of seconds, with working memory span limited to about four chunks.

The link between working memory and fluid intelligence is one of the most robust findings in this area, though researchers debate exactly which part of working memory, storage or attention or speed, is doing the most work.


50.2.2 The process-overlap and mutualism accounts of the positive manifold

This sub-section covers two modern theories that try to explain the positive manifold without assuming a single real g sitting behind everything.

Both start from unease with the idea that g is a genuine mental power rather than a statistical shadow, and both offer a way for abilities to correlate without a common cause.

The process-overlap theory, developed by Kristof Kovacs and Andrew Conway around 2016, proposes that any given mental task calls on several different processes at once, and that certain domain-general processes, especially those of executive attention, are tapped by nearly every task.

Because these shared processes are involved everywhere, tests come out correlated, producing the positive manifold, without there needing to be a single underlying substance called g; the overlap of many processes, not one thing, creates the appearance of one thing.

The mutualism theory, proposed by Han van der Maas and colleagues in 2006, offers a different route.

It suggests that the separate abilities start out largely independent in early childhood but help one another grow over time, so that being good at reading helps you learn, which helps your vocabulary, which helps your reasoning, and so on.

Through these mutually beneficial interactions during development, the abilities become positively correlated even though there was no common g to begin with.

In systems terms, mutualism is a set of coupled growth processes: each ability's growth rate takes the levels of the other abilities as input, and the coupling parameters alone are enough to generate a general factor as an emergent output over developmental time.

Both accounts remain live options, and together with the traditional g view they show that a finding as solid as the positive manifold can still be explained in strikingly different ways.


50.3 Biology and change

This section turns to where intelligence differences come from in the deeper sense of nature and nurture, and to how cognition changes as a person ages.

These are questions loaded with strong feelings and a long history of misuse, so they call for special care and plain honesty about what is and is not known.

The section covers the roles of genes and environment, a puzzling rise in test scores over the generations, and the changes that come with old age.


50.3.1 Heritability, the gene-environment interplay, and the Flynn effect

This sub-section covers how much of the difference in intelligence between people traces to their genes, how genes and environment work together, and a famous historical trend.

Heritability is a technical term that is very easy to misread, so it must be defined carefully.

Heritability is the proportion of the differences among people in a particular group and setting that can be statistically traced to genetic differences among them; it is a statement about variation in a population, not about how much of any one person's intelligence is fixed by their genes.

For intelligence, estimates of heritability commonly range from about 30 percent to about 75 percent, and a striking finding is that heritability rises with age, from roughly 20 percent in early childhood to perhaps 60 to 80 percent in adulthood.

That rise seems strange until you learn about gene-environment correlation, the tendency for people to seek out and create environments that suit their genetic leanings, so that a child inclined toward reading finds more books and reads more, amplifying the original small difference over time.

This means genes and environment are not two separate forces to be added up but are woven together throughout development.

In systems terms this is a positive feedback loop: a small parameter difference biases environment selection, the selected environment feeds back as training input, and the loop amplifies initial differences over years.

The Flynn effect, named for the researcher James Flynn who documented it, is the observation that raw scores on intelligence tests rose steadily across the twentieth century in many countries, by roughly three points per decade.

Because this rise happened far too fast to be caused by changes in genes, it must be environmental, reflecting things such as better nutrition, more schooling, and more cognitively demanding daily life.

The Flynn effect is a powerful reminder that high heritability within a generation does not mean intelligence is fixed, since the whole population's scores can shift a great deal in a single lifetime; in some places the rise has recently stalled or reversed, and that too appears to be environmental.


50.3.2 Cognitive aging: processing speed, inhibition, and reserve

This sub-section covers what happens to thinking in the second half of life, which is a mix of real decline and real preservation.

The most consistent finding is that fluid abilities decline with age while crystallised abilities are largely preserved, so an older adult typically reasons and processes new information more slowly but retains, and even keeps adding to, their store of knowledge and vocabulary.

A leading explanation, associated with the psychologist Timothy Salthouse, points to processing speed: as we age the basic speed of mental operations slows, and because so many tasks depend on doing several steps quickly before information is lost, a general slowing drags down performance across the board.

In systems terms, slowing is a rise in the cycle time of elementary operations, and because intermediate results decay while later steps run, a longer cycle time causes cascading losses in any multi-step computation.

A second proposed factor is a weakening of inhibition, the ability to keep irrelevant thoughts and distractions out of mind, so that older adults may be more easily sidetracked by interfering information.

Not everyone declines at the same rate, and this is where the idea of reserve comes in.

Cognitive reserve is the notion that a lifetime of education, mentally demanding work, and engagement builds up a buffer that lets some people sustain more brain change before it shows as a loss of function, rather like a stronger engine coping with more wear before it stumbles.

Reserve helps explain why two people with similar brain aging can differ greatly in how sharp they remain, and it offers a hopeful message, since the activities that build reserve are partly within a person's control.

It is worth stating plainly that normal aging is not the same as dementia, which is a disease process, and that much of the mind's most valuable capacity, its accumulated knowledge and judgment, holds up well into late life.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Test batteries: standardised task items across verbal, numerical, spatial, and memory domains, from the assessment environment.

◦ Learning environments: schooling, reading, work demands, and nutrition, from the developmental setting.

◦ Genetic endowment: the initial parameter settings and growth propensities of the cognitive system.

◦ Cross-ability signals: in the mutualism account, each ability receives the current levels of the other abilities as growth input.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Test scores and a positive correlation matrix among them, consumed by factor-analytic models that extract g and the broad factors.

◦ Predictive indices: standardised scores that forecast school and job outcomes to a modest degree, consumed by institutions and researchers.

◦ Environment selection: choices of books, courses, and challenges, consumed by the gene-environment feedback loop.

• STATE.

◦ Current levels of each broad ability, including fluid reasoning and crystallised knowledge.

◦ The accumulated long-term knowledge store, which keeps growing into late adulthood.

◦ Cognitive reserve: the buffer accumulated through education and engagement.

◦ Population-level state: the distribution of scores across a generation, which the Flynn effect shifts.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Working memory capacity, about four chunks.

◦ Processing speed: the cycle time of elementary operations, which lengthens with age.

◦ Inhibitory strength: the gain on suppression of irrelevant information.

◦ Mutualism coupling weights: how strongly each ability's growth feeds the others.

◦ Heritability, about 30 to 75 percent depending on age and setting, rising from roughly 20 percent in early childhood to perhaps 60 to 80 percent in adulthood.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ An elementary mental operation runs on the order of tens of milliseconds, with a production-rule cycle of about 50 milliseconds as a benchmark.

◦ Working memory maintenance must refresh over seconds against decay and interference.

◦ Ability growth through mutualistic coupling unfolds over years of childhood.

◦ Fluid ability typically peaks in early adulthood and declines gradually over decades, while crystallised ability grows into middle age and beyond.

◦ The Flynn effect proceeds at roughly 3 points per decade at population scale.

◦ The precise onset age of fluid decline: REFUSED, because estimates vary widely across cohorts and methods and no single honest value exists.

• MODES.

◦ Fluid mode, novel problem solving on unfamiliar material, engaged when stored knowledge does not apply; crystallised mode, retrieval of stored knowledge and skill, engaged when the problem is familiar.

◦ Growth mode in development, plateau in mid-life, and selective decline in aging, switched by maturation and senescence.

◦ Compensation mode in older adults, in which accumulated knowledge and strategy substitute for slowed processing, triggered when speed demands exceed current capacity.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Reasoning failures under load when working memory capacity is exceeded.

◦ Cascading errors in multi-step tasks as processing speed slows with age.

◦ Increased distractibility from weakened inhibition.

◦ Misreading heritability as personal fixedness, a conceptual failure the Flynn effect refutes.

◦ Dementia as a disease process distinct from normal aging, and score misinterpretation when tests are applied across groups and settings they were not normed for.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called ability count with value four.
Create a list variable called abilities containing the starting level of each ability, drawn independently at random.
Create a list variable called coupling containing a small positive weight for each pair of different abilities.
For each year in the development period, do the following.
    For each ability, do the following.
        Create a number variable called boost with initial value zero.
        For each other ability, multiply the other ability's level by the coupling weight and add the result to boost.
        Calculate the ability's own growth toward its personal ceiling.
        Add the boost and the growth to the ability's level.
For each pair of different abilities, calculate the correlation of their levels across the simulated people.
Calculate the average of those correlations.
Report the average correlation as the strength of the positive manifold.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for sampling starting abilities.
import random

# Set the random seed to two so the run repeats exactly.
random.seed(2)

# Create the population size, the number of abilities, and the coupling weight.
people, n_abil, coupling = 200, 4, 0.03

# Create each person's abilities as independent random starting levels, so there is no g at the start.
pop = [[random.uniform(0.1, 0.3) for _ in range(n_abil)] for _ in range(people)]

# Create each person's growth ceilings, also independent across abilities.
caps = [[random.uniform(0.8, 1.2) for _ in range(n_abil)] for _ in range(people)]

# Repeat for fifteen simulated years of development.
for year in range(15):
    # For each person in the population, update every ability.
    for p in range(people):
        # Copy the current levels so all updates use the same snapshot.
        old = list(pop[p])
        # For each ability, compute mutualistic help from the other abilities.
        for a in range(n_abil):
            # Sum the other abilities' levels times the coupling weight.
            boost = sum(coupling * old[b] for b in range(n_abil) if b != a)
            # Compute logistic growth toward this person's ceiling for this ability.
            grow = 0.1 * old[a] * (1 - old[a] / caps[p][a])
            # Add the growth and the mutualism boost to the ability level.
            pop[p][a] = old[a] + grow + boost

# Define a function that returns the correlation between two ability columns.
def corr(x, y):
    # Calculate the means of both lists.
    mx, my = sum(x) / len(x), sum(y) / len(y)
    # Calculate the covariance and both variances.
    cov = sum((a - mx) * (b - my) for a, b in zip(x, y))
    vx = sum((a - mx) ** 2 for a in x)
    vy = sum((b - my) ** 2 for b in y)
    # Return the covariance divided by the product of the standard deviations.
    return cov / ((vx * vy) ** 0.5)

# Collect the correlation of every pair of different abilities across people.
rs = [corr([q[a] for q in pop], [q[b] for q in pop])
      for a in range(n_abil) for b in range(a + 1, n_abil)]

# Print the average pairwise correlation, the emergent positive manifold with no built-in g.
print("mean inter-ability correlation:", round(sum(rs) / len(rs), 3))


CHAPTER 51. COMPARATIVE AND EVOLUTIONARY COGNITION (CONTEXT)

This chapter widens the lens from the human mind to minds in general, asking what other animals can think and why human thinking took the shape it did.

Comparative cognition studies the mental abilities of non-human animals and compares them across species, while evolutionary cognition asks how and why the human mind was shaped by natural selection.

The two together give perspective: they show which of our abilities are shared with our animal relatives and which, if any, are truly special, and they remind us that the mind is a biological organ with a history.

In systems terms, comparison across species is a way of asking which modules of the cognitive architecture are ancient shared components and which are recent human extensions, and evolution is the long-timescale optimisation process that set the architecture's design.

This matters for a project like konnectome because understanding what is general to minds and what is particular to ours helps set the target for a humanlike machine.


51.1 Comparative cognition

This section is about the minds of other animals, studied carefully and without either flattering or dismissing them.

The great challenge of the field is that animals cannot tell us what they think, so everything must be inferred from behaviour, which makes it easy to read in too much or too little.

This section samples what animals can do and then covers the rule of caution that keeps the inferences honest.


51.1.1 Learning, number, and space across species

This sub-section surveys some of the impressive cognitive abilities found across the animal kingdom.

The lesson of a century of research is that many capacities once thought uniquely human turn out, in simpler forms, to be widespread.

Many animals show a rough sense of number, an ability to tell more from less without counting in words, which has been demonstrated in creatures as different as monkeys, birds, fish, and even some insects.

This wordless number sense closely resembles the core number system found in human infants, suggesting a deep and ancient shared ability.

Animals also navigate space with great skill, and some, such as certain birds that store thousands of seeds and later recover them, have spatial memories that put humans to shame.

Learning itself, in the forms of forming associations and adjusting behaviour by its consequences, is universal across animals with nervous systems and is the foundation on which the more elaborate abilities are built.

As a mechanism, associative learning takes paired events and reward outcomes as input, outputs updated response strengths, and updates on the timescale of single trials, seconds to minutes apart, across every species tested.

Some species show remarkable feats: certain crows and other corvids make and use tools and solve multi-step puzzles, and great apes can learn to use symbols to communicate to a limited degree.

The overall picture is of a continuum, with human abilities often being sharper or more general versions of capacities that exist, in seed form, across many species.


51.1.2 Animal theory of mind and metacognition

This sub-section covers two of the most contested questions in the field: whether animals understand other minds, and whether they can reflect on their own knowledge.

Theory of mind, as in the human chapter, means understanding that others have mental states such as beliefs and intentions.

Whether any animal has it is fiercely debated: chimpanzees clearly track what others can see and know, and act on it, but whether they grasp that another can hold a false belief, the human benchmark, remains uncertain, with some recent studies offering suggestive but not decisive evidence.

Metacognition means thinking about one's own thinking, and in animals the question is usually whether an animal can sense its own uncertainty, whether it knows when it does not know.

In clever studies, animals such as monkeys and dolphins are given a hard perception task plus the option to decline a trial for a smaller but sure reward, and some animals decline more often exactly on the hardest trials, as if aware they are unsure.

In systems terms the rich reading posits a monitor that takes the decision system's internal confidence as input and outputs an escape choice, while the lean reading posits a direct learned association from stimulus difficulty to the escape response with no confidence readout at all; the two make different predictions about transfer to brand-new tasks.

This looks like metacognition, but there is a serious alternative reading, since a simple learned association between hard stimuli and the escape response could produce the same behaviour without any real self-awareness.

The debate is genuinely unsettled, and careful researchers hold that the behaviour is real and interesting while the interpretation remains open, which is exactly the kind of caution the next sub-section is about.


51.1.3 Morgan's canon and the control of anthropomorphism

This sub-section covers the guiding rule of caution that has shaped the whole field, and its limits.

Anthropomorphism is the tendency to project human thoughts and feelings onto animals, seeing a guilty conscience in a dog or a grudge in a cat where simpler explanations may do.

To guard against this, the British psychologist Conwy Lloyd Morgan proposed in 1894 a principle now called Morgan's canon, which says we should not explain an animal's behaviour as the product of a higher mental power if it can be explained by a lower and simpler one.

In practice this makes the simpler explanation the default, and puts the burden of proof on anyone claiming a richer mental ability, which has kept the field disciplined for over a century.

In systems terms the canon is a model-selection rule: among candidate mechanisms that reproduce the observed input-output behaviour, prefer the one with the fewest internal states and processes unless the data force more.

But the canon has its own critics, who warn that it can be pushed too far and load the deck against animal minds.

One such worry has been named anthropofabulation, the mistake of setting the bar for crediting an animal with some ability at an inflated picture of how well humans do that same thing, so that animals are denied an ability that, measured fairly, they actually share with us.

The mature position is to use Morgan's canon as a check against wishful thinking while remembering that the simplest explanation is not automatically the correct one, and that being unfairly stingy is as much an error as being unfairly generous.


51.2 Evolutionary cognition

This section asks why the human mind has the particular shape it does, by looking at the evolutionary pressures that built it.

The core idea is that the mind, like the body, is a product of natural selection, and that its features are there because they helped our ancestors survive and reproduce.

The section covers the claim that the mind is a bundle of special-purpose tools, the idea that its growth was driven by social life, and the notion of a distinctively human way of making a living.


51.2.1 The adapted mind and domain-specific mechanisms

This sub-section covers the central proposal of evolutionary psychology, associated with Leda Cosmides, John Tooby, and the 1992 book The Adapted Mind.

The main claim is that the mind is not a single general-purpose problem solver but a large collection of specialised mechanisms, each shaped by evolution to solve a particular problem our ancestors repeatedly faced.

A domain-specific mechanism is a piece of mental machinery dedicated to one kind of problem, such as choosing a mate, avoiding spoiled food, detecting cheaters in an exchange, or reading facial expressions.

The argument for this view is that narrow, specialised problems are usually easier to solve well than broad general ones, so evolution would favour many dedicated tools over one all-purpose one, much as a kitchen holds many specialised utensils rather than one universal gadget.

On this picture the mind resembles a Swiss Army knife or a set of many small computers, each tuned to its own ancestral task, rather than a single blank general processor.

In systems terms the two sides predict differently: a modular architecture predicts fixed input formats, fast dedicated processing, and selective breakdowns of single functions, while a general architecture predicts flexible transfer across domains and graceful, broad degradation.

This framework is influential but also criticised, with opponents arguing that it can overstate how modular and how fixed the mind really is, and that much human ability seems flexible and general rather than carved into fixed special purposes.

The honest summary is that some degree of specialisation is widely accepted, while the claim that the mind is mostly a bundle of narrow innate modules remains contested.


51.2.2 The social-brain hypothesis

This sub-section covers a leading explanation for why humans and their relatives evolved such large and powerful brains.

The social-brain hypothesis, associated especially with the anthropologist Robin Dunbar in the 1990s, proposes that the main driver of big brains was not the physical world but the social one.

The idea is that living in large, stable groups full of shifting alliances, rivalries, and relationships is cognitively demanding, and that keeping track of who is friends with whom, who owes whom, and who can be trusted required ever more brainpower.

In support, Dunbar found that across primate species the size of the social group an animal lives in tends to track the relative size of its neocortex, the outer, thinking part of the brain.

In systems terms the hypothesis treats social tracking as a memory and inference load that scales steeply with group size, since the number of pairwise relationships grows roughly with the square of the number of members, so group size sets a lower bound on required social storage and update capacity.

Extending this to humans yields the well-known estimate, sometimes called Dunbar's number, of roughly 150 as the number of stable relationships a person can comfortably maintain, though this figure is a rough average and is itself debated.

The broader claim, that the challenges of social life were a major engine of human intelligence, is widely taken seriously, even as researchers argue over how much of the story it explains.


51.2.3 The cognitive niche

This sub-section covers a complementary idea about what makes the human way of life distinctive.

A niche, in biology, is the particular way a species makes its living, the set of resources and strategies it depends on.

The cognitive niche, a term from John Tooby and Irven DeVore, is the proposal that humans survive above all by reasoning, planning, and knowledge, using intelligence to outwit problems that other animals meet with fixed instincts or physical adaptations.

Rather than growing thicker fur or sharper claws, humans work out how to make clothing and weapons, and rather than each generation starting from scratch, they pass hard-won knowledge to the next through language.

A closely related idea, sometimes called the cultural niche, stresses that no single human is smart enough to invent all this alone, and that our real advantage is the ability to learn from one another and accumulate know-how over generations, which links directly to the theme of the next chapter.

In systems terms the cognitive niche swaps slow genetic adaptation, which updates over generations, for fast informational adaptation, which updates within a lifetime and is transmitted between lifetimes through language.

Together these ideas say that the human specialisation is flexible intelligence married to social learning, a combination that let one species spread into nearly every environment on Earth.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Behavioural observations: choices, latencies, and success rates of animals on controlled tasks, from the experimental setup.

◦ Ecological and social context: group size, foraging demands, and habitat structure, the selection pressures acting on the lineage.

◦ Individual experience: trial-by-trial reward and stimulus pairings driving associative learning.

◦ Social information: what conspecifics do and attend to, input to social learning and social tracking.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Adaptive behaviour: foraging, caching, tool use, navigation, and social manoeuvring, consumed by the environment and by fitness.

◦ Uncertainty responses: opt-out or escape choices in metacognition paradigms, consumed by experimenters as a possible confidence readout.

◦ Comparative maps: which capacities are shared across species and which are derived, consumed by theorists setting the target for humanlike machines.

• STATE.

◦ Learned association strengths between stimuli, actions, and outcomes.

◦ Spatial and cache memories, in some species covering thousands of stored locations.

◦ Social registers: who is dominant, allied, indebted, and trustworthy within the group.

◦ In the contested rich reading, an internal confidence variable and possibly representations of what others see and know.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Learning rate on associative updates.

◦ Discrimination precision of the approximate number sense, which improves as the ratio between quantities grows.

◦ Neocortex ratio, the correlate of manageable group size across primates.

◦ Escape threshold: the difficulty level at which an animal declines a trial for a sure smaller reward.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ A single associative learning trial unfolds over seconds, with learning visible across tens of trials.

◦ Seed-caching birds retain cache locations across weeks to months.

◦ Evolutionary shaping of cognitive mechanisms operates over thousands of generations.

◦ Stable human social network capacity is roughly 150 relationships, a capacity figure rather than a timescale, maintained by interaction over months to years.

◦ The processing time of a putative animal confidence readout: REFUSED, because the mechanism itself is contested and no honest chronometric value exists.

• MODES.

◦ Individual learning mode, trial and error against the world, versus social observation mode, exploiting what others already know; switched by the availability and reliability of demonstrators.

◦ Exploit mode on easy trials versus opt-out mode on hard trials in metacognition tasks, switched by difficulty or, on the rich reading, by low internal confidence.

◦ For the theorist, rich interpretation mode versus lean interpretation mode, switched by Morgan's canon and by evidence of transfer to novel tasks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Overattribution: anthropomorphism, reading human-like states into simpler mechanisms.

◦ Underattribution: anthropofabulation, denying shared abilities by comparing animals to an idealised human.

◦ Associative mimicry: lean mechanisms reproducing the surface behaviour of rich ones and fooling the experimenter.

◦ Ecological invalidity: laboratory tasks that misrepresent an animal's natural competence.

◦ For the evolved mind itself, mismatch failures where ancient mechanisms misfire in modern environments.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called environment state representing the currently best behaviour.
Create a list variable called agents where each agent has a behaviour and a strategy label of individual or social.
For each generation, do the following.
    With a small probability, change the environment state to a new best behaviour.
    For each agent, do the following.
        If the agent's strategy is individual, then pay a learning cost and set the agent's behaviour to the environment state.
        Otherwise, copy the behaviour of a randomly chosen other agent at no learning cost.
        If the agent's behaviour matches the environment state, then add the payoff to the agent's score.
    Calculate the average score of the individual learners and the average score of the social learners.
    Replace low-scoring agents with copies of high-scoring agents, keeping their strategy labels.
Report the final share of social learners and the average scores of each strategy.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for mutation, copying, and selection.
import random

# Set the random seed to three so the run repeats exactly.
random.seed(3)

# Create the payoff for correct behaviour, the cost of individual learning, and the environment change rate.
payoff, cost, change_rate = 1.0, 0.4, 0.1

# Create one hundred agents, each a dictionary with a strategy, a behaviour, and a score.
agents = [{"strategy": random.choice(["individual", "social"]), "behaviour": 0, "score": 0.0}
          for _ in range(100)]

# Create the environment state, the currently correct behaviour, as the integer zero.
env = 0

# Repeat for two hundred generations.
for gen in range(200):
    # With probability equal to the change rate, move the environment to a new correct behaviour.
    if random.random() < change_rate:
        # Increase the environment state by one to make old copied behaviour obsolete.
        env = env + 1
    # For each agent, learn and then collect the payoff.
    for a in agents:
        # If the agent is an individual learner, pay the cost and learn the true state directly.
        if a["strategy"] == "individual":
            # Set the behaviour to the environment state and subtract the learning cost.
            a["behaviour"] = env
            a["score"] = a["score"] - cost
        # Otherwise, copy the behaviour of a random other agent, which may be out of date.
        else:
            # Set the behaviour to a randomly chosen agent's behaviour.
            a["behaviour"] = random.choice(agents)["behaviour"]
        # If the behaviour matches the environment, add the payoff to the score.
        if a["behaviour"] == env:
            # Increase the score by the payoff for correct behaviour.
            a["score"] = a["score"] + payoff
    # Sort the agents by score and replace the worst tenth with copies of the best tenth.
    agents.sort(key=lambda x: x["score"])
    for i in range(10):
        # Copy the strategy of a top agent into a bottom agent, resetting nothing else.
        agents[i]["strategy"] = agents[-1 - i]["strategy"]

# Count how many agents ended up as social learners.
social_share = sum(1 for a in agents if a["strategy"] == "social") / len(agents)

# Print the final share of social learners, showing the balance selection finds.
print("final share of social learners:", social_share)


CHAPTER 52. CULTURAL, SITUATED, AND DISTRIBUTED COGNITION (CONTEXT)

This chapter makes a point that is easy to miss when we study the mind one skull at a time: much of human thinking happens between people and out in the world, not just inside a single head.

Cultural cognition studies how the accumulated knowledge of a group shapes and empowers each individual mind; situated and distributed cognition study how thinking is spread across people, tools, and surroundings.

In systems terms the chapter widens the system boundary: instead of drawing the box around one brain, it draws the box around brains plus tools plus other people, and treats the whole assembly as the computing system.

This matters because the single greatest fact about human intelligence may be that it is collective and cumulative, that we are smart largely because we stand on the shoulders of everyone who came before.

A machine meant to think like a human, then, cannot be understood purely as a solitary reasoner, and that is why this chapter closes the survey of human cognition before the book turns to architectures and machines.


52.1 Cultural cognition

This section is about the role of culture, the shared body of knowledge, skills, and practices that a group passes down, in making human minds what they are.

The key insight is that humans are set apart less by individual cleverness than by an extraordinary ability to learn from each other and to build on what others have worked out.

This section covers how such shared knowledge accumulates, how it is transmitted, and how culture and biology have shaped each other.


52.1.1 Cumulative culture and the ratchet effect

This sub-section covers what may be the single most important feature of human culture: it accumulates.

Cumulative culture means that human knowledge and technology are not reinvented each generation but are built up over time, each generation inheriting what the last achieved and adding a little more.

The psychologist Michael Tomasello captured this with the image of the ratchet effect, named for the mechanical ratchet that turns one way and then locks, preventing any slipping back.

The ratchet effect is the idea that a useful improvement, once made, is faithfully preserved and passed on, so that gains are locked in and later improvements build on top of them rather than the whole thing sliding back to the start.

As a mechanism, the ratchet takes each generation's inherited repertoire plus its innovations as input, outputs the repertoire passed to the next generation, and requires transmission fidelity high enough that losses per generation stay below gains; its characteristic timescale is the generation.

Because of this ratchet, human tools and ideas have grown to a sophistication that no single person could ever reach alone, from stone flakes to spacecraft, over countless small steps by many hands.

Other animals show culture in a weak sense, such as local traditions in how to crack nuts, but their traditions rarely ratchet upward in complexity the way human culture does, and explaining that difference is a central goal of the field.


52.1.2 Social learning, imitation, and natural pedagogy

This sub-section covers the mechanisms that make the ratchet possible, the ways humans transmit knowledge faithfully from one person to another.

Social learning simply means learning from others rather than by one's own trial and error, and it comes in weaker and stronger forms.

A weaker form is emulation, in which an animal sees the result another achieved and tries to reach the same result its own way, without copying the exact method.

A stronger form is imitation, in which the learner copies the actual actions the other performed, method and all, which is what allows a technique to be reproduced faithfully even when the learner does not understand why each step works.

In systems terms, emulation transmits only the goal specification while imitation transmits the full procedure, and only procedure-level transmission has the fidelity the ratchet needs.

Tomasello argued that this high-fidelity imitation, combined with active teaching and a human urge to conform, is what lets improvements be preserved without slipping, powering the ratchet.

Human children are in fact famously prone to overimitation, copying even the obviously unnecessary steps in a demonstration, which looks wasteful but may be a price worth paying for reliably absorbing techniques whose logic is not visible.

Researchers Gergely Csibra and Gyorgy Gergely added the idea of natural pedagogy, the proposal that humans come equipped both to teach and to learn from teaching, with built-in signals such as eye contact, being addressed by name, and a special tone of voice that mark information as important and meant to be generalised and remembered.

Together these mechanisms make humans uniquely good at passing knowledge down the generations intact.


52.1.3 Gene-culture coevolution

This sub-section covers the deep idea that human genes and human culture have shaped each other over evolutionary time, each pulling on the other.

Gene-culture coevolution is the view that culture is not merely a product of our biology but has itself become a force of natural selection acting back on our genes.

The classic example is the ability of many adults to digest milk.

Once some human groups took up dairy farming, a cultural practice, it became advantageous to keep producing the enzyme that digests milk sugar into adulthood, and so genes for that ability spread in exactly those populations, a clear case of a cultural invention reshaping the gene pool.

More broadly, once our ancestors came to depend on learning from one another, there was selective pressure favouring minds good at social learning, teaching, and cooperation, so the very features that make culture possible were themselves sharpened by the presence of culture.

In systems terms this is a coupled two-loop system: the cultural loop updates within and between lifetimes, the genetic loop updates over generations, and each loop's output changes the selection gradient the other loop descends.

This creates a feedback loop in which biology enables culture and culture in turn reshapes biology, and many researchers see this loop as central to how humans became so different from other animals.


52.2 Sociocultural theory

This section covers an older and highly influential tradition, rooted in the work of one Russian psychologist, that placed social interaction at the very centre of how the mind develops.

Where earlier chapters treated development as something happening inside the individual child, this tradition insists that the child's mind is built through interaction with other people and with the tools of their culture.

The section covers the two ideas from this tradition that have had the widest reach.


52.2.1 The zone of proximal development and mediation

This sub-section covers the best-known idea of the psychologist Lev Vygotsky, who worked in the Soviet Union in the 1920s and 1930s and whose writings became widely influential decades later.

The zone of proximal development is the gap between what a learner can do alone and what the same learner can do with help from a more capable person.

The point is that the most important learning happens in this zone, on tasks a child cannot yet manage by themselves but can accomplish with the guidance of a parent, teacher, or more skilled peer.

A related practical idea, developed by later researchers from Vygotsky's work, is scaffolding, the support a helper provides that is gradually withdrawn as the learner grows able to stand on their own, just as a builder's scaffold is removed once the wall can support itself.

In systems terms, scaffolding is an adaptive controller: it takes the learner's current performance as input, outputs just enough support to keep the task solvable, and reduces its gain as competence rises, over sessions spanning days to months.

Underlying all this is Vygotsky's concept of mediation, the claim that human thinking is almost always carried out through cultural tools, above all language, that stand between the mind and the world and reshape how we think.

On this view we do not confront the world with a bare mind but always through inherited instruments of thought, which is why learning is so bound up with the culture that supplies those instruments.


52.2.2 Internalisation and private speech

This sub-section covers Vygotsky's account of how something that starts as social interaction becomes part of the individual mind.

Internalisation is the process by which a child takes an activity first carried out with other people and gradually turns it into an inner, private mental process of their own.

Vygotsky's striking claim was that many higher mental functions appear first between people, on the social plane, and only later within the single child, on the psychological plane.

His favourite illustration is private speech, the out-loud self-talk that young children so often produce while playing or solving problems, narrating their own actions to themselves.

Vygotsky argued that this private speech begins as ordinary social speech with a caregiver, is then turned by the child upon themselves to guide their own behaviour, and finally goes underground to become silent inner speech, the wordless verbal thinking that adults use to direct themselves.

In systems terms, internalisation migrates a control loop across the system boundary: a regulation signal that first flows from caregiver to child through audible speech is re-implemented inside the child, first as audible self-directed output and finally as an internal channel, over a course of years in early childhood.

In this picture the quiet voice in your head that talks you through a hard task is the grown-up descendant of a conversation you once had out loud with someone else, a social process that moved inside.

This idea, that self-control and reasoning have social roots, remains one of the most influential in developmental psychology.


52.3 Situated and distributed cognition

This section covers a family of modern views holding that thinking cannot be fully understood as something sealed inside the individual head, because it reaches out into the body, the tools, and the social setting.

Where the cultural theories stressed what we inherit from others, these views stress how thinking is spread out, in the moment, across people and the physical world around them.

The section covers the situated view, the distributed view, and the intelligence of groups.


52.3.1 Situated action and situated learning

This sub-section covers the idea that thought and action are always shaped by the concrete situation in which they occur, and cannot be well described as the mere execution of abstract plans in the head.

Situated action, a term associated with the researcher Lucy Suchman in the 1980s, is the view that what people actually do arises moment to moment from their ongoing engagement with a specific setting, rather than from a complete plan worked out in advance.

A plan, on this view, is more like a rough resource or guide for action than a script that dictates each step, because the real situation always throws up particulars that must be handled on the spot.

In systems terms the two views predict differently: a plan-execution architecture predicts behaviour determined ahead of time and brittle under surprise, while a situated architecture predicts a tight sense-act loop, running at the pace of the environment, that consults the plan only as one input among many.

Situated learning, developed by Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger around 1991, applies the same insight to how people learn.

Their claim is that knowledge is not an abstract thing stored in the head and then applied, but is bound up with the real activities and social settings in which it is used, so that learning a trade is best understood as gradually joining a community of people who practise it.

They introduced the idea of legitimate peripheral participation, the way a newcomer starts at the edge of a working community doing small real tasks and moves inward toward full membership as they gain skill, as an apprentice becomes a master.

The broad message is that to understand thinking we must look at people acting in real settings, not only at minds in isolation.


52.3.2 Cognition in the wild and the distribution of thought across people and tools

This sub-section covers the strong claim that a single act of thinking can be spread across several people and their instruments, so that the thinking unit is larger than one brain.

The anthropologist Edwin Hutchins made this case in his 1995 book Cognition in the Wild, based on close study of how a large naval ship is navigated.

Distributed cognition is the view that a cognitive process can be carried by a system made up of several people together with their tools and representations, no one of whom holds the whole process in their own head.

Hutchins showed that navigating the ship is accomplished by a team in which each person handles one part, information passes between them and through instruments, charts, and written records, and the successful navigation is a property of the whole system rather than of any single mind.

The tools themselves, such as the chart and the compass, carry part of the cognitive load, storing and transforming information that would otherwise have to be held in a head.

In systems terms, the ship's navigation team is a pipeline of processors connected by communication channels and shared external memories, and the computation is defined over the whole pipeline, with each hand-off taking seconds and the full fix cycle repeating on the order of minutes.

The phrase in the wild signals the study of thinking as it really happens in the messy world of work, rather than in the tidy isolation of the laboratory.

This view reframes many everyday achievements, from flying an airliner to running a hospital, as feats of distributed rather than individual cognition, and it suggests that designing good tools and good teamwork is a way of designing intelligence itself.


52.3.3 Collective intelligence

This sub-section covers the question of whether groups, as groups, can be more or less intelligent, in a way that parallels individual intelligence.

Collective intelligence refers to the ability of a group to perform well across a wide range of tasks, considered as a property of the group rather than of any single member.

In an influential 2010 study, the researcher Anita Williams Woolley and colleagues found that groups show a measurable general ability factor, sometimes called a c factor, so that a team that does well on one kind of task tends to do well on others, much as an individual's g predicts across tasks.

Strikingly, this collective ability was not well predicted by the average intelligence of the members or by the smartest member.

Instead it was linked to how the group interacted: to members taking turns rather than a few dominating, to the social sensitivity of the members in reading one another, and, in that study, to the proportion of women in the group, which the authors traced largely to higher average social sensitivity.

In systems terms, group intelligence depends less on the power of the individual processors and more on the bandwidth and scheduling of the channels between them: turn-taking is a fair scheduler, and social sensitivity is accurate reading of the other processors' states.

The finding suggests that making a group smart is partly a separate problem from making an individual smart, and that how people communicate and share the floor can matter more than raw individual horsepower.

Like much in this young area the results continue to be tested and refined, but the core idea, that intelligence can be a feature of a collective, fits naturally with the distributed view of mind and closes this survey of human cognition on the theme with which it is most concerned: that human thought is, at bottom, a shared and cumulative achievement.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Demonstrations and teaching: observed procedures, pedagogical signals such as eye contact and special tone, and explicit instruction, from other people.

◦ The inherited repertoire: the tools, techniques, symbols, and language passed down by the previous generation.

◦ The immediate situation: the concrete particulars of the setting, read moment to moment by the sense-act loop.

◦ Messages and readings from teammates and instruments in a distributed system.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Faithful reproductions of procedures, consumed by the next learner and by the ratchet.

◦ Innovations: small improvements added to the repertoire, consumed by the group's shared stock.

◦ External representations: marks on charts, written records, and tool states, consumed by other members of the distributed system and by one's own future self.

◦ Group-level task performance, the c factor's observable output, consumed by whoever the team serves.

• STATE.

◦ The group's accumulated cultural repertoire, held redundantly across many heads and many artefacts.

◦ Each learner's position in the zone of proximal development, the moving boundary between unaided and aided competence.

◦ The stage of internalisation of each regulated skill, from social speech through private speech to inner speech.

◦ The contents of shared external memories: charts, logs, displays, and records.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Transmission fidelity: how exactly a procedure survives one teaching hand-off, the parameter the ratchet depends on.

◦ Innovation rate: how often a generation adds an improvement.

◦ Scaffolding gain: how much support the helper supplies, tuned downward as competence rises.

◦ Communication structure: turn-taking equality and members' social sensitivity, the predictors of the c factor.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ The sense-act loop of situated action runs at the pace of the environment, on the order of hundreds of milliseconds to seconds per cycle.

◦ Hand-offs in a distributed team take seconds, with full task cycles such as a navigational fix on the order of minutes.

◦ Scaffolded learning within the zone of proximal development unfolds over days to months of sessions.

◦ Internalisation of speech into inner speech takes years of early childhood.

◦ The cultural ratchet advances per generation, and gene-culture coevolution such as the spread of adult milk digestion took thousands of years.

◦ The decay rate of a group's unwritten shared knowledge: REFUSED, because it depends on turnover and practice in ways the literature does not reduce to one honest value.

• MODES.

◦ Emulation mode, copying goals only, versus imitation mode, copying full procedures; imitation is triggered in humans by pedagogical cues and social context.

◦ Aided mode inside the zone of proximal development versus independent mode outside it, switched by the withdrawal of scaffolding.

◦ Social speech, private speech, and inner speech as successive operating modes of self-regulation.

◦ Individual computation versus distributed computation, switched by task scale: when the task exceeds one head's capacity, the system must distribute across people and tools.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Ratchet slippage: knowledge lost when transmission fidelity drops, as in small isolated populations losing technologies.

◦ Overimitation of superfluous steps, and cascading copying of errors.

◦ Scaffolding failures: help withdrawn too soon, leaving the learner stranded, or too late, blocking independence.

◦ Distributed breakdowns: miscommunication between members, stale or wrong external records, and single points of failure in the pipeline.

◦ Group pathologies that lower the c factor: domination of the floor by a few members and poor reading of others' states.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called shared memory that both agents can read and write, initially empty.
Create a list variable called clues holding the full set of puzzle clues.
Give the first agent only the first half of the clues.
Give the second agent only the second half of the clues.
For each round, do the following.
    For each agent, do the following.
        For each clue the agent holds, do the following.
            If the clue is not yet in the shared memory, then write the clue to the shared memory.
        Read all clues currently in the shared memory.
        If the clues read from the shared memory cover the full set, then declare the puzzle solved by this agent.
    If the puzzle is solved, then stop the rounds.
Check whether either agent could have covered the full set from its private clues alone.
Report that neither agent alone succeeds and that the pair with the shared memory succeeds.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create the full secret code that the team must reconstruct, as a list of six numbered clues.
full_code = [(i, "clue" + str(i)) for i in range(6)]

# Give agent one only the even-numbered clues, a limited private memory.
agent1_clues = [c for c in full_code if c[0] % 2 == 0]

# Give agent two only the odd-numbered clues, a different limited private memory.
agent2_clues = [c for c in full_code if c[0] % 2 == 1]

# Create the shared external memory, an initially empty whiteboard both agents can use.
whiteboard = []

# Define a function that tests whether a set of clues covers the whole code.
def solved(clues):
    # Return whether the set of clue numbers equals the full required set.
    return set(i for i, _ in clues) == set(i for i, _ in full_code)

# Print whether agent one alone can solve the puzzle from private memory.
print("agent1 alone:", solved(agent1_clues))

# Print whether agent two alone can solve the puzzle from private memory.
print("agent2 alone:", solved(agent2_clues))

# Repeat for up to five rounds of taking turns at the whiteboard.
for rnd in range(5):
    # Let each agent take a turn with its own private clues.
    for name, private in (("agent1", agent1_clues), ("agent2", agent2_clues)):
        # For each clue the agent privately holds, share it if it is new.
        for clue in private:
            # If the clue is not yet on the whiteboard, write it there.
            if clue not in whiteboard:
                # Append the clue to the shared external memory.
                whiteboard.append(clue)
        # Read the whiteboard and check whether the combined record solves the puzzle.
        if solved(whiteboard):
            # Print which agent completed the solution and in which round.
            print(name, "completes the code in round", rnd, "using the whiteboard")
            # Stop the loop over agents because the task is done.
            break
    # If the whiteboard now holds the full code, stop the rounds.
    if solved(whiteboard):
        # Leave the round loop because the distributed system has solved the task.
        break

# Print the final size of the shared memory, the part of the thinking held outside both heads.
print("clues held in shared memory:", len(whiteboard))


================================================================================

PART THIRTEEN. THE COMPUTATIONAL FRAMEWORKS OF MIND

================================================================================

CHAPTER 53. RATIONAL ANALYSIS AND THE BAYESIAN BRAIN (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter is about a big and hopeful idea: that a great deal of what the mind does can be understood as trying to do the smartest possible thing given the situation it is in.

Instead of starting with the wiring of the brain, this way of thinking starts with the problem the mind is trying to solve, and asks what the best solution to that problem would look like.

The word "framework" in the chapter title means a way of thinking and a set of mathematical tools, rather than a single fact or a single experiment.

The particular tools here come from probability, which is the branch of mathematics that deals with uncertainty, with how strongly we should believe things when we cannot be sure.

Seen as an engineered system, this framework is unusual because it IS an algorithm: it specifies inputs, which are evidence from the world, an internal state, which is a set of graded beliefs, and an update rule, which is Bayes' theorem, that maps the old state plus new evidence to a new state.

By the end of the chapter you should understand what "rational analysis" is, what people mean when they call the brain "Bayesian," and why many researchers find this one of the most powerful lenses we have on thinking, while others remain skeptical.


53.1 Rational analysis

Rational analysis is a recipe for building theories of the mind by asking what a well-designed mind ought to do, and then checking whether real people do that.

The key move is to look outward at the world before looking inward at the head, because a mind that works well is a mind that fits the world it lives in.


53.1.1 The rational-analysis method and the role of the environment

Rational analysis is a method introduced by the psychologist John Anderson around 1990, in a book called The Adaptive Character of Thought.

The core claim is simple to state: the mind is adaptive, meaning it has been shaped by evolution and by learning to do a good job in the environment it actually faces.

So if you want to understand why the mind behaves a certain way, you should first understand the problem the environment sets, and then work out what the best behaviour would be.

Anderson laid this out as a series of steps, which are worth walking through slowly because they are the heart of the whole approach, and because they read exactly like a systems engineering loop of specify, model, derive, test, and revise.

First, you state precisely what the mind is trying to achieve, that is, its goal.

Second, you build a careful, formal description of the environment, meaning the structure of the world the mind is adapted to, including which events are common and which are rare.

Third, you make only the smallest necessary assumptions about the mind's internal limits, such as limits on speed or memory, so that the environment does most of the explaining.

Fourth, you work out mathematically what the best possible behaviour would be, given the goal, the environment, and those minimal limits.

Fifth, you compare that ideal behaviour against what real people actually do in experiments.

Sixth, if the prediction is wrong, you go back and revise your description of the goal or the environment, and try again.

The word "optimal" appears a lot in this area, and it simply means the best possible given the circumstances, not perfect in some absolute sense.

A helpful way to see the role of the environment is an example about memory that Anderson made famous.

Your memory seems to make some things easy to recall and other things hard, and at first this can look like a flaw.

But Anderson pointed out that the things you have encountered recently, or encountered often, are exactly the things you are statistically most likely to need again soon.

So a memory system that makes recent and frequent items easiest to retrieve is not being lazy; it is betting sensibly on the future based on the pattern of the past.

The environment, in this example, is the statistics of when information tends to be needed, and the mind's behaviour turns out to match those statistics remarkably well.

In systems terms, the method takes as input a formal model of environmental statistics plus a goal function, produces as output a predicted behaviour curve, and runs on the timescale of theory building rather than of the behaving mind itself.

This is the signature of rational analysis: a puzzling quirk of the mind becomes sensible once you look at the shape of the world the mind is solving for.

It is worth being honest about a limitation that critics have raised.

Because the method lets you revise your description of the environment when a prediction fails, a determined theorist can sometimes make almost any behaviour look "rational" after the fact, which weakens the claim.

The best practitioners guard against this by fixing the environment description in advance using independent data about the world, rather than tuning it to fit the very behaviour they are trying to explain.


53.1.2 Rational models of memory, categorisation, and inference

Anderson did not leave rational analysis as an abstract slogan; he applied it in detail to several specific mental abilities, and this sub-section walks through them.

The first is memory, which we have just met.

The rational model of memory treats remembering as a prediction problem: at each moment the mind estimates the probability that a given piece of information will be needed, and it prioritises retrieval accordingly.

As a system, this memory model subscribes to a history of past uses of each item, publishes a need probability for each item, and its characteristic timescale is the slow power-law decay of that probability over hours, days, and years of disuse.

This single idea reproduces several well-known laws of memory, such as the fact that items seen more recently and more frequently are recalled better, because those really are the items most likely to be relevant, given how information tends to recur in everyday life.

The second application is categorisation, which is the mental act of sorting things into kinds, such as deciding that a new animal is a dog.

The rational model of categorisation treats this as guessing which hidden category best explains the thing in front of you, and using that guess to predict the thing's other, unseen properties.

Rather than storing one fixed definition of "dog," the model builds up clusters from experience and asks which cluster a new item most probably belongs to, which nicely handles the fact that real categories have fuzzy, graded membership.

Its systems reading: inputs are observed features of a new item, state is a growing set of learned clusters with their statistics, and output is a probability for each cluster plus predictions of the item's unseen properties, delivered within the second or so a categorisation judgment takes.

The third application is causal inference, which is working out what causes what, for example learning that a certain plant makes you ill.

The rational model treats this as estimating, from your history of observations, how strongly one thing raises or lowers the probability of another.

Here the input is a running table of co-occurrences between candidate cause and effect, the state is a graded belief about causal strength, and the output is a prediction of the effect given an intervention, updated one observation at a time.

Across all three cases the pattern is identical: take a mental ability, describe the statistical problem the world poses, and show that human behaviour looks like a good statistical solution to that problem.

The lasting influence of this work is that it made "what is the mind optimally solving for" a respectable and productive question, and it fed directly into the broader Bayesian programme that the rest of this chapter describes.


53.2 The Bayesian programme

The Bayesian programme is the larger research movement that grew up around the idea that the mind is, at heart, an engine for reasoning under uncertainty.

Its name comes from Bayes' theorem, a rule from probability theory, and this section explains what that rule is and how it has been used to model thinking.


53.2.1 Bayes as a computational-level theory of induction

To understand this sub-section we first need the word "induction."

Induction means reasoning from limited evidence to a general conclusion, such as seeing a few white swans and forming a belief about swans in general.

Induction is hard because the evidence never fully pins down the answer, so you can only ever hold beliefs with some degree of confidence, never certainty.

This is exactly the kind of problem probability theory was built for, and Bayes' theorem is the specific rule for updating beliefs in the light of evidence.

Named after the Reverend Thomas Bayes, an eighteenth-century English clergyman and mathematician, the theorem tells you how to combine two things.

The first thing is your "prior," which is how strongly you believed each possibility before seeing the new evidence.

The second thing is the "likelihood," which is how well each possibility predicts the evidence you actually observed.

Multiply the prior by the likelihood, tidy up the numbers so they add to one, and you get the "posterior," which is your updated belief after seeing the evidence.

In plain words: sensible belief is a blend of what you expected beforehand and how surprising the new data would be under each explanation.

Read as a system, the update rule takes two input signals, a prior distribution and a likelihood function, holds no extra state beyond the current distribution, and publishes the posterior distribution, which then becomes the prior for the next round, an explicit feedback loop.

Now the phrase "computational-level theory" deserves unpacking, because it is doing careful work.

It refers to a distinction made by the vision scientist David Marr, who said you can describe a mental ability at three levels.

The computational level asks what problem is being solved and what the ideal solution is; the algorithmic level asks what steps and representations are used; and the implementation level asks how the brain physically carries it out.

To call Bayes a computational-level theory is to say it describes the problem of induction and its ideal solution, without yet claiming that neurons literally carry out Bayes' theorem step by step.

This is an important and honest caveat, because it means a Bayesian model can be a good description of what the mind achieves even if the brain reaches that achievement by some other, approximate route.

In systems terms the caveat says: the interface specification is claimed to be right, while the internal implementation is deliberately left open.


53.2.2 Hierarchical Bayesian models and learning to learn

A hierarchical Bayesian model is a Bayesian model with more than one level of belief stacked on top of each other, and this stacking turns out to explain something deep about human learning.

The word "hierarchical" here just means layered, with general beliefs sitting above more specific ones.

Picture a child learning words for kinds of things.

At the bottom level, the child learns specific facts, such as what a particular ball looks like.

At a higher level, the child can learn a general lesson about categories themselves, for example that objects of the same kind tend to share their shape more than their colour or size.

A hierarchical Bayesian model captures both levels at once, and the higher-level lesson then guides all future lower-level learning.

As a system, the lower level subscribes to raw examples and publishes beliefs about specific categories, while the upper level subscribes to those lower-level beliefs and publishes a learned prior back down, a two-way message-passing architecture in which the upper level changes on a slower timescale than the lower.

This gives rise to a striking and well-documented effect called "learning to learn," sometimes called forming an overhypothesis.

Learning to learn means that once you have grasped a general regularity, you can master each new specific case from far less evidence than before.

The child who has learned that "kinds go by shape" can learn a brand new word from a single example, because the higher-level knowledge tells her which features matter.

Researchers such as Joshua Tenenbaum, Charles Kemp, and their colleagues showed that hierarchical Bayesian models reproduce this pattern, and they even predict a surprising detail.

The detail is that the broad, abstract lesson can be learned before all the specific details are filled in, which matches the finding that young children show category biases before they have learned all their categories.

This mattered because a long-standing objection to statistical accounts of the mind was that children learn too fast, from too little data, to be mere statistics-gatherers.

Hierarchical models answer that objection by showing how abstract knowledge, itself learned statistically, can make later learning fast and data-thrifty.


53.2.3 Structured probabilistic knowledge: grammars, graphs, and programs

This sub-section makes a point that is easy to miss but very important: being Bayesian does not force you to think of knowledge as a flat list of probabilities.

The probabilities can be laid over rich, structured representations, and choosing the right structure is often where the real explanatory power lies.

The word "structure" here means the shape or organisation of the knowledge, the way its parts connect.

Three kinds of structure come up again and again in this literature.

The first is a graph, which in this technical sense means a set of nodes connected by links, used to show which things influence which others.

A causal graph, for instance, can represent your belief that clouds cause rain, with an arrow from cloud to rain, and probability theory then tells you how to reason over that graph.

The second is a grammar, which is a set of rules for building complex structures out of simpler parts, borrowed from the study of language.

A probabilistic grammar can capture the idea that thoughts, sentences, or even melodies are built by combining pieces according to rules, with probabilities attached to the choices.

The third and most general is a program, meaning a small piece of a step-by-step procedure that generates data.

In this view a concept can be represented as a little probabilistic program that, when run, produces examples of the concept, and learning the concept means inferring the program.

In systems terms, each structure choice fixes the data format of the hypothesis space over which the Bayesian update runs: the same update rule, different schemas for the state it updates.

The unifying insight, argued by researchers including Tenenbaum, Kemp, Thomas Griffiths, and Noah Goodman, is that human knowledge is both structured and probabilistic at the same time.

Structure captures the compositional, rule-like richness of thought, and probability captures our ability to cope with uncertainty and to learn from noisy, incomplete evidence.

The claim that these two ingredients belong together, rather than being rival visions of the mind, is one of the defining ideas of modern computational cognitive science.


53.3 The domains of Bayesian cognition

Having laid out the machinery, this section shows it at work in three concrete areas of thinking, so that the abstract ideas become tangible.

The pattern in each case is the same: take an everyday human ability, and show that people behave as if they were doing careful probabilistic reasoning.


53.3.1 Concept learning and the size principle

Concept learning means figuring out the meaning of a category, such as what counts as a "dog" or a "prime number," from examples.

A famous puzzle is that a few examples usually leave the answer wildly ambiguous, yet people converge on sensible meanings anyway.

Suppose someone points at a few numbers, say 16, 8, 2, and 64, and calls them all "blickets."

The examples fit many rules: powers of two, even numbers, numbers under a hundred, and so on, so how does a learner pick?

Tenenbaum's Bayesian model of concept learning, from the late 1990s, offered an elegant answer built on something called the size principle.

The size principle says that, all else equal, a narrower, more specific hypothesis should be preferred over a broader one when both fit the examples equally well.

The reasoning is that if the true category were the broad one, say "all even numbers," it would be a strange coincidence for every example you were shown to also happen to be a tidy power of two.

The narrow hypothesis "powers of two" predicts the actual examples much more strongly, so it earns a higher likelihood, and Bayes' theorem then favours it.

The mechanism is beautifully mechanical: if examples are assumed to be drawn at random from the true category, then each example has likelihood one divided by the size of the hypothesis, so a hypothesis containing 10 items assigns each example ten times the probability that a hypothesis containing 100 items does.

Crucially, this preference for the narrow hypothesis grows exponentially stronger with each additional example, because each new example that fits the narrow rule makes the broad rule's "coincidence" even more unlikely.

As a system, the learner subscribes to a stream of positive examples, holds as state a posterior weight over every candidate hypothesis, and publishes a generalisation probability for any queried new item, sharpening after every example.

This is a lovely result because it explains, in exact numbers, the human intuition that a run of suspiciously specific examples points to a specific rule.

It also shows how a Bayesian learner can generalise sensibly from just a handful of positive examples, without ever being told what does not count as a blicket.

The chapter's code sample below implements exactly this learner, with a small hierarchical touch: a prior that itself favours simple rules.


53.3.2 Intuitive physics as probabilistic simulation

Intuitive physics means the rough, automatic sense we all have of how physical objects will behave, such as knowing a leaning tower of blocks is about to topple.

You did not compute any equations to feel that; the understanding was fast, effortless, and approximate.

A leading account, developed by Peter Battaglia, Jessica Hamrick, Kevin Smith, Tomer Ullman, Tenenbaum and colleagues, proposes that the mind contains an "intuitive physics engine."

The comparison is to the physics engines inside video games, which are pieces of software that simulate how objects move, fall, and collide well enough to look right, without being perfectly accurate.

The proposal is that your mind runs a similar internal simulation: it imagines how a scene will unfold and reads off the likely outcome.

The probabilistic part is essential and clever.

Because you are never quite certain of the exact positions, weights, and speeds of things, the mind is thought to run the simulation several times with slightly different guesses about those details.

If most of the imagined runs end with the tower falling, you feel confident it will fall; if the runs disagree, you feel unsure.

The systems reading: input is a noisy percept of the scene, the process draws a handful of samples of the scene's uncertain parameters, runs a short forward simulation on each, and publishes an outcome distribution, all within roughly the first second of looking, since stability judgments are made at a glance.

This single idea accounts for a wide range of findings, including how people judge stability, how they predict where objects will land, and how their confidence tracks the genuine ambiguity of a scene.

It is a strong example of the Bayesian programme, because it treats a fast, intuitive human skill as approximate probabilistic reasoning over an internal model of the world.

It is worth noting that this remains an active research area, and some recent work argues that people also fall back on simpler shortcuts when full simulation would be too costly, which connects to the resource-rational ideas of the next chapter.


53.3.3 Intuitive psychology as inverse planning

Intuitive psychology, often called theory of mind, means our everyday ability to make sense of other people in terms of their beliefs and goals.

When you see someone hurry past the bus stop toward a shop, you effortlessly infer they wanted something from the shop more than they wanted the bus.

The Bayesian account of this ability, developed especially by Chris Baker, Rebecca Saxe, and Tenenbaum, is called inverse planning, and the name captures the idea neatly.

Planning, in this technical sense, means working forward from a goal to the actions that would achieve it: given that I want coffee, I walk to the cafe.

Inverse planning runs that logic backward: given that I saw you walk to the cafe, I infer that you probably wanted coffee.

More precisely, the model assumes that people are roughly rational agents who choose actions that tend to achieve their goals, and then it uses Bayes' theorem to work out which goals and beliefs best explain the actions you observed.

The framework rests on the tools of decision-making under uncertainty, in which an agent with goals picks actions to reach them, and the observer inverts that process to recover the hidden goals.

In systems terms, the observer subscribes to a stream of observed actions, holds a forward model of rational planning as fixed machinery plus a posterior over candidate goals as state, and publishes a running goal estimate that is revised action by action as the other person's path unfolds.

This account is attractive because it explains not just single guesses but the whole graded pattern of our social inferences, including how we revise our guess about someone's goal as their path unfolds.

Recent work has begun to join intuitive psychology and intuitive physics together, so that an observer reasons about what someone wants while also reasoning about the physical world that person is acting in, which is closer to how real social understanding works.


53.4 Bayes at the neural level

So far Bayes has been a description of what the mind achieves, at Marr's computational level.

This section turns to the harder question of how a brain made of neurons could actually carry out anything like probabilistic reasoning.

Two main proposals compete, and they make different bets about what the noisiness of the brain is for.


53.4.1 Probabilistic population codes

To understand this we need the idea of a population code.

A population code means representing something not with a single cell but with the combined pattern of activity across a whole group, or population, of neurons.

For example, the direction of a moving object might be encoded by which cells in a group fire most strongly and how strongly, rather than by any one cell alone.

A probabilistic population code, developed by Wei Ji Ma, Jeff Beck, Peter Latham, Alexandre Pouget and colleagues around 2006, adds a crucial twist.

The twist is that the population does not just signal a single best guess; it automatically represents a whole probability distribution, that is, a spread of how likely each possible value is.

The clever part is that the natural variability of neurons, the fact that they fire a slightly different number of spikes each time, is not treated as a nuisance to be averaged away.

Instead, that variability is exactly what carries the information about uncertainty: broadly speaking, a stronger and crisper burst of population activity signals a more confident, narrower estimate, and a weaker one signals more doubt.

A further attractive feature is that, under this scheme, combining two sources of evidence in the statistically correct way turns out to correspond to simply adding the two populations' activity together, which is something neurons can plausibly do.

The systems reading: the input is a sensory drive, the output at every instant is a full distribution encoded in the population's firing pattern, and the combination operation is a parallel add, running at the timescale of neural integration, tens of milliseconds.

So probabilistic population codes offer a concrete story in which representing and combining uncertainty falls naturally out of ordinary neural machinery.


53.4.2 Sampling against parametric representations of uncertainty

This sub-section lays out the main rival to the population-code story, and the debate between them.

The two proposals differ in what a moment of neural activity is taken to represent.

The population-code view just described is often called parametric, meaning the neural activity at any instant encodes the full probability distribution all at once, spelled out in its shape.

The sampling view, developed by researchers including Jozsef Fiser, Pietro Berkes, Gergo Orban, and Mate Lengyel, proposes something quite different.

On the sampling view, the brain represents a probability distribution not by holding it whole at every instant, but by drawing examples from it one after another over time.

An analogy helps: if you want to describe the range of heights in a city, you could either write down the full curve of how common each height is, which is the parametric way, or you could just call out a series of individual people's heights, which is the sampling way, letting the pattern emerge over the sequence.

On this account the moment-to-moment fluctuation of neural activity is not noise around a fixed answer; it is the brain trying out different possibilities, each fluctuation a fresh sample from its beliefs.

The two views make different systems predictions: the parametric view says uncertainty is available in a single read of the population, so confidence should be usable almost instantly, while the sampling view says uncertainty accumulates over a sequence of samples, so confidence should sharpen with time and judgments made under time pressure should be more variable.

Each view has appeal.

The parametric view explains how the brain can combine and act on uncertainty instantly, while the sampling view explains why neural activity is so variable and why our own judgments seem to fluctuate as if we were drawing from a distribution.

The honest current state of the science is that this is unsettled, and interestingly some recent analyses suggest the two views may not be as opposed as they first seemed, since certain sampling schemes can be read as producing a kind of population code.

For a beginner, the key point to carry away is that there is a genuine, live scientific question here, and researchers have not yet agreed on how, or even whether, the brain literally implements probabilistic reasoning.


53.5 The process-model question

This final section confronts a gap that runs through the whole chapter.

The gap is between saying what the ideal answer is, at the computational level, and saying how a real, limited mind actually reaches an answer in real time, which is the level of process.


53.5.1 Rational process models and sampling algorithms in the mind

A process model is a theory of the actual steps a mind takes, moment by moment, as opposed to just the ideal outcome it approximates.

This matters because exact Bayesian reasoning is usually far too hard to compute in full; the number of possibilities to weigh can be astronomically large.

So if the mind is even roughly Bayesian, it cannot be doing the exact calculation; it must be using some shortcut that lands close enough.

A leading idea is that the mind uses sampling algorithms, which are methods that approximate a probability distribution by drawing a manageable number of examples from it rather than considering every possibility.

Statisticians and computer scientists rely on exactly these methods, under names such as Monte Carlo methods, precisely because they make otherwise impossible probability calculations practical.

The proposal, developed by Griffiths, Tenenbaum, Ed Vul, Goodman and others, is that the mind does something similar, and that this explains features of human thought that look irrational at first.

For instance, our guesses are noticeably variable, we give somewhat different answers to the same question on different occasions, and sampling predicts exactly this kind of scatter.

There is even a striking analysis by Vul, Goodman, Griffiths, and Tenenbaum showing that, when thinking is costly, it can be sensible to base a decision on just one or a very few samples rather than many.

This reframes what looks like sloppiness as a reasonable trade-off between accuracy and effort, and it ties the Bayesian programme directly to the resource-rational ideas of the next chapter.

In systems terms, a rational process model replaces the ideal update rule with an anytime approximation: an algorithm whose answer improves with every sample drawn, and which can be interrupted at any moment to act on the best answer so far.

So rational process models try to keep the successes of the Bayesian computational-level story while facing up to the fact that real minds must approximate, and they propose sampling as the bridge.


53.5.2 The probabilistic language of thought

The probabilistic language of thought is an ambitious attempt to bring together the two big themes we have seen: rich, structured, program-like knowledge, and probabilistic reasoning under uncertainty.

The older phrase "language of thought," from the philosopher Jerry Fodor, is the idea that thinking happens in an internal, language-like system with words and grammar of its own, so that thoughts are built from parts according to rules, much as sentences are.

The probabilistic version, developed by Goodman, Tenenbaum, and colleagues, says that this internal language is one for writing little probabilistic programs.

A probabilistic program, recall, is a short procedure that generates data with some randomness built in, so that running it produces not one fixed output but a range of possible outputs with different likelihoods.

On this view a concept is a program that can generate examples of itself, a belief about the world is a program that generates possible observations, and reasoning is running and inverting these programs.

To make this concrete and testable, researchers built an actual computer programming language for it, called Church, named in honour of the logician Alonzo Church.

Church and its successors let scientists write down a candidate mental model as real code, run it, and compare its behaviour against what people do, which turns philosophical proposals into precise, checkable predictions.

The appeal of the probabilistic language of thought is that it promises the best of both worlds at last: the compositional, unlimited creativity of structured symbolic thought, and the graceful handling of uncertainty that probability provides.

Whether the human mind really works this way is far from settled, and the framework is demanding to test, but it stands as one of the most complete visions on offer for how a single system could be both structured and probabilistic.

Notice how naturally the systems approach fits here: on this account the mind is literally a runtime for probabilistic programs, so describing cognition as software is not a metaphor but the theory itself.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Evidence stream: discrete observations or examples from the environment, such as labelled examples of a concept, sensory measurements, or another agent's observed actions.

◦ Hypothesis space: a structured set of candidate explanations, formatted as rules, causal graphs, grammars, or probabilistic programs, supplied by long-term knowledge.

◦ Prior distribution: a weighting over the hypothesis space, supplied either innately, by earlier learning, or by a higher level of a hierarchical model.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Posterior distribution: an updated weighting over hypotheses, consumed by decision, action, and language systems and fed back as the next round's prior.

◦ Generalisation judgments: the probability that a new item belongs to the learned concept, consumed by categorisation and prediction processes.

◦ Confidence signal: the spread of the posterior, consumed by metacognition and by the stopping rules of the next chapter.

• STATE.

◦ The current posterior over hypotheses, carried forward between observations.

◦ In hierarchical models, one posterior per level, with upper levels acting as learned priors for lower levels.

◦ In sampling process models, the current set of drawn samples standing in for the full distribution.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Hypothesis space size and structure: how many candidate explanations are entertained and in what format.

◦ Prior strength: how much evidence is needed to overturn initial beliefs.

◦ Likelihood model: the assumed process generating examples, for instance random sampling from the true concept, which is what produces the size principle.

◦ Sample count: in process models, how many samples are drawn before acting, often as low as one to a few.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ A single Bayesian belief update in perception operates within the timescale of a perceptual judgment, on the order of a few hundred milliseconds, as in cue-combination experiments.

◦ Hierarchical overhypothesis learning operates over developmental time, from days to years, as in children learning the shape bias during the second year of life.

◦ The number of internal simulation runs or samples behind an intuitive judgment: REFUSED, because the literature infers few samples indirectly and gives no agreed per-sample duration.

◦ The neural implementation timescale under the parametric versus sampling debate: REFUSED, because the two accounts assign different meanings to the same tens-of-milliseconds fluctuations and the question is unsettled.

• MODES.

◦ Exact inference mode: small hypothesis spaces are updated in full, triggered when the space is enumerable, as in simple concept games.

◦ Approximate sampling mode: large spaces are handled by drawing a few samples, triggered when full enumeration is intractable, which is the normal case.

◦ Learning mode against exploitation mode: early evidence reshapes the posterior strongly, while a sharply peaked posterior makes the system behave as if it held a fixed rule, the transition being driven by accumulated evidence.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Wrong priors: with a mistaken prior the update is faithful but the conclusions are wrong, as in stubborn belief perseverance.

◦ Wrong hypothesis space: the true explanation is never considered, so no amount of evidence can find it.

◦ Few-sample noise: decisions based on one or two samples are variable and occasionally wildly off, which reads as probability matching and inconsistent judgment.

◦ Unfalsifiability at the theory level: the rational analyst can redescribe the environment until any behaviour looks optimal, a failure of the method rather than the mind.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called hypotheses containing each candidate rule, its set of members, and its prior probability.
Create a list variable called examples containing the observed positive examples.
For each hypothesis in hypotheses, set its posterior to its prior probability.
For each example in examples,
    For each hypothesis in hypotheses,
        If the example is a member of the hypothesis set,
            Multiply the hypothesis posterior by one divided by the size of the hypothesis set.
        Otherwise,
            Set the hypothesis posterior to zero.
Create a number variable called total with initial value zero.
For each hypothesis in hypotheses, add the hypothesis posterior to total.
For each hypothesis in hypotheses, divide the hypothesis posterior by total.
Create a number variable called generalisation with initial value zero.
For each hypothesis in hypotheses,
    If the query item is a member of the hypothesis set,
        Add the hypothesis posterior to generalisation.
Return generalisation as the probability that the query item belongs to the concept.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a dictionary mapping each hypothesis name to its set of members from one to one hundred.
hypotheses = {
    # Set powers of two to the numbers two, four, eight, up to sixty four.
    "powers of two": {2 ** k for k in range(1, 7)},
    # Set even numbers to every second number from two to one hundred.
    "even numbers": set(range(2, 101, 2)),
    # Set multiples of four to every fourth number from four to one hundred.
    "multiples of four": set(range(4, 101, 4)),
    # Set numbers under fifty to the numbers one to forty nine.
    "numbers under fifty": set(range(1, 50)),
}

# Create a dictionary of priors that favours simpler, broader rules slightly.
priors = {"powers of two": 0.2, "even numbers": 0.4,
          "multiples of four": 0.2, "numbers under fifty": 0.2}

# Define a function that returns the posterior after seeing the examples.
def learn(examples):
    # Create an empty dictionary called posterior.
    posterior = {}
    # For each hypothesis name and member set in the hypotheses dictionary,
    for name, members in hypotheses.items():
        # Set the score to the prior probability of the hypothesis.
        score = priors[name]
        # For each example in the examples list,
        for x in examples:
            # If the example is in the member set, apply the size principle, otherwise set the score to zero.
            score = score * (1.0 / len(members)) if x in members else 0.0
        # Store the score under the hypothesis name.
        posterior[name] = score
    # Set the total to the sum of all scores.
    total = sum(posterior.values())
    # Divide each score by the total so the posterior adds to one.
    return {name: s / total for name, s in posterior.items()}

# Define a function that returns the probability that a query item fits the concept.
def generalise(posterior, query):
    # Add up the posterior of every hypothesis whose member set contains the query.
    return sum(p for name, p in posterior.items() if query in hypotheses[name])

# Set the observed examples to sixteen, eight, two, and sixty four.
examples = [16, 8, 2, 64]
# Learn the posterior from the examples.
post = learn(examples)
# For each hypothesis, print its posterior probability.
for name, p in sorted(post.items(), key=lambda kv: -kv[1]):
    # Print the hypothesis name and its rounded posterior.
    print(name, round(p, 4))
# Print the generalisation probability for thirty two and for ten.
print("is 32 a blicket:", round(generalise(post, 32), 4))
print("is 10 a blicket:", round(generalise(post, 10), 4))


CHAPTER 54. BOUNDED, RESOURCE-RATIONAL, AND ECOLOGICAL RATIONALITY (FRAMEWORK)

The previous chapter asked what an ideal mind would do.

This chapter asks a more down-to-earth question: what should a mind do when it is not ideal, when its time, memory, and computing power are all sharply limited?

That question turns out to change the picture in deep ways, because once you take limits seriously, behaviour that looked foolish can start to look wise.

This chapter introduces three closely related traditions that each take limits as their starting point: bounded rationality, resource-rational analysis, and ecological rationality.

In systems terms, the previous chapter specified the ideal function to compute; this chapter adds the engineering constraints, a compute budget, a deadline, and a cost per operation, and asks for the best algorithm that fits inside them.

They share a hopeful conviction, that human thinking is much smarter than the long catalogue of human "biases" would suggest, once you judge it by the right standard.


54.1 Bounded rationality

Bounded rationality is the founding idea of this whole family: that real minds are rational within bounds, doing the best they can with the limited resources they have.

It was the great insight of Herbert Simon, an American scientist so wide-ranging that he won both a Nobel Prize in economics and the top award in artificial intelligence.


54.1.1 Satisficing and aspiration levels

Simon coined the word "satisficing," a blend of "satisfy" and "suffice," and it names one of the most useful ideas in the study of decision-making.

Satisficing means choosing the first option that is good enough, rather than searching on and on for the very best option.

The contrast is with "optimising," which means finding the single best possible choice, something that often requires examining every alternative.

Simon argued that optimising is usually impossible in real life, because there are too many options, too little time, and too little information to consider them all.

So instead of maximising, people set what Simon called an "aspiration level," which is a threshold of acceptability, a bar for how good is good enough.

You then search through options one at a time and stop as soon as something clears the bar.

Think of looking for somewhere to eat in an unfamiliar town: you do not survey every restaurant and rank them; you walk until you find one that looks decent enough, and you go in.

As a system, satisficing is a sequential search loop: input is a stream of options with their values, state is the current aspiration level, output is the first option whose value clears the threshold, and the loop terminates in as many steps as it takes to find one, not in as many steps as there are options.

The aspiration level is not fixed forever; it adjusts to experience.

If good options keep turning up easily, you raise your bar, and if everything is disappointing, you lower it, so the standard itself adapts to the environment.

That adjustment is a feedback controller on the threshold parameter, running on a slower timescale than the search itself.

Simon's point was not that people are lazy or stupid, but that satisficing is a genuinely intelligent response to a world too complex to fully compute.

This reframing, that stopping when you have enough can be the smart move, is the seed from which the rest of the chapter grows.


54.1.2 The scissors of mind and environment

Simon offered a memorable image for how thinking works, and it is worth learning because it recurs throughout this field.

He said that rational behaviour is shaped "by a scissors whose two blades are the structure of task environments and the computational capabilities of the actor."

The point of the scissors image is that a single blade cuts nothing.

To understand why someone behaves as they do, you cannot look only at the mind, and you cannot look only at the world; you have to see how the two meet, just as cutting needs both blades pressing together.

The first blade is the mind's limits: how much it can remember, how fast it can compute, how much it can attend to.

The second blade is the structure of the environment: which situations arise often, how regular or predictable the world is, what information is freely available.

A behaviour that seems irrational when you stare only at the mind can turn out to be an excellent fit once you see the shape of the world it evolved and learned to handle.

In systems terms this is a design principle rather than a mechanism: the specification of any cognitive algorithm must include the statistics of its input distribution, because an algorithm is only well designed relative to the inputs it will actually receive.

This is a profound methodological lesson, and it directly connects Simon's bounded rationality to Anderson's rational analysis from the previous chapter, since both insist that you cannot understand the mind without understanding its world.

The scissors image is the shared foundation that the two remaining traditions in this chapter build upon, each emphasising one blade or the way the blades are matched.


54.2 Resource-rational analysis

Resource-rational analysis is a modern, mathematically precise upgrade of Simon's bounded rationality.

Its guiding idea is to treat the mind's limits not as an excuse for failure but as a formal part of the problem to be solved.


54.2.1 The optimal use of limited computation

The central proposal, developed especially by Tom Griffiths, Falk Lieder, and their colleagues in the 2010s, can be stated in one sentence.

Resource-rational analysis says the mind makes the best possible use of its limited computational resources, so it optimises subject to the cost of thinking.

Notice the careful shift from the previous chapter.

Classical rational analysis asked, what is the best answer, and it ignored how hard that answer is to compute.

Resource-rational analysis asks, what is the best answer you can afford, given that thinking itself takes time and effort that are worth something.

Formally, this means the mind is imagined to weigh two things against each other: the quality of the decision it would reach, and the computational cost of the thinking needed to reach it.

The right amount to think is the amount where a little more thinking would no longer be worth its cost.

The systems reading is direct: the objective function being maximised is expected decision value minus computation cost, the input is the current state of deliberation, and the output is a choice between "compute more" and "act now," evaluated afresh at every step of thinking.

This is a powerful reframing because it turns human limits from a problem into part of the solution.

A person who thinks quickly and roughly rather than slowly and exactly is not failing to be rational; they may be being rational about the price of their own thinking.

The approach has been used to re-derive many well-known mental shortcuts as the answers you should give if you correctly account for the cost of computation, which is the theme of the sub-sections that follow.


54.2.2 Rational metareasoning and the value of computation

This sub-section introduces the machinery that lets resource-rational analysis actually work: reasoning about your own reasoning.

The technical term is "metareasoning," where the prefix meta means about itself, so metareasoning means thinking about how to think.

The idea is that a smart but limited agent should not just think about the world; it should also make good decisions about how much thinking to do and which thoughts to have.

To make this precise, researchers use a quantity called the "value of computation."

The value of computation is the expected benefit you would gain from performing a particular mental operation, such as considering one more option or imagining one more outcome, minus the cost of doing it.

If a further step of thinking is likely to improve your decision by more than it costs, it is worth taking; if not, you should stop and act.

Rational metareasoning, then, is the policy of always choosing the mental operation with the highest value of computation, and stopping when no operation is worth its cost.

As a system, the metareasoner sits one level above the reasoner: it subscribes to the reasoner's current estimates and their uncertainty, publishes a control signal that either triggers one more computation or commits to an action, and holds as state the running estimates plus a count of computations spent.

This gives a principled answer to a question that plagues any limited thinker: when should I stop deliberating and just decide?

Lieder and Griffiths used this framework to model how people select among different problem-solving strategies, treating the choice of strategy as itself a rational decision about how to spend limited mental effort.

The beauty of the approach is that it explains the flexible, situation-dependent way people switch between careful thought and quick shortcuts, without having to call either one irrational.

The chapter's code sample below builds exactly this kind of agent: it simulates possible outcomes one at a time and stops the moment another simulation is no longer expected to pay for itself.


54.2.3 Heuristics as resource-rational strategies

A heuristic is a mental shortcut, a simple rule of thumb that gives a good-enough answer quickly instead of a perfect answer slowly.

For decades, many heuristics were viewed mainly as sources of error, the origins of the famous "biases" catalogued in the study of judgment.

Resource-rational analysis offers a strikingly different reading: many heuristics are exactly the strategies a limited mind should use, because they buy most of the benefit of full reasoning at a fraction of the cost.

A clear example is the anchoring effect, the well-documented tendency for people's numerical estimates to be pulled toward whatever number they happened to consider first.

This has long been listed as a bias, an irrational contamination of judgment.

But Lieder, Griffiths and colleagues showed that if you start from an initial guess and then adjust it by a series of small mental steps, each step being costly, then stopping the adjustment early, and therefore staying somewhat anchored, is precisely what you should do to balance accuracy against effort.

On this reading the anchoring bias is not a flaw in the machinery; it is the fingerprint of a mind spending its limited thinking wisely.

In systems terms, anchoring-and-adjustment is an iterative refinement algorithm with an early-exit condition, and the observed bias is simply the residual error left at the optimal exit point.

The general lesson is that before you call a mental shortcut irrational, you should ask what the ideal strategy would be for a thinker who has to pay for every computation, because the shortcut may turn out to be that ideal strategy.

This does not mean every bias is secretly optimal, and researchers are careful not to over-claim, but it does mean that the label "bias" should not be applied before the resource-rational analysis has been done.


54.3 Ecological rationality

Ecological rationality is the third tradition, and it puts the spotlight on the second blade of Simon's scissors: the structure of the environment.

Its central claim is that whether a simple strategy is smart or foolish depends entirely on the world it is used in.


54.3.1 Fast-and-frugal heuristics and the adaptive toolbox

This programme is associated above all with the psychologist Gerd Gigerenzer and his colleagues at the Max Planck Institute in Berlin.

They describe human thinking in terms of "fast-and-frugal heuristics," and both adjectives matter.

Fast means the rule reaches a decision quickly; frugal means it uses very little information, often ignoring most of what is available.

A famous example is the "take-the-best" heuristic for choosing between two options, such as guessing which of two cities is larger.

Take-the-best looks at the single most useful clue first, for instance whether a city has a major sports team, and if that clue distinguishes the two options, it decides then and there and ignores everything else.

Only if the best clue fails to separate them does it move to the next clue, and so on, but often the very first clue is enough.

As a system, take-the-best is a short program with a fixed cue ordering as its only stored state: input is a pair of options with their cue values, the loop reads cues in order of validity, and the output is a choice emitted at the first discriminating cue, so its running time is measured in cues consulted, typically one to three.

Gigerenzer's group describes the mind as holding an "adaptive toolbox," a collection of many such simple heuristics, each suited to a particular kind of problem.

The image is of a handyman's toolbox with different tools for different jobs, rather than one all-purpose master strategy.

Intelligence, on this view, lies largely in selecting the right simple tool for the situation at hand, and in the fact that each tool is matched to the structure of the environments where it works well.

The word "ecological" in ecological rationality points exactly to this matching: a heuristic is rational not in the abstract but in relation to a particular ecology, a particular kind of world.


54.3.2 Less-is-more effects and the bias-variance trade-off

The most provocative claim of the ecological rationality programme is the "less-is-more" effect, and this sub-section explains both the claim and the deep statistical reason behind it.

A less-is-more effect is a situation where using less information, or a simpler rule, actually produces better decisions than using more information or a more complex rule.

This sounds impossible at first, because surely more information can only help.

Gigerenzer's group documented many cases, across three decades, where simple heuristics that deliberately ignore most of the data match or even beat sophisticated methods that use all of it, especially when predicting new, unseen cases.

The explanation comes from a fundamental principle in statistics and machine learning called the bias-variance trade-off, which is worth understanding because it explains why simplicity can win.

When you use a strategy to predict something, your errors come from two sources.

The first source is bias, meaning the strategy is too simple to capture the real pattern, so it is systematically off.

The second source is variance, meaning the strategy is so flexible that it over-reacts to the particular quirks and noise of the small sample of data it happened to see, so it swings around wildly from one sample to the next.

A very complex strategy has low bias but high variance: it can fit anything, including the noise, so it generalises poorly to new cases.

A very simple heuristic has higher bias but much lower variance: it may miss some subtle structure, but it is not fooled by noise, so it can predict new cases more reliably.

When data are scarce or noisy, which is the normal condition of real life, the simple heuristic's steadiness beats the complex method's flexibility, and less genuinely is more.

In systems terms this is a debate about model capacity: the two sides predict differently how prediction error on new cases should change as training data shrink, with the ecological side predicting that low-capacity heuristics overtake high-capacity models exactly when samples get small, a prediction that has been repeatedly confirmed.

This gives the less-is-more effect a rigorous foundation, and it shows that the ecological rationality programme and modern statistics are pointing at the same truth from two directions.


54.4 Rational inattention and the cost of control

The final section brings the economist's way of thinking to the question of attention and mental effort.

The unifying idea is that paying attention and exerting mental control are themselves costly resources, so they should be spent according to a cost-benefit logic, just like money.


54.4.1 Information-theoretic limits on attention

Rational inattention is a theory that comes originally from economics, developed by the Nobel laureate Christopher Sims around 1998 to 2003.

The starting observation is that people cannot absorb and process all the information around them; there is a hard limit on how much they can take in.

To make this precise, Sims borrowed a measure from information theory, the mathematical study of communication founded by Claude Shannon.

Information theory measures information in units called bits, and it treats any limited processor, including a mind, as a channel that can pass only so many bits per unit of time.

Rational inattention says that, given this channel limit, a person should choose to attend to exactly the information that matters most for their decisions, and remain deliberately ignorant of the rest.

Crucially, being inattentive is not a failure here; it is the optimal allocation of a scarce resource.

If some feature of the world barely affects your welfare, it is rational not to spend precious channel capacity tracking it, even if the information is freely available.

The theory predicts, for example, that people will pay close attention to information when the stakes are high and the situation is uncertain, and will tune it out when it would not change what they do.

The systems reading: the attention allocator subscribes to estimates of stakes and uncertainty for each information source, holds a fixed capacity budget in bits as its central parameter, and publishes an allocation of that budget across sources, re-allocating as stakes change.

This connects the study of attention, which Part Three of this outline treats as a psychological process, to a clean economic principle about spending a limited resource where it does the most good.


54.4.2 Control allocation as an economic problem

This sub-section extends the same economic logic from attention to the broader idea of cognitive control and mental effort.

Cognitive control means the effortful steering of your own thinking, the deliberate work of concentrating, resisting a habit, or holding a goal in mind against distraction.

Everyday experience tells us this kind of control feels effortful and that we are reluctant to sustain it, and the puzzle is why mental effort should feel costly at all when no muscle is being tired.

A leading answer, developed by Amitai Shenhav, Matthew Botvinick, Jonathan Cohen and colleagues, is captured in a framework called the expected value of control.

The expected value of control is the net worth of exerting mental control in a given situation, calculated by weighing the benefits that control would bring against the intrinsic cost of the effort it requires.

On this account, your mind is constantly making an implicit economic decision: is it worth the effort to concentrate harder here, or should I coast on an easier, automatic response?

You allocate more control when the payoff justifies it, such as during a demanding, important task, and you withhold it when the reward is not worth the strain.

As a system, the control allocator subscribes to signals of task payoff, error rate, and conflict, publishes a control intensity that gates other processes, and updates that intensity on the timescale of task blocks, seconds to minutes, rather than moment to moment.

Treating effort as a cost that must be justified by expected benefit explains a great deal, including why we procrastinate on tedious tasks, why we tire of concentration, and why we reserve our hardest thinking for what matters most.

This closes the chapter on a satisfying unity: attention, effort, and control are all limited resources, and a great deal of the mind's apparent laziness or bias dissolves once you see it as the sensible husbanding of resources that are genuinely costly to spend.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Decision problem: a set of options with uncertain values, arriving from perception, memory, or imagination.

◦ Resource signals: available time, current fatigue, and competing demands, from interoception and task context.

◦ Stakes signal: how much the outcome matters, from motivational systems.

◦ Environment statistics: how regular, redundant, and noisy the current world is, learned from experience.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Committed choice: the selected option, consumed by the action system.

◦ Stop-thinking signal: the metareasoner's decision to end deliberation, consumed by whatever reasoning process is running.

◦ Strategy selection: which heuristic or careful procedure to run, consumed by downstream reasoning.

◦ Attention and control allocations: how much capacity and effort each task receives, consumed by perception and executive processes.

• STATE.

◦ Current best estimate of each option's value, plus the uncertainty around each estimate.

◦ The running count or cost of computations spent so far in the current deliberation.

◦ The aspiration level, adjusted by recent search experience.

◦ The learned cue ordering and toolbox of heuristics, built up over long experience.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Cost per computation: the price of one more mental step, which sets how early deliberation stops.

◦ Aspiration threshold: the bar for "good enough" in satisficing.

◦ Channel capacity: the bits-per-second limit of rational inattention.

◦ Effort cost weight: how strongly the expected value of control discounts effortful strategies.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ A single deliberation episode in simple choices typically runs from a few hundred milliseconds to a few seconds before the stopping rule fires, as in standard response-time experiments.

◦ Aspiration-level adaptation runs over multiple encounters, minutes to days, as experience recalibrates what counts as good enough.

◦ Vigilant cognitive control degrades measurably within tens of minutes of sustained demand, as in vigilance-decrement studies.

◦ The monetary or utility value of one unit of mental effort: REFUSED, because published estimates vary widely across tasks and no consensus number exists.

◦ The brain's information-channel capacity in bits per second: REFUSED, because estimates range over orders of magnitude depending on the task and the level of description.

• MODES.

◦ Deliberative mode against heuristic mode: high stakes, high uncertainty, and available time trigger careful computation, while low stakes or time pressure trigger a fast-and-frugal tool.

◦ Search mode against commit mode in satisficing: search continues while options fall below the aspiration level and terminates at the first option that clears it.

◦ Exploit mode against re-tune mode: the aspiration level and cue ordering stay fixed while they keep working, and shift when outcomes repeatedly disappoint.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Anchoring: adjustment stops early, leaving estimates pulled toward the starting point, the visible residue of a rational stopping rule.

◦ Mis-set thresholds: an aspiration level too high yields endless search and choice paralysis, while one too low yields premature, poor commitments.

◦ Ecological mismatch: a heuristic tuned to one environment is deployed in another, so a normally smart shortcut produces systematic error.

◦ Control misallocation: effort costs are overweighted, appearing clinically as apathy and avolition, or underweighted, appearing as perseverative overcontrol.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called estimated values with one running estimate per option, each with initial value zero.
Create a list variable called sample counts with one counter per option, each with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called cost per simulation holding the cost of one mental simulation.
Repeat the following loop.
    For each option, calculate the uncertainty of its estimate as one divided by one more than its sample count.
    Calculate the value of computation as the largest uncertainty among the options minus the cost per simulation.
    If the value of computation is less than or equal to zero,
        Exit the loop.
    Select the option with the largest uncertainty.
    Draw one noisy simulated outcome for the selected option.
    Add one to the selected option's sample count.
    Update the selected option's running estimate toward the simulated outcome by one divided by its sample count.
Select the option with the highest running estimate.
Return the selected option as the committed choice.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for noisy simulated outcomes.
import random

# Set the true, hidden values of three options.
true_values = [0.55, 0.60, 0.40]
# Set the cost of running one more mental simulation.
cost_per_sim = 0.02
# Create a list of running value estimates, one per option, starting at zero.
estimates = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0]
# Create a list of sample counts, one per option, starting at zero.
counts = [0, 0, 0]

# Define a function that simulates one noisy outcome of choosing an option.
def simulate(option):
    # Return the true value plus zero-mean noise with spread zero point two.
    return true_values[option] + random.gauss(0.0, 0.2)

# Define a function that returns each option's estimate uncertainty.
def uncertainties():
    # Return one divided by one more than the sample count, for each option.
    return [1.0 / (1 + c) for c in counts]

# Repeat the think-or-act loop until thinking stops paying.
while True:
    # Get the current uncertainty of every option.
    unc = uncertainties()
    # Calculate the value of computation as the largest uncertainty minus the cost.
    value_of_computation = max(unc) - cost_per_sim
    # If one more simulation is not worth its cost, stop deliberating.
    if value_of_computation <= 0:
        break
    # Select the most uncertain option to think about next.
    target = unc.index(max(unc))
    # Draw one simulated outcome for that option.
    outcome = simulate(target)
    # Add one to that option's sample count.
    counts[target] += 1
    # Move the running estimate toward the outcome by the learning fraction.
    estimates[target] += (outcome - estimates[target]) / counts[target]

# Select the option with the highest running estimate.
choice = estimates.index(max(estimates))
# Print how many simulations were spent on each option.
print("simulations per option:", counts)
# Print the final estimates rounded to two decimal places.
print("estimates:", [round(e, 2) for e in estimates])
# Print the committed choice.
print("chosen option:", choice)


CHAPTER 55. CONNECTIONISM AND PARALLEL DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter is about a completely different way of picturing the mind from the symbol-and-rule picture that dominated early cognitive science.

Connectionism proposes that thinking arises from the cooperation of very many simple units, loosely inspired by brain cells, none of which understands anything on its own.

The name comes from the word "connection," because in these models the knowledge lives not in the units but in the strengths of the connections between them.

Parallel distributed processing, usually shortened to PDP, is the fuller name for the same movement, and its two key words tell you its character.

"Parallel" means many things happen at once rather than one step at a time, and "distributed" means each piece of knowledge is spread across many units rather than stored in one place, both of which make these systems feel more brain-like than a step-by-step symbolic program.

In systems terms a connectionist model is refreshingly explicit: its state is a vector of unit activations plus a matrix of connection weights, its operating cycle is a parallel weighted sum passed through a squashing function, and its learning rule is a small weight change driven by error, all of which this chapter will make concrete in code.


55.1 The foundations

This section covers the two historical pillars on which connectionism rests: the early, limited networks of the mid-twentieth century, and the breakthrough in the 1980s that overcame their limits.

Understanding this history explains both why connectionism was once written off and why it came roaring back.


55.1.1 The perceptron and its limits

The perceptron was one of the earliest artificial neural networks, built and championed by the psychologist Frank Rosenblatt in the late 1950s.

An artificial neural network is a system of simple connected units that pass signals to one another, very loosely modelled on neurons in the brain.

The perceptron was exciting because it could learn: it adjusted the strengths of its connections in response to examples, gradually getting better at sorting inputs into categories.

Its operating cycle, in systems terms, is a single parallel pass: inputs arrive as a vector, each is multiplied by a weight, the products are summed, and the unit outputs one or zero depending on whether the sum clears a threshold, with learning nudging each weight after every classification error.

For a while this fuelled great optimism that such machines might soon learn to do almost anything.

Then in 1969 two prominent researchers, Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert, published a book called Perceptrons that changed the mood entirely.

They proved mathematically that a simple, single-layer perceptron has a fundamental limit: there are easy problems it can never solve, no matter how it is trained.

Their most famous example was a logical operation called exclusive-or, usually written XOR, which is true when exactly one of two inputs is on but false when both or neither are on.

The reason a single-layer perceptron cannot learn XOR is that the pattern cannot be separated by a single straight dividing line, and a single-layer perceptron can only ever draw such a straight boundary.

This result, though narrow, was widely taken as a verdict on the whole approach, and funding and enthusiasm for neural networks collapsed for over a decade, a lull sometimes called an artificial-intelligence winter.

The crucial detail, often lost at the time, is that Minsky and Papert's proof applied strictly to networks with no middle layer, and they only conjectured, without proving, that adding layers would not help.

That conjecture turned out to be wrong, which sets up the breakthrough of the next sub-section.


55.1.2 Distributed representation and backpropagation

The revival of connectionism in the 1980s rested on two ideas working together: distributed representation, and a learning method called backpropagation.

Distributed representation means encoding each concept as a pattern of activity spread across many units, rather than dedicating one unit to one concept.

Under this scheme the idea of "dog" is not a single cell that lights up; it is a particular pattern across a whole population, and different concepts are different patterns over the same shared units.

This turns out to have lovely consequences: similar concepts naturally have similar patterns, the system degrades gracefully if some units are damaged, and it can generalise to new cases that resemble old ones.

Graceful degradation means performance falls off gently rather than crashing when part of the system is lost, which is strikingly like how real brains tolerate damage.

From a systems standpoint, distribution is a fault-tolerance property of the storage format: because every concept is spread over every weight, deleting any single component removes a little of everything rather than all of something, and the code sample at the end of this chapter demonstrates this directly by damaging a trained network.

The second idea, backpropagation, solved the learning problem that had doomed the perceptron, by making it possible to train networks with one or more middle layers.

A middle layer, usually called a hidden layer, is a layer of units sitting between the input and the output, and such layers let a network draw curved, complex boundaries, which is exactly what solving XOR requires.

Backpropagation, whose name is short for backward propagation of error, is a procedure for adjusting all the connection strengths in a multi-layer network so that its output moves closer to the desired answer.

It works by comparing the network's output to the correct answer, measuring the error, and then passing responsibility for that error backward through the layers, nudging each connection a little in the direction that would reduce the error.

Repeated over many examples, this slowly sculpts the connections until the network performs the task, and it lets the hidden layers discover useful internal features on their own.

The single-layer ancestor of backpropagation is the delta rule: change each weight by the learning rate times the error times the input, which is the rule the code sample below uses, and backpropagation is exactly this rule generalised so the error signal can be passed through hidden layers.

Backpropagation was made famous in 1986 by David Rumelhart, Geoffrey Hinton, and Ronald Williams, as part of a landmark two-volume collection titled Parallel Distributed Processing, edited by Rumelhart and James McClelland.

That collection is the founding document of modern connectionism, and the same backpropagation method, scaled up enormously, is what drives today's deep learning systems, a point we return to at the end of the chapter.


55.2 The classic models of cognition

Having the machinery is one thing; showing it explains real human thinking is another.

This section presents the celebrated early connectionist models that took specific mental abilities and reproduced them, often overturning the assumption that the mind must be running explicit rules.


55.2.1 The past-tense debate and rules against networks

The past-tense debate was one of the most heated and illuminating arguments in cognitive science, and it turned on a homely fact about English verbs.

Most English verbs form their past tense by a simple rule, adding "-ed," as in walk to walked, but a stubborn minority are irregular, as in go to went or sing to sang.

The traditional view was that the mind must contain an explicit rule for the regulars plus a memorised list for the irregulars, two separate mechanisms.

In 1986 Rumelhart and McClelland startled the field with a single connectionist network that learned to produce past tenses without any explicit rule at all.

The network simply learned, from many examples, the statistical mapping from a verb's sound to its past-tense sound, and out of that one learned mapping came both regular and irregular forms.

Remarkably, the network even reproduced a famous quirk of children learning English, called over-regularisation, in which children who once correctly said "went" start saying "goed" before eventually recovering.

That a network with no built-in rule could mimic this child-like pattern was a powerful demonstration that rule-like behaviour might emerge from a system that contains no rules.

The linguists Steven Pinker and Alan Prince fired back sharply in 1988, arguing that the network had real flaws and that the evidence still favoured two separate mechanisms, a rule route and a memory route.

This dual-route reply remains influential, and the debate was never decisively settled in either direction.

In systems terms the two sides propose different architectures for the same input-output mapping, and they predict differently: the single-network account predicts graded interference between regulars and irregulars and frequency effects everywhere, while the dual-route account predicts that the rule route should apply uniformly regardless of a regular verb's frequency, and experiments probing these signatures have found support for both, which is why the debate persists.

Its lasting importance is that it crystallised the deepest question dividing the field: is the mind a manipulator of explicit symbolic rules, or a network in which apparently rule-governed behaviour emerges from learned statistics?


55.2.2 Reading and the triangle model

Reading aloud is another everyday skill that became a proving ground for connectionism, because it too mixes regularity with exceptions.

Many English words are pronounced by regular spelling-to-sound patterns, as in "mint" and "hint," but others are irregular exceptions, as in "pint," which breaks the pattern.

The triangle model, developed by Mark Seidenberg and James McClelland in 1989 and later refined by David Plaut and colleagues, is a connectionist account of how we read.

It is called the triangle model because it links three kinds of representation arranged at the corners of a triangle: the written form of a word, its sound, and its meaning.

Between these corners sit layers of hidden units, and the network learns the mappings among print, sound, and meaning from exposure to many words.

As a system, the model subscribes to a spelling pattern at its orthographic corner, publishes a pronunciation at its phonological corner within the several hundred milliseconds a skilled reader needs to begin naming a word, and its state is the single weight matrix that simultaneously encodes the regular patterns and the exceptions.

The important claim is that a single learned network can handle both regular and exception words, and can pronounce novel made-up words too, all without separate rule-based and lookup mechanisms.

This directly challenged the older "dual-route" theory of reading, which held that skilled reading needs two distinct pathways, one applying rules and one looking up exceptions.

The triangle model showed that one connectionist system, sensitive to the statistics of the language, could do the job that two separate mechanisms were thought to require.

As with the past-tense debate, the argument was not fully resolved, and dual-route theorists have their own strong models, but the triangle model established connectionism as a serious contender for explaining a core human skill.


55.2.3 Recurrent networks and the discovery of structure in time

The models discussed so far mostly handle inputs presented all at once, but much of cognition, above all language, unfolds over time, one word after another.

Handling time requires a network that can remember what came before, and that is what a recurrent network provides.

A recurrent network is one whose connections loop back on themselves, so that some of its activity is fed back in as part of the next input, giving it a kind of short-term memory of its own recent states.

In systems terms the recurrence adds a state register: at every step the network's input is the current item concatenated with a copy of its own previous hidden pattern, so the hidden layer becomes a compressed running summary of the sequence so far.

The pioneering example is the simple recurrent network introduced by Jeffrey Elman in a 1990 paper with the evocative title "Finding Structure in Time."

Elman's network was given the humble task of predicting the next item in a sequence, for instance the next word in a stream of text, and learning only from whether its predictions were right.

The results were remarkable, and they are the reason the paper became a classic.

From nothing but the prediction task, the network discovered where word boundaries fall in a continuous stream of letters, because predictability drops at the end of a word.

It also developed internal representations that grouped words into categories such as nouns and verbs, and that respected grammatical relationships like which nouns can go with which verbs, even though no one had labelled any of this.

In other words, structure that linguists describe with explicit rules emerged inside the network purely from the effort of predicting what comes next.

This was a profound demonstration, and its spirit lives on directly in today's large language models, which are, at heart, enormous next-item predictors that discover linguistic structure from raw text.


55.2.4 Semantic cognition as an emergent

Semantic cognition means our organised knowledge of the meanings of things: what a robin is, that it is a bird, that birds can fly, that a robin is more like a canary than like an oak tree.

A natural assumption is that such knowledge is stored as an explicit filing system, a built-in hierarchy of categories with facts attached to each.

James McClelland and Timothy Rogers, building on the PDP tradition, argued instead that this organised knowledge is emergent, meaning it arises on its own from a network learning many small facts, without any hierarchy being built in.

The word "emergent" is key: it means a large-scale order that appears out of the interaction of many simple parts, none of which contains the order itself.

In their model, a network is simply trained on many statements of the form thing-relation-property, such as "robin can fly" and "oak has bark," over and over.

As it learns, the network's internal patterns for different things gradually organise themselves so that similar things come to have similar patterns, producing, without instruction, exactly the groupings and resemblances that our conceptual knowledge shows.

The systems reading: input is a stream of item-relation-property triples, state is the slowly changing weight matrix, and the published output is a property prediction for any queried item, with the hierarchy visible only as the geometry of the hidden patterns, coarse splits forming before fine ones over the course of training.

The model reproduces subtle facts about human semantic knowledge, including the order in which children differentiate concepts, first splitting living from non-living, then finer distinctions, and the specific ways this knowledge breaks down in brain disease.

The broad lesson, running through this whole section, is the connectionist signature claim: rich, structured, rule-like knowledge need not be built in, because it can emerge from a simple system learning the statistics of experience.


55.3 The theory of network dynamics

This section steps back from specific tasks to look at the general mathematical behaviour of these networks, the way their activity flows and settles over time.

Understanding this behaviour reveals why networks are naturally good at certain things, above all memory and the satisfaction of many soft constraints at once.


55.3.1 Attractor networks and content-addressable memory

An attractor network is a network whose pattern of activity, once set going, tends to flow toward and settle into one of a set of stable states, called attractors.

The word "attractor" is apt: like a valley that a rolling ball rolls down into, a stable state pulls nearby patterns of activity toward it until the network comes to rest there.

The great pioneer of this idea was the physicist John Hopfield, whose 1982 network showed how a simple recurrent network could store a set of patterns as its stable resting states.

This gives rise to a powerful and brain-like kind of memory called content-addressable memory.

Content-addressable memory means you retrieve a stored item by supplying part or a rough version of its content, rather than by knowing an address or location where it is filed.

The contrast is with a computer's ordinary memory, where you must know the exact address to get something back.

In an attractor network, if you present a partial or noisy version of a stored pattern, the network's activity flows downhill into the nearest attractor and completes the pattern, filling in the missing parts.

As a system, retrieval is a settling loop: input is a corrupted pattern loaded as the initial state, each cycle updates units in parallel from their weighted neighbours, and the output is the stable pattern reached after a modest number of cycles, so retrieval time is measured in update cycles rather than in search steps.

This is exactly what human memory feels like: a snatch of a tune, a whiff of a smell, or half a face is often enough to bring the whole memory flooding back.

Attractor dynamics also explain the graceful degradation mentioned earlier, since the memory is spread across the whole network and a partial injury only blurs the valleys rather than deleting particular files.

So a very simple mechanism, activity settling into valleys, captures several of the most human features of memory at once.


55.3.2 Energy landscapes and constraint satisfaction

This sub-section gives the deeper mathematical picture behind attractor networks, and it centres on a beautiful idea borrowed from physics called an energy landscape.

Hopfield showed that you can attach a single number to every possible state of the network, which he called its energy, by analogy with physical systems that settle into low-energy states.

You can then picture all the network's possible states as a landscape of hills and valleys, where height corresponds to energy, and the stable attractor states are the bottoms of the valleys.

The key mathematical fact is that, as the network updates its units, its energy can only stay the same or go down, so the activity always rolls downhill and eventually comes to rest in a valley.

This gives a vivid and exact way to understand what the network is doing: it is always seeking a low point in its energy landscape.

In systems terms the energy function is a global progress guarantee: it proves the settling loop terminates, because a quantity bounded below strictly decreases until no update changes anything.

The same picture explains why these networks are natural constraint-satisfaction machines.

Constraint satisfaction means finding a solution that respects as many as possible of a set of competing requirements that cannot all be perfectly met at once.

In the network, each connection acts as a soft constraint: a positive connection says two units "want" to agree, a negative one says they "want" to differ, and no single arrangement can satisfy every such pull.

Rolling downhill in the energy landscape is precisely the process of finding the state that best balances all these competing pulls at the same time, in parallel.

This matters for cognition because so much of thinking, from understanding an ambiguous sentence to interpreting a dim scene to solving a puzzle, involves juggling many soft, partial constraints together rather than following one rigid rule.

The energy-landscape view thus gives connectionism a principled account of how a mind might settle, quickly and in parallel, on the interpretation that best fits everything it knows.


55.4 Deep learning as a cognitive model

The final section brings the story up to the present, where the connectionist ideas of the 1980s have grown, through vastly bigger networks and data, into the deep learning systems that now dominate artificial intelligence.

The question this section asks is not whether these systems are useful, but what, if anything, they teach us about the human mind.


55.4.1 Deep networks as models of perception and language

Deep learning refers to neural networks with many layers stacked one above another, the word "deep" simply meaning many-layered, trained on very large amounts of data with the descendants of backpropagation.

These are the direct heirs of the 1980s connectionist networks, differing mainly in scale, in the amount of data and computing power poured into them.

A genuinely surprising scientific finding is that these engineering systems, built to perform tasks rather than to mimic biology, turn out to be among the best available predictors of activity in the brain.

In vision, deep networks trained to recognise objects develop internal layers whose responses closely match, layer by layer, the responses recorded from the primate visual system along its object-recognition pathway.

That an artificial network optimised only to label images should end up resembling the brain's own visual stages is a striking convergence, and it suggests that both may be finding similar solutions to the same problem.

A parallel story holds in language, where large networks trained simply to predict upcoming words have been found to predict aspects of human brain activity during reading and listening better than earlier, hand-built theories did.

In systems terms these comparisons treat the network and the brain as two implementations of the same interface, and test the match stage by stage: present the same input to both, record the internal signals of both, and measure how well one predicts the other.

These results have made deep networks a serious tool in the science of the mind, not just in engineering, because they give researchers working models that can be probed, compared to brains, and tested against behaviour.

At the same time, sober voices caution that matching brain activity is not the same as explaining it, since a deep network is itself so complex that it can be as hard to understand as the brain it models.

So deep learning has become both a promising model of perception and language and a fresh puzzle in its own right, and the field is still working out how much genuine understanding it delivers.


55.4.2 The nativism and emergentism debate reopened

The rise of deep learning has breathed new life into one of the oldest arguments about the mind, the debate between nativism and emergentism.

Nativism is the view that much of the mind's structure is innate, built in from birth, so that a child comes equipped with prior knowledge, for instance about grammar or about objects, that makes learning possible.

Emergentism is the opposing view that such structure is not built in but emerges from general-purpose learning applied to rich experience, so that what looks innate is really the product of learning.

This argument is ancient, but modern deep networks have given it a sharp new test bed.

The reason is that a large network typically starts with very little built-in knowledge and learns almost everything from data, so it is a working example of the emergentist bet.

When such a system, after training on enough text, produces fluent and largely grammatical language, emergentists point to it as evidence that powerful structure can indeed be learned from experience alone, without innate grammar of the kind nativists proposed.

Nativists reply that today's networks learn from astronomically more data than any child ever hears, and often still make errors no child would make, so the comparison does not settle the question of what human children need.

They also note that the network's architecture is itself a kind of built-in prior, so no learning is ever truly from a blank slate, which complicates the whole debate.

In systems terms the two sides predict differently what happens when you shrink the training data toward a child's real diet: nativists predict a learner without built-in structure should fail to reach child-level grammar at child-scale data, while emergentists predict that better learning algorithms plus richer, more child-like input can close the gap, and running exactly this experiment is now an active research programme.

The honest state of the field is that this remains genuinely open, and thoughtful researchers on both sides agree the interesting question is no longer "innate or learned" but "what minimum of built-in structure lets the rest be learned."

For a beginner, the lesson to carry from this final sub-section is that connectionism, born as one framework among several decades ago, now sits at the very centre of the biggest questions in both cognitive science and artificial intelligence, and that the argument it reignited about what the mind must be given versus what it can learn is far from over.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Input pattern: a vector of activation values representing a stimulus, arriving from perceptual encoding or from another network's output.

◦ Teaching signal: the desired output pattern during learning, supplied by the environment, a caregiver, or the next item in a sequence for prediction learning.

◦ Recurrent feedback: in recurrent and attractor variants, a copy of the network's own previous activation state.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Output pattern: a vector of activations representing a classification, a pronunciation, a prediction, or a completed memory, consumed by action systems or by downstream networks.

◦ Error signal: the difference between output and teaching signal, consumed internally by the learning rule.

◦ Hidden representation: the internal pattern over hidden units, readable by other processes and, in research, by scientists probing what the network has learned.

• STATE.

◦ The activation vector: the current pattern across all units, the fast-changing working state.

◦ The weight matrix: the connection strengths, the slow-changing store where all learned knowledge lives.

◦ In recurrent networks, the context copy of the previous hidden state, providing short-term memory of the sequence.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Learning rate: how large a step each weight takes toward reducing error.

◦ Network size and depth: numbers of units and layers, which set representational capacity.

◦ Activation function and threshold: the squashing rule turning a unit's summed input into its output.

◦ Training exposure: the number of example presentations, which determines where the network sits between novice and expert performance.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ One unit update in the brain's implementation is bounded by the neuronal membrane time constant, roughly 10 to 20 milliseconds, so a settling episode of a few dozen cycles fits within a few hundred milliseconds, matching recognition times.

◦ Weight change is slow relative to activation flow: human skill learning of the kind these networks model unfolds over hours to years of practice.

◦ The number of settling cycles for a given attractor retrieval: REFUSED, because it depends on network size, noise, and cue quality, and no single literature value exists.

◦ The wall-clock time per training epoch: REFUSED, because it is a property of the simulating hardware, not of the cognitive model.

• MODES.

◦ Performance mode against learning mode: forward activation flow runs at every use, while weight updating engages only when a teaching or error signal is present.

◦ Feedforward mode against settling mode: layered networks map input to output in one pass, while recurrent and attractor networks iterate until stable, the architecture determining the mode.

◦ Intact mode against degraded mode: with damage, the network does not switch algorithms but slides gracefully into a noisier version of the same computation.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Graceful degradation under damage: lesioning units or weights blurs all knowledge a little rather than deleting single items, matching patterns seen in brain injury and dementia.

◦ Over-regularisation during learning: statistically dominant patterns temporarily capture exceptional cases, as in children saying goed.

◦ Catastrophic interference: rapid training on new material can overwrite old knowledge, a known weakness that motivated complementary learning accounts.

◦ Spurious attractors: settling networks can rest in blend states that correspond to no stored memory, producing confident but false completions.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called weights holding one small random number for each connection from each input unit to each output unit.
Create a number variable called learning rate with initial value zero point two.
Repeat the following for each training pass.
    For each training pattern with its input list and its target list,
        For each output unit,
            Create a number variable called activation with initial value zero.
            For each input unit, calculate the product of the input value and its weight to this output unit, and add the result to activation.
            Pass activation through the squashing function to get the output value.
            Calculate the error as the target value minus the output value.
            For each input unit, multiply the learning rate by the error and by the input value, and add the result to the connecting weight.
To test graceful degradation, set a fraction of the weights to zero.
For each training pattern, compute the output values again with the damaged weights.
Report that the outputs are degraded but still close to the targets.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for the squashing function and the random module for weights and damage.
import math, random

# Define the squashing function that maps any sum to a value between zero and one.
def squash(x):
    # Return one divided by one plus the exponential of negative x.
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-x))

# Create four training patterns mapping distributed animal features to two category units.
# Each input is four features; each target is bird-likeness and fish-likeness.
patterns = [([1, 1, 0, 0], [1, 0]),   # robin: wings and feathers make a bird.
            ([1, 0, 1, 0], [1, 0]),   # sparrow: wings and small body make a bird.
            ([0, 0, 1, 1], [0, 1]),   # minnow: small body and fins make a fish.
            ([0, 1, 0, 1], [0, 1])]   # trout: feature mix that makes a fish.

# Create a weight matrix of small random numbers, one row per output unit.
weights = [[random.uniform(-0.5, 0.5) for _ in range(4)] for _ in range(2)]
# Set the learning rate to zero point five.
rate = 0.5

# Define a function that computes both output values for an input pattern.
def forward(inputs):
    # For each output unit, squash the weighted sum of the inputs.
    return [squash(sum(w * i for w, i in zip(row, inputs))) for row in weights]

# Repeat the training loop for two hundred passes through the patterns.
for _ in range(200):
    # For each input pattern and its target pattern,
    for inputs, targets in patterns:
        # Compute the current outputs.
        outputs = forward(inputs)
        # For each output unit, apply the delta rule to its incoming weights.
        for j in range(2):
            # Calculate the error as the target minus the output.
            error = targets[j] - outputs[j]
            # For each input unit, nudge the weight by rate times error times input.
            for i in range(4):
                weights[j][i] += rate * error * inputs[i]

# Print the trained outputs for every pattern.
print("trained:", [[round(o, 2) for o in forward(p)] for p, t in patterns])

# Damage the network by zeroing one randomly chosen weight per output unit.
for j in range(2):
    # Set one incoming weight of this output unit to zero.
    weights[j][random.randrange(4)] = 0.0

# Print the outputs after damage to show graceful degradation.
print("damaged:", [[round(o, 2) for o in forward(p)] for p, t in patterns])

CHAPTER 56. DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS AND FOUR-E COGNITION (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter is about a family of ideas that quietly challenges the most common picture of the mind.

The common picture says the mind is like a computer inside the head: it takes in information, runs steps on it, and spits out behaviour.

The ideas in this chapter say that this picture leaves out too much.

They say the mind is better understood as something that unfolds continuously in time, like a river flowing, and that it is not trapped inside the skull but reaches out into the body and the surrounding world.

The phrase four-E cognition, usually written 4E cognition, is a shorthand for four related claims, each starting with the letter E: that cognition is embodied, embedded, enacted, and extended.

We will unpack each of those words slowly, because none of them means what it might seem to at first glance.

The label framework in the heading means this chapter offers a way of thinking and a set of tools, rather than a single finding, and it gives the earlier chapters on perception, memory, and thought a different lens to be seen through.

In systems terms, the chapter proposes a change of unit: instead of a boxed processor with an input port and an output port, the unit of analysis becomes a closed loop of brain, body, and environment, exchanging continuous signals with no clean start or finish line.

Why should a beginner care?

Because if these thinkers are even partly right, then building a mind - which is konnectome's goal - may require more than a very clever program; it may require a body and a world for that program to live in.


56.1 The dynamical systems approach

This section introduces a mathematical way of describing things that change over time, and the claim that the mind is one of those things.

A dynamical system, in plain terms, is anything whose current state depends on its past state and keeps evolving moment by moment: a swinging pendulum, the weather, a population of rabbits, or, on this view, a thinking brain.

The dynamical approach borrows the mathematics that physicists and engineers already use for such systems and asks whether the same mathematics can describe cognition.

As a system specification, a dynamical model needs only three things: a state vector that summarises the present, a differential equation or update rule that maps the present state to its rate of change, and a set of parameters that shape the flow.

The point of the section is to show what changes when you stop asking what steps the mind computes and start asking how the mind flows.


56.1.1 State space, attractors, and coupling

Let us define three tools that this approach uses constantly, because they carry the whole idea.

The first is state space.

A state is just a complete snapshot of a system at one instant: for a pendulum it is its position and its speed right now.

State space is the imaginary space of every possible snapshot the system could ever be in, so that each point in that space is one possible complete condition of the system.

As the system changes over time, the point that represents it traces a path through this space, and that path is a compact picture of the system's whole history and future.

The second tool is the attractor.

An attractor is a region of state space that the system tends to fall into and settle around, the way a marble rolls to the bottom of a bowl no matter where in the bowl you release it.

Some attractors are single resting points, like the marble coming to rest; some are repeating loops, like a heartbeat that keeps returning to the same rhythm; and some are stranger, wandering patterns that never exactly repeat yet stay within bounds.

In cognitive terms, a stable habit, a settled decision, or a locked-in perception can be pictured as the system falling into an attractor.

The third tool is coupling.

Two systems are coupled when the state of each continuously feeds into and shapes the state of the other, so that neither can be understood alone.

The classic everyday image is two people walking side by side who fall into the same stride without trying: each person's steps nudge the other's until the two bodies form a single, larger rhythmic system.

The dynamical claim is that brain, body, and environment are coupled in exactly this way, so the real unit of cognition is the whole coupled loop, not the brain by itself.

This matters because coupling can produce coordinated, intelligent-looking behaviour without any inner plan directing it, simply from the back-and-forth between parts.

Read as a mechanism, the coupled loop takes as input the continuous state of each partner, produces as output a coordinated joint trajectory, and settles on the timescale of the movement itself - fractions of a second to a few seconds - with the attractor landscape as its only stored program.

The best-studied laboratory case is rhythmic finger coordination, captured by the Haken-Kelso-Bunz (HKB) model of 1985, in which two fingers moving together have exactly two stable attractors, in-phase and anti-phase, and the anti-phase pattern abruptly collapses into the in-phase one when the movement is driven faster - and the code sample at the end of this chapter shows the in-phase attractor capturing two mismatched oscillators in miniature.


56.1.2 The dynamical hypothesis and its evidence

The dynamical hypothesis is a bold, named claim, and it is worth stating carefully because it is often exaggerated.

It was set out most sharply by the philosopher Tim van Gelder in an article titled The Dynamical Hypothesis in Cognitive Science, published in the journal Behavioral and Brain Sciences in 1998.

Van Gelder proposed that cognitive systems are dynamical systems and are best understood with the mathematics of change over time, rather than as digital computers manipulating symbols.

In its strongest form the hypothesis says the mind has no inner symbols and no stored rules at all, only continuously changing quantities, which is a genuinely radical suggestion.

In systems terms the two sides predict different observables: a symbolic account predicts discrete state transitions with rule-shaped error patterns, while the dynamical account predicts smooth trajectories, gradual drifts, hysteresis - a system's tendency to stay in its current pattern beyond the point where it first became unstable - and abrupt phase transitions when a control parameter crosses a threshold.

The most influential body of evidence comes from developmental psychology, in the work of Esther Thelen and Linda Smith, whose 1994 book A Dynamic Systems Approach to the Development of Cognition and Action is the landmark text.

Thelen and Smith studied how babies learn to reach and to walk and famously re-examined a puzzle known as the A-not-B error.

In that puzzle an infant who has repeatedly found a toy hidden at location A will often keep reaching to A even after watching the toy be hidden at a new location B, and the traditional reading blamed an immature concept of hidden objects.

Thelen and Smith argued instead that the error falls out of the dynamics of the reach itself - the built-up habit of moving toward A, the memory in the muscles, the delay before acting - so that small changes to the body and the situation make the error come and go, which is what their experiments found.

Their slogan was that development has, in their words, no structures and no rules, only patterns that self-organise out of the coupling of a growing body with a rich world.

It is fair to a beginner to add the honest caveat that most researchers today accept the dynamical approach as a valuable description and a source of real insight, especially for skilled movement and development, while doubting the strongest claim that representations can be dispensed with entirely.

The dynamicist Randall Beer and the critic Chris Eliasmith have both argued, from opposite sides, that the deepest question is not whether the mind changes over time - everyone agrees it does - but whether describing that change requires us to keep talking about internal representations, and that question remains open.


56.2 Embodied cognition

This section turns to the first of the four Es, the claim that thought is shaped, through and through, by the fact that we have bodies.

Embodied cognition is the idea that the details of our physical form - our hands, our upright posture, our senses, our capacity to move - are not merely tools the mind uses but are woven into the very content and style of our thinking.

As a systems claim, embodiment says the body is not a peripheral device on the far side of a clean interface; it is part of the processor, so the format of thought inherits the format of sensing and moving.

The section explains two of the most concrete lines of evidence for that idea, one from language and one from the way we understand meaning.


56.2.1 Conceptual metaphor and sensorimotor grounding

Start with a plain observation about everyday speech.

We say a warm smile, a close friend, a high price, a heavy heart, and a bright idea, borrowing words from the world of touch, space, weight, and light to talk about feelings and thoughts that have no temperature, distance, or brightness of their own.

The linguist George Lakoff and the philosopher Mark Johnson, in their 1980 book Metaphors We Live By, argued that this is not a decoration on top of thought but a window into how thought is built.

Their claim, known as conceptual metaphor theory, is that we understand abstract ideas - affection, importance, morality, time - by mapping them onto concrete bodily experiences such as warmth, size, cleanliness, and movement through space.

The term sensorimotor grounding names the underlying proposal: that abstract concepts are anchored in, and partly made of, the brain's records of sensing and moving.

Sensory here means to do with the senses, and motor means to do with movement, so a sensorimotor grounding is a footing in perception and action.

Seen as a mechanism, the metaphor system takes an abstract target concept as input, retrieves a stored mapping to a concrete bodily source domain, and outputs an interpretation coloured by that source, all within the few hundred milliseconds of normal word understanding.

For example, the idea that affection is warmth is thought to grow from a baby's earliest experience of being held close by a warm caregiver, so the concept of a loving relationship keeps a thread back to bodily heat.

There is suggestive experimental support: studies have reported that briefly holding a warm drink can make people judge a stranger as more generous and caring, though it is honest to say that several such bodily-priming effects have been hard to reproduce reliably, and the field now treats the flashier findings with caution.

The careful version of the claim, which most researchers accept, is the weaker and better-supported one: that understanding words about actions and objects tends to engage the brain's sensory and motor systems, so meaning is at least partly re-enacted in the body rather than handled as pure abstract code.


56.2.2 Simulation semantics

Simulation semantics is a specific and testable version of the embodiment idea, focused on how we grasp the meaning of words and sentences.

Semantics is simply the study of meaning, so simulation semantics is the theory that we get at meaning by simulation.

To simulate here means to partly re-run, in the brain, the perception or action that a word refers to, as a kind of inner rehearsal.

The proposal, developed by researchers such as Lawrence Barsalou and Benjamin Bergen, is that when you understand the sentence the pilot grasped the lever, your brain faintly reactivates the visual and motor patterns of seeing a lever and closing a hand around it, and that this partial re-enactment is what understanding consists of.

As a process, the simulator subscribes to a stream of words, publishes a partial sensorimotor re-enactment as its output, and runs fast enough to keep pace with speech, which arrives at roughly two to three words per second.

Barsalou's broader framework, called perceptual symbol systems and set out in an influential 1999 paper, holds that concepts are not abstract symbols stripped of all sensory character but are compressed records of perception and action that can be replayed.

One striking piece of supporting evidence is the action-sentence compatibility effect reported by Arthur Glenberg and Michael Kaschak in 2002: people are faster to judge a sentence sensible when the hand movement the response requires matches the direction of the action described, as if reading about handing something toward yourself had already primed the inward motion.

Neuroimaging adds that reading action words like kick, pick, and lick activates regions of the motor strip near the parts that control the foot, hand, and mouth respectively, which fits the simulation story.

The honest boundary of the theory is the hardest case: it is much clearer how you would simulate kicking than how you would simulate justice, democracy, or the number seven, and critics press exactly there, so how far simulation reaches into fully abstract thought is still debated.


56.3 Embedded and extended cognition

This section covers the middle two Es, which are about the world beyond the body.

Embedded cognition is the modest claim that thinking is deeply dependent on the surrounding environment and offloads work onto it.

Extended cognition is the bolder claim that parts of the environment can literally become parts of the thinking mind.

In engineering language, embedded cognition says the mind uses external storage and external computation heavily; extended cognition says those external resources are inside the system boundary, not outside it.

The section walks from the modest claim to the bold one and shows where the argument gets contentious.


56.3.1 The extended-mind thesis and the parity principle

The extended-mind thesis is one of the most provocative ideas in modern philosophy of mind, and it was launched by a single short paper.

The philosophers Andy Clark and David Chalmers published The Extended Mind in the journal Analysis in 1998, and it has shaped the debate ever since.

Their claim is that the mind does not stop at the skin.

When a notebook, a smartphone, or a sketch on paper plays the same functional role that a piece of memory or reasoning would play if it happened inside the head, then, they argue, that external object is a genuine part of the cognitive process, not merely a helpful accessory.

Their argument rests on a rule of thumb they call the parity principle, which can be stated in plain words as follows.

If a part of the world does a job that we would happily call thinking had it gone on inside the head, then we should call it thinking wherever it happens, because it would be arbitrary prejudice to count location alone as decisive.

Their famous illustration is a thought experiment about two people, Inga and Otto.

Inga hears of an exhibition, recalls from her biological memory that the museum is on a certain street, and walks there.

Otto has a memory impairment from Alzheimer's disease and instead keeps a notebook in which he has reliably written the museum's address; he consults it and walks there.

Clark and Chalmers argue that Otto's notebook plays exactly the role Inga's memory plays - it stores a standing belief he can look up and act on - so the notebook deserves to be counted as part of Otto's memory and mind.

Stated as a systems test, parity is an interface test: if an external store offers the same read access, reliability, and automatic trust as biological memory, then from the point of view of the running cognitive process the two are the same component, differing only in access latency - seconds for the notebook versus well under a second for biological recall.

The main objection, raised by the philosophers Fred Adams and Kenneth Aizawa, is called the coupling-constitution fallacy: the worry that just because something is tightly linked to your thinking, it does not follow that the thing is a part of your thinking, any more than a fuel line is a part of the engine's combustion.

Beginners should know this remains a live philosophical dispute rather than a settled result, but even critics grant its practical lesson, that human cognition leans heavily on external props.


56.3.2 Scaffolding and cognitive niche construction

These two terms name the practical, less controversial heart of the embedded and extended story, and they are easy to grasp with examples.

Scaffolding, a term drawn from the developmental psychologist Lev Vygotsky and the builder's platform he had in mind, means the temporary external support that lets a person accomplish something they could not yet manage alone.

A child learning arithmetic counts on fingers, then on a number line drawn on paper, then in the head, so the external aids scaffold the skill until the inner skill can stand without them.

Adults scaffold constantly too: we make grocery lists so we need not hold items in memory, we arrange the ingredients on the counter in the order a recipe needs, and we use calendars, calculators, and search engines to carry loads our unaided brains would struggle with.

In systems terms, scaffolding is load balancing: working memory, which holds only about four chunks at once, offloads state to an external medium with effectively unlimited capacity, at the price of slower access through the eyes and hands.

Cognitive niche construction is the broader and more striking idea, borrowed from biology where niche construction means an animal reshaping its environment - as a beaver builds a dam - so that the changed environment then shapes the animal in turn.

Applied to cognition, it means humans continually rebuild their surroundings into thinking-friendly forms: we invent writing, numerals, maps, diagrams, road signs, and filing systems, and these external structures then do a large share of the cognitive work and pass down through culture to the next generation.

The philosopher Andy Clark captures the moral by calling humans natural-born cyborgs, meaning we are the animals whose special trick is to fuse our brains with tools and symbols we ourselves have made.

For konnectome the lesson is concrete rather than mystical: a great deal of human intelligence is stored not in the individual head but in the shared, engineered world, so a fair comparison between human and machine intelligence has to take that external scaffolding into account.


56.4 Enactivism and ecological psychology

This section covers the last E, the enacted mind, together with an older cousin called ecological psychology.

Enactivism is the view that a mind is not a thing that passively receives a picture of the world but an activity that brings a world into being through living and doing.

Ecological psychology is the related tradition, founded earlier, that stresses how much useful information is already out there in the environment for an active creature to pick up.

Both traditions push against the idea that perceiving is building an inner copy of the world, and the section explains their three central ideas.

In systems terms both traditions shrink the internal state the perceiver must maintain and enlarge the role of the sensor-actuator loop: less stored model, more live sampling.


56.4.1 Autopoiesis and the enactive approach

To understand enactivism you have to start with a strange word that comes from biology.

Autopoiesis, coined by the Chilean biologists Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela in the 1970s, literally means self-producing, and it names the defining trick of a living cell: it is a system that continuously makes and repairs the very components and boundary that keep it in existence.

A cell builds the membrane that holds it together, and that membrane in turn lets the cell keep building itself, so life is a self-sustaining loop rather than a fixed structure.

The enactive approach, launched by Varela together with the philosopher Evan Thompson and the psychologist Eleanor Rosch in their 1991 book The Embodied Mind, extends this biological insight into a theory of cognition.

Their core claim is that cognition is not the representation of a pre-given outside world by a pre-given inside mind, but rather the bringing forth, or enacting, of a meaningful world through the ongoing activity of a living body.

The technical word for how a creature actively assigns meaning to its surroundings is sense-making, and the idea is that things in the environment become significant - food, threat, shelter - only in relation to a living system's need to keep itself going.

A simple illustration: a lump of sugar is not intrinsically good; it becomes good only from the standpoint of a bacterium that must feed to survive, so the meaning is created in the encounter, not read off the world.

Read as a specification, sense-making takes the organism's viability needs and the current environmental encounter as inputs, and outputs a valence - an assignment of good, bad, or neutral - that exists nowhere in the world alone and nowhere in the organism alone, only in their meeting.

This tradition also brings consciousness and the felt, first-person quality of experience back to the centre of cognitive science, which mainstream information-processing accounts had tended to set aside, and that is one reason it has attracted renewed attention.


56.4.2 Sensorimotor contingency

Sensorimotor contingency theory is a sharper, more concrete member of the enactive family, aimed specifically at explaining perception.

A contingency is just a lawful if-then dependency, a reliable pattern of the form if I do this, then that will follow.

A sensorimotor contingency, then, is the reliable rule that links a movement to the change it produces in what you sense.

The theory was set out by the psychologists Kevin O'Regan and Alva Noe in an influential 2001 paper, and its central claim is surprising: seeing is not the brain building a picture, but the brain's practical mastery of these movement-to-sensation rules.

To perceive a bottle as round is, on this view, to implicitly know how the image on your eye would shift as you turned it, and to perceive something as red is to know how that surface would respond to changing light.

As a mechanism, the perceiver's state is a learned table of movement-to-sensation laws; its input is the current sensory change paired with the movement that caused it; its output is the recognition of what kind of thing is out there; and its sampling loop runs at the pace of eye movements, roughly three to four fixations per second.

The theory explains a puzzle that troubles picture-in-the-head accounts, the puzzle of why the world looks rich and detailed even though the eye takes in sharp detail only at its centre: it looks detailed because you can, at any instant, flick your eyes to sample any part, so the detail is available on demand from the world rather than stored all at once inside.

This dovetails with striking findings on change blindness, where people fail to notice large changes to a scene when the change is masked by a flicker or an eye movement, which suggests we hold far less of the world in our heads than it feels like we do.

The provocative slogan associated with this view is that the world serves as its own best model, meaning that instead of maintaining a full inner replica, the brain leaves the information out in the world and goes back to look whenever it needs it.


56.4.3 Affordances and direct perception

Affordance and direct perception are the two flagship ideas of ecological psychology, founded by the American psychologist James J. Gibson across works culminating in his 1979 book The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.

An affordance is what the environment offers an animal for action: a chair affords sitting, a handle affords grasping, a gap affords passing through, and a ledge affords stepping up.

Gibson's key point is that we perceive the world in terms of these action possibilities directly, so that we see a doorway as walk-through-able rather than first seeing a bare shape and only later reasoning out what we could do with it.

Crucially an affordance is relational: a step affords climbing only relative to the length of your own legs, so the very same stair is climbable for an adult and a barrier for a toddler, which means affordances are defined jointly by the world and the body that meets it.

In systems terms, affordance perception is a function of two inputs - the structured light from the scene and the perceiver's own body dimensions and action capacities - and its output is not a description but a menu of currently possible actions, refreshed continuously as the animal moves.

Direct perception is Gibson's bolder companion claim, that the information needed to perceive the world accurately is already present in the structured light reaching the eyes, so perceiving does not require the brain to add hidden inferences or fill in missing pieces.

Gibson pointed, for instance, to optic flow - the way the whole visual scene streams outward around a point as you move forward - which specifies your heading and speed directly and reliably, giving the moving animal usable information for free.

This puts Gibson in sharp, deliberate opposition to the constructivist tradition of Hermann von Helmholtz, treated earlier in this outline, which holds that perception is a form of unconscious inference that must guess at a world the senses underdetermine.

In systems terms the two sides predict differently: Gibson predicts that enriching the stimulus removes the need for internal assumptions, so a fully structured natural scene should never mislead a moving observer, while the constructivist predicts that even rich scenes are interpreted through prior assumptions, so illusions should persist wherever the priors and the world disagree.

The honest state of the debate is that each side captures real cases: Gibson is compelling for an animal freely moving through a well-lit natural world flooded with information, while the constructivists are compelling for the impoverished, ambiguous, or illusory displays that fill the psychology laboratory, and much modern work tries to reconcile the two rather than crown a winner.


56.5 Chapter systems treatment

The process modelled here is coordination by coupling: two or more rhythmic components, none of them in charge, settling into a shared pattern purely through mutual influence, as captured in miniature by the Haken-Kelso-Bunz (HKB) model of bimanual coordination.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ The continuous state of each coupled component, formatted as a phase angle per oscillator, sourced from proprioception - the body's sense of its own limb positions - and from vision or hearing of the partner's movement.

◦ A control parameter such as movement frequency or task demand, sourced from voluntary intention or the pace of the environment.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A relative phase signal, the difference between the component phases, formatted as an angle where zero means in-phase and one hundred eighty degrees means anti-phase, consumed by the motor system as the current coordination pattern.

◦ A stability signal, the moment-to-moment variability of relative phase, consumed by the system itself as an early warning that the current pattern is about to break.

• STATE.

◦ The current phase of each oscillator and nothing more; the coordination pattern itself is not stored anywhere but re-created continuously by the coupling.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Coupling strength, which sets how hard each component pulls on the other.

◦ The ratio of the two coupling terms in the HKB potential, which determines whether the anti-phase attractor exists at all.

◦ Movement frequency, the control parameter whose increase destroys the anti-phase attractor.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Relaxation into the in-phase attractor after a perturbation takes on the order of a few movement cycles, which at ordinary movement rates is roughly one to a few seconds.

◦ In Kelso's finger experiments the anti-phase pattern loses stability and switches to in-phase as pacing rises through roughly two to three cycles per second.

◦ A single characteristic time for cognition-wide dynamics: REFUSED, because the dynamical approach explicitly denies that one timescale governs all cognitive processes.

• MODES.

◦ In-phase mode, both components moving together, stable at all achievable frequencies.

◦ Anti-phase mode, components alternating, stable only at low frequencies; the transition to in-phase is triggered when rising frequency flattens the anti-phase basin until noise carries the system out of it.

◦ Uncoupled mode, each component free-running at its own frequency, entered when coupling strength falls near zero, for example when partners stop attending to each other.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Unwanted entrainment, as when a speaker cannot help falling into an audience's clapping rhythm.

◦ Hysteresis errors, in which the system clings to an old pattern past the point where it stopped being appropriate, as in the infant A-not-B reach toward the old hiding place.

◦ Loss of flexibility in disorders of coordination, where attractors are too deep to escape, and pathological instability, where they are too shallow to hold, as studied in movement disorders.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called phase one with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called phase two with initial value two point eight.
Create a number variable called own frequency one with initial value one point zero.
Create a number variable called own frequency two with initial value one point one.
Create a number variable called coupling strength with initial value zero point eight.
Create a number variable called time step with initial value zero point zero one.
For each step from one to two thousand, do the following.
    Calculate the relative phase as phase one minus phase two.
    Calculate the pull on oscillator one as the negative of coupling strength times the sine of the relative phase.
    Calculate the pull on oscillator two as coupling strength times the sine of the relative phase.
    Add own frequency one plus the pull on oscillator one, times the time step, to phase one.
    Add own frequency two plus the pull on oscillator two, times the time step, to phase two.
    If the step is a multiple of four hundred, print the relative phase reduced to the range from negative pi to pi.
Print the final relative phase, which has settled near zero, the in-phase attractor.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for the sine function and pi.
import math

# Create a number variable called phase_one with initial value zero.
phase_one = 0.0
# Create a number variable called phase_two with initial value two point eight.
phase_two = 2.8
# Create a number variable called own_frequency_one with initial value one point zero.
own_frequency_one = 1.0
# Create a number variable called own_frequency_two with initial value one point one.
own_frequency_two = 1.1
# Create a number variable called coupling_strength with initial value zero point eight.
coupling_strength = 0.8
# Create a number variable called time_step with initial value zero point zero one.
time_step = 0.01

# Define a function that reduces an angle to the range from negative pi to pi.
def wrap(angle):
    # Return the angle shifted by pi, taken modulo two pi, then shifted back by pi.
    return (angle + math.pi) % (2 * math.pi) - math.pi

# For each step from one to two thousand, do the following.
for step in range(1, 2001):
    # Calculate the relative phase as phase_one minus phase_two.
    relative_phase = phase_one - phase_two
    # Calculate the pull on oscillator one as the negative of coupling_strength times the sine of the relative phase.
    pull_one = -coupling_strength * math.sin(relative_phase)
    # Calculate the pull on oscillator two as coupling_strength times the sine of the relative phase.
    pull_two = coupling_strength * math.sin(relative_phase)
    # Add own_frequency_one plus pull_one, times the time_step, to phase_one.
    phase_one = phase_one + (own_frequency_one + pull_one) * time_step
    # Add own_frequency_two plus pull_two, times the time_step, to phase_two.
    phase_two = phase_two + (own_frequency_two + pull_two) * time_step
    # If the step is a multiple of four hundred, print the wrapped relative phase.
    if step % 400 == 0:
        # Print the step number and the wrapped relative phase rounded to three decimals.
        print("step", step, "relative phase", round(wrap(relative_phase), 3))

# Print the final relative phase, which has settled near zero, the in-phase attractor.
print("settled relative phase:", round(wrap(phase_one - phase_two), 3))


CHAPTER 57. PREDICTIVE PROCESSING, ACTIVE INFERENCE, AND THE FREE ENERGY PRINCIPLE (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter presents one of the most ambitious and talked-about ideas in the recent science of mind, a single principle that some researchers hope can explain perception, action, learning, attention, and even emotion all at once.

The core intuition is simple to state: the brain is fundamentally a prediction machine that is always guessing what its senses will report next, and everything it does is in the service of making better guesses.

In systems terms the whole chapter describes one control loop: a generative model - an internal machine that can produce predicted sensory data from hypotheses about the world - runs forward, a comparator subtracts prediction from input, and the residual error drives every update in the system.

We will build this up in three stages of increasing ambition.

The first stage, predictive coding, is a well-supported account of how the brain might perceive by predicting.

The second stage, the free energy principle, is a grand and controversial attempt to derive that account from a single mathematical rule about how any self-preserving thing must behave.

The third stage, active inference, extends the rule from perceiving the world to acting in it.

A beginner should hold on to one honest warning throughout: the further we go up this ladder, the more mathematically imposing and the more disputed the claims become, so admiration and skepticism are both appropriate.


57.1 Predictive coding

This section explains the most concrete and best-evidenced idea in the chapter, a theory about the mechanics of perception.

Predictive coding proposes that instead of passively passing sensory signals up from the eyes and ears to the brain, the brain is constantly sending predictions down and only passing up the parts it got wrong.

As an engineering scheme this is a compression strategy: transmitting only the residual error uses far less bandwidth than transmitting the whole signal, which is exactly why the same trick is used in video compression.

The section describes how that would work as a layered system and traces the idea back through a long history so the reader sees it is not a passing fashion.


57.1.1 Hierarchical prediction and error minimisation

Let us define the machinery piece by piece, because the whole theory is really just this one loop repeated.

A hierarchy here means a stack of processing levels, with lower levels close to the raw senses - the parts of the brain that first receive signals from the eyes - and higher levels handling more abstract, general descriptions such as objects, causes, and contexts.

The central proposal is that each higher level is continuously trying to predict what the level just below it is doing, and it sends that prediction downward.

The lower level compares the prediction it receives against what it is actually registering, and it computes the difference between the two.

That difference is called prediction error, and it is simply the mismatch between what was expected and what arrived.

The key move is that the brain sends only this prediction error back up the hierarchy, not the whole signal, because whatever the higher level already predicted correctly carries no news and can be left unsaid.

The higher levels then adjust their picture of the world to reduce the error next time, and the whole system keeps looping until the errors settle down to a minimum, at which point the brain's guess and the world are in agreement and you have a stable perception.

To minimise error is thus the single job of the system, and perception, on this account, is the brain's best current hypothesis about the hidden causes out in the world that are producing the sensory signals.

Read as an interface, each level subscribes to two signals - the prediction descending from above and the error ascending from below - and publishes two signals, its own prediction downward and its own residual error upward, with the loop iterating on the timescale of tens to a few hundred milliseconds within a single act of perception.

The influential computational demonstration of this scheme was given by Rajesh Rao and Dana Ballard in a 1999 paper in the journal Nature Neuroscience.

They showed that a network built this way, with error-signalling units and prediction-sending units, could reproduce puzzling features of real visual neurons, such as why a neuron that fires for a short line can go quiet when the line is extended - a phenomenon called end-stopping - which falls out naturally if that neuron is reporting prediction error rather than raw stimulus.

An everyday way to feel the idea: you stop hearing the steady hum of a refrigerator because your brain predicts it perfectly, so it generates no error and drops out of awareness, and the moment it switches off the change is a large prediction error that you notice at once.


57.1.2 The Helmholtzian analysis-by-synthesis lineage

This sub-section places predictive coding in a long tradition so the reader sees its deep roots.

The German physicist and physiologist Hermann von Helmholtz proposed in the 1860s that perception is a process of unconscious inference, meaning the brain unconsciously reasons from ambiguous sensory clues to its best guess about the hidden outside cause.

Helmholtz's insight was that the senses alone never fully fix what is out there - the same patch of light on the eye could come from countless different scenes - so the brain must add assumptions to settle on one interpretation, and it does this so fast and so automatically that we never notice the guessing.

Analysis by synthesis is the name later given to the strategy this implies, and the phrase is worth unpacking.

Analysis means breaking an incoming signal down to figure out what produced it, and synthesis means generating or constructing a candidate signal from a hypothesis about its cause.

Analysis by synthesis, then, is the trick of understanding an input by trying to build it: the brain guesses at a cause, synthesises the sensory pattern that cause would produce, compares that to the real input, and revises the guess until the built pattern matches, which is exactly the predictive-coding loop described above.

The term was introduced in the 1950s and 1960s in speech research, and the psychologist Ulric Neisser gave it prominence in his founding 1967 textbook Cognitive Psychology, so the idea had been circulating for decades before the modern mathematical versions arrived.

Because this sub-section describes a lineage rather than a mechanism, the systems reading is a prediction contrast: a pure feed-forward account predicts that perception should be no slower or richer when input is degraded, while any analysis-by-synthesis account predicts that degraded input forces extra generate-and-compare cycles, visible as slower recognition and stronger influence of expectations.

The lineage matters because it shows predictive coding is the latest expression of a very old and durable intuition, that to perceive is to construct, going back at least to Helmholtz and arguably to much older philosophy about how the mind meets the world.


57.2 The free energy principle

This section climbs to the most ambitious and most contested idea in the chapter.

The free energy principle, associated above all with the neuroscientist Karl Friston, tries to show that predictive processing is not just one clever strategy the brain happens to use, but something that any system which manages to keep existing must be doing.

It is a beautiful and sweeping claim, and it is also famously hard to follow and hotly argued over, so the section aims to give the honest gist without pretending it is simple or settled.


57.2.1 Variational free energy as a bound on surprise

We need to define three ideas gently: surprise, free energy, and the bound between them.

Surprise, in this technical sense, does not mean the feeling of being startled; it is a mathematical measure of how unexpected a sensory state is, given the brain's model of the world, where states the model deems very unlikely count as high surprise.

The principle starts from a biological observation dressed in mathematics: a living thing survives only by staying within a narrow range of states - a body temperature near thirty-seven degrees, oxygen in the blood, and so on - and being knocked far outside that range is, from the model's point of view, a highly surprising and usually fatal condition.

So a system that persists must, in effect, keep its sensory states unsurprising, which means it must minimise surprise over the long run.

The snag is that a brain cannot actually compute surprise directly, because doing so would require knowing the probability of its sensations averaged over every possible way the world could be, which is impossible to work out.

This is where variational free energy comes in: it is a quantity the brain can compute from what it has, and it is mathematically guaranteed to always be greater than or equal to the true surprise, so it sits above surprise like a ceiling.

The word variational is borrowed from a branch of mathematics for finding the best approximation, and the word free energy is borrowed by analogy from physics; a beginner can safely treat the whole term as a name for a computable stand-in for surprise.

Because free energy is an upper bound on surprise - a ceiling - pushing the ceiling down forces the surprise underneath it down too, so a system that keeps minimising free energy is thereby keeping its surprise low without ever having to measure surprise directly.

As a computation, the free-energy calculator takes the current sensory input and the system's current approximate belief as inputs, and outputs a single scalar cost that the rest of the system treats as the quantity to drive downhill.

The pleasing payoff is that minimising variational free energy turns out to be mathematically the same as minimising prediction error, which ties this grand principle back to the concrete predictive-coding machinery of the previous section.


57.2.2 Markov blankets and self-organisation

To make the principle apply to any self-preserving thing and not just to brains, Friston reaches for a concept called the Markov blanket.

Named after the mathematician Andrey Markov, a Markov blanket is a statistical boundary that separates the inside of a system from the outside, defined so that the two only ever influence each other through the boundary itself and never directly.

In plainer words, it is the set of variables that stands between a thing and its environment, like a skin or a cell membrane, such that the inside can only sense the outside and act on the outside through that intervening layer.

The blanket has two working parts: sensory states, through which the world affects the system, and active states, through which the system affects the world, and together they wrap the internal states off from the external ones.

For an engineer this is simply an interface specification: the blanket is the complete list of input channels and output channels, and the claim is that everything cognitive happens in the traffic across that interface.

Self-organisation is the term for how order and structure can arise and maintain themselves in a system without any outside designer arranging them, purely from the local interactions of the parts, the way a whirlpool organises itself in draining water.

Friston's grand argument is that any system that manages to hold itself together against the universe's relentless tendency toward disorder - any system with a Markov blanket that persists over time - will look, from the outside, exactly as if it were minimising the free energy of its sensory states, and therefore as if it were modelling and predicting its world.

On this reading, prediction is not a special talent of clever brains but the signature of existence itself for anything that stays distinct from its surroundings, from a single cell to a person.

It is fair to tell a beginner that this is the most disputed step in the whole chapter: admirers find it a breathtaking unification, while critics, including sympathetic ones, argue that the Markov-blanket formalism is applied loosely and that the leap from a mathematical description to a claim about what systems are really doing is not fully earned.


57.2.3 The unification claim across brain theories

This sub-section explains why the free energy principle has generated so much excitement despite its difficulty.

The unification claim is the promise that a single principle - minimise free energy - can be shown to contain, as special cases, many of the separate theories that different fields had developed on their own.

Friston and colleagues argue, for instance, that predictive coding is what free-energy minimisation looks like for perception, that the reinforcement-learning theories of reward described earlier in this outline are what it looks like for action, that the efficient-coding ideas from sensory neuroscience fall out of it, and that even the exploratory drive of curiosity can be derived from it.

The appeal is the appeal of physics envy in the best sense: just as physicists prize a single equation that explains many separate phenomena, a single principle that knits together perception, action, learning, and attention would be a major theoretical achievement.

Because this sub-section describes a debate rather than a mechanism, the systems contrast is this: if the unification is real, then the parameters of the separate theories should turn out to be constrained by one another rather than freely tunable, whereas if the principle is merely a flexible language, each re-description will add free parameters and forbid nothing.

The counter-view, pressed by careful commentators, is that a principle general enough to cover everything risks explaining nothing in particular, because it may be too flexible to rule any specific observation out, and a theory that no possible finding could contradict is more a framework or a language than a testable claim.

The current honest verdict, which a beginner deserves, is mixed: the free energy principle is widely regarded as mathematically elegant and genuinely generative of new experiments and models, while its status as a true law of mind and life rather than a very general modelling stance remains unsettled and actively debated.


57.3 Active inference

This section extends the predictive story from perceiving to doing, which is where it becomes a full theory of behaviour rather than only of perception.

Active inference is the idea that action, just like perception, is in the business of minimising prediction error, but it does so from the other end.

Where perception changes your model to fit the world, action changes the world to fit your model, and the section unpacks how that reversal works and what it explains.

In control-engineering terms, perception is state estimation and action is feedback control, and active inference claims both are performed by one and the same error-cancelling machinery.


57.3.1 Action as the fulfilment of prediction

Here is the pivotal and slightly dizzying idea, stated plainly first.

In ordinary thinking, we predict what will happen and then act separately for our own reasons; in active inference, acting simply is making a prediction come true.

The proposal is that when you decide to reach for a cup, your brain issues a confident prediction that your hand is already at the cup, which creates a large prediction error because your hand is in fact still on the table.

There are two ways to wipe out that error: change the prediction to match reality, or change reality to match the prediction, and active inference says the motor system takes the second route by moving the hand until the sensed position finally matches the predicted position, at which point the error vanishes.

Movement, on this view, is the body cancelling its own prediction errors by making the predicted state actually happen, and this is called the fulfilment of prediction.

The signals that drive the muscles are recast as predictions about the sensations the body expects to feel when the movement is complete, and the spinal reflexes act to close the gap - a proposal sometimes described as motor control by active inference rather than by classical motor commands.

As a mechanism, the motor loop takes a proprioceptive prediction as its input, publishes muscle activity as its output, holds the target prediction as its only state, and closes its error at the speed of spinal reflex arcs, tens of milliseconds, far faster than deliberate correction.

This tidy scheme raises an obvious worry that the theory must answer: if a strong enough prediction can move your arm, why do wishful expectations not move it constantly, and the answer offered is a mechanism called precision control, treated below and in the earlier perception chapters, which decides how much weight a given prediction or error is allowed to have.

The elegance a beginner can appreciate is the symmetry: perception and action become two sides of one coin, both merely different ways of reducing the mismatch between what the brain expects and what its senses report.


57.3.2 Expected free energy as the sum of epistemic and pragmatic value

To choose among possible actions, and especially to plan ahead, active inference introduces a forward-looking quantity, and it splits neatly into two motivations everyone can recognise.

Expected free energy is the free energy a system anticipates it would incur in the future if it followed a particular course of action, so where ordinary free energy scores the present, expected free energy scores imagined futures, letting the system compare plans before committing.

The system is said to prefer the course of action with the lowest expected free energy, and the mathematics shows that this quantity breaks into two parts that pull the agent in two familiar directions.

The first part is pragmatic value, which is the drive to reach outcomes you prefer - to get food when hungry, warmth when cold, the goal you actually want - and it is the exploiting, goal-seeking side of behaviour.

The second part is epistemic value, from a Greek root meaning to do with knowledge, and it is the drive to reduce your uncertainty - to gather information, to resolve ambiguity, to find out - and it is the exploring, curious side of behaviour.

The lovely result is that a single formula yields both the urge to get what you want and the urge to learn what you do not know, so curiosity is not bolted on as an extra but drops out of the same principle as goal-seeking.

As a computation, the planner takes as inputs the current belief state, a menu of candidate actions, and a table of preferred outcomes; for each action it simulates the expected observations, scores them for preference satisfaction and for expected information gain, and publishes the action with the best combined score - which is exactly what the code sample at the end of this chapter does in a two-room world.

This gives a principled account of the exploration-exploitation trade-off discussed in the learning chapters, the everyday dilemma of whether to return to the restaurant you know is good or to try the new one you know nothing about, and here that trade-off is simply the balancing of pragmatic against epistemic value.

For a field trying to build agents that both pursue goals and explore sensibly, this unified treatment of wanting and wondering is one of active inference's most attractive offerings.


57.3.3 Interoceptive inference and the emotional self

This sub-section extends the predictive framework inward, to the body's own internal states, and reaches a striking claim about feelings.

Interoception is the perception of the internal condition of your own body: your heartbeat, your breathing, your gut, your temperature, your sense of hunger or fullness.

Interoceptive inference is the proposal that the brain perceives these inner signals in exactly the same predict-and-correct way it perceives the outside world, by generating predictions about the state of the body and updating them against the actual signals coming from within.

The neuroscientist Anil Seth, building on work with Hugo Critchley, argued in influential papers around 2013 that emotions are the brain's best guesses about the causes of its own bodily sensations, so a racing heart and tight chest get interpreted, in context, as fear or excitement depending on what the brain predicts is going on.

On this view an emotion is not a raw readout of the body but an inference about the body, which is why the same physical arousal can be felt as different emotions in different situations - a point that connects to older two-factor theories of emotion covered elsewhere in this outline.

As a mechanism, the interoceptive loop subscribes to slow visceral signals - heart rate, breathing, gut state, operating over seconds to minutes rather than milliseconds - combines them with contextual predictions, and publishes a felt emotional state that the rest of cognition consumes as a summary of how the body is doing.

Seth memorably describes both ordinary perception and emotional feeling as a controlled hallucination, meaning the felt world and the felt self are always the brain's constructed best guess, reined in and corrected by sensory signals but built from the inside out.

This framework has become clinically interesting because it offers a way to understand disorders of the sense of self and of bodily feeling - such as anxiety, depression, and dissociation - as disturbances in interoceptive prediction, though this is a young research area and the clinical picture is still being worked out and should be described with care.

The larger significance for a beginner is that predictive processing here reaches all the way to the emotional and embodied self, suggesting that who you feel yourself to be is, on this theory, another model the brain is continually inferring.


57.4 The philosophy and the disputes

This section steps back from the machinery to weigh what it all means and where thoughtful people disagree.

Having laid out predictive coding, the free energy principle, and active inference, we now ask the harder questions: what picture of the mind does this paint, what obvious objection does it face, and how does it sit alongside the four-E ideas of the previous chapter?

The section is deliberately even-handed, because this is a frontier where the honest answer is often that the matter is not resolved.


57.4.1 The prediction-machine reading of mind

This sub-section states the sweeping philosophical picture that the framework invites, and names its most articulate champion.

The prediction-machine reading of mind, argued at length by the philosopher Andy Clark in his 2016 book Surfing Uncertainty and in a much-cited 2013 article, holds that the brain is, at bottom, an organ for prediction, and that this one idea reorganises how we should think about perception, action, imagination, and understanding.

On this reading the boundary between perceiving and imagining softens, because both are the brain running its internal model, the difference being only whether sensory prediction errors are currently reining the model in.

It also reframes attention, which becomes the brain turning up the volume on the prediction errors it judges reliable and turning down the ones it judges noisy, a process called precision weighting that we met in the perception chapters.

In systems terms precision weighting is gain control: each error channel carries a multiplier, attention sets the multiplier, and the same architecture explains focused perception, imagination with the input gain near zero, and dreaming with the gain fully closed.

Clark's careful version resists the wildest conclusions and tries to marry the prediction-machine idea to the embodied and extended views of the previous chapter, insisting that a predicting brain is still a brain in a body in a world, not a solitary calculator.

The reading is attractive because it is unifying and concrete, and it is worth flagging that even its friends treat it as a promising organising vision rather than a finished proof, since much of the neural evidence is consistent with predictive processing without uniquely requiring it.


57.4.2 The dark-room problem and its answers

This sub-section presents the single most famous objection to the framework, because facing it teaches the theory better than any praise could.

The dark-room problem is a sharp thought experiment aimed at the claim that the brain acts to minimise surprise.

The objection runs like this: if all you must do to keep your sensations unsurprising is to find a silent, dark, unchanging room and stay there forever, then a creature obeying the free energy principle should crawl into such a room and never leave, since a dark room is maximally predictable.

Since real animals plainly do not do this - they seek stimulation, novelty, food, mates, and change - the objection charges that the principle predicts the opposite of how living things actually behave.

The standard answer has two parts, and both are worth understanding.

First, an animal's predictions are not blank; they are set by its nature and its needs, so a creature genuinely expects to eat, to move, to see daylight, and to encounter its own kind, which means a dark empty room is in fact wildly surprising and unwelcome relative to what the creature's model expects of a life worth living.

Second, the epistemic-value term from active inference, described above, positively rewards reducing uncertainty, so a well-built agent is driven to explore and gather information rather than to stagnate, and boredom in the dark room is exactly the pull of unresolved uncertainty demanding to be reduced.

Defenders therefore argue the dark room only looks tempting if you forget that surprise is measured against the organism's own expectations, which are already those of an active, embodied, needful creature.

In systems terms the dispute is about where the preference table lives: the objection assumes an agent whose preferred-outcome distribution is flat, and the defence answers that no viable agent ships with a flat preference table, because the table is part of the organism's design.

Critics reply that this rescue works only by quietly loading the answer into the creature's built-in expectations, which raises the further question of where those expectations come from, so the exchange is a good example of how the framework's disputes tend to run: each patch invites a deeper question, and the debate continues.


57.4.3 The tension and reconciliation with four-E cognition

This closing sub-section asks how the prediction framework relates to the embodied and enactive ideas of the last chapter, and the relationship is genuinely complicated.

At first glance the two look opposed.

Predictive processing seems to put a rich internal model at the very centre of the mind, with the brain building and updating an inner representation of the world, whereas four-E cognition, especially in its enactive and ecological forms, was suspicious of inner models and wanted to relocate cognition into the body and the world.

So there is a real tension between a picture of the mind as an inner prediction engine and a picture of the mind as world-involving activity that travels light on internal representation.

Yet many thinkers, Andy Clark foremost among them, argue the two can be reconciled, and the bridge is action.

Because active inference makes the body's movements and the sampling of the world part of the very process of minimising error, the predicting brain is not a sealed calculator but a system that constantly reaches out, moves, and manipulates the environment to keep its predictions on track, which is exactly the embodied, world-engaged picture the four-E camp wanted.

A helpful middle position holds that the amount of internal modelling is a dial rather than a fixed setting: some tasks lean on rich inner prediction while others lean on cheap, direct exploitation of information in the world, and the same predictive machinery can slide between the two depending on what is efficient.

In systems terms the two camps predict differently: a heavy-model account predicts that cutting the agent off from the world mid-task should barely disturb short-term performance, because the model carries on, while a light-model account predicts immediate degradation, because the world was doing the storage.

The most radical enactivists remain unconvinced and still object to any essential role for internal representation, so a beginner should understand this as an ongoing negotiation rather than a completed peace treaty.

The productive upshot for konnectome is that these are not simply rival teams to pick between; they are increasingly seen as complementary constraints on any complete theory of mind, which is precisely the stance this outline takes toward competing frameworks throughout.


57.5 Chapter systems treatment

The process modelled here is active inference in miniature: an agent in a two-room world that chooses among actions by scoring each one's expected free energy, so that looking before leaping emerges from the same rule as leaping.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Sensory observations, formatted as discrete outcomes such as a cue light or the presence of food, sourced from the environment through the sensory states of the Markov blanket.

◦ A preference distribution over outcomes, formatted as prior probabilities that encode what the agent wants to sense, sourced from the agent's design or biology.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A posterior belief over hidden world states, formatted as a probability distribution, consumed by the planner.

◦ A selected action, formatted as a discrete command through the active states of the blanket, consumed by the environment.

• STATE.

◦ The current belief distribution over hidden states, and the generative model itself: the likelihood mapping from hidden states to observations and the preference table over outcomes.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Cue reliability, the probability that the informative observation is truthful.

◦ Preference strength, how sharply the agent favours its desired outcome.

◦ The relative weighting of epistemic and pragmatic value, which tunes curiosity against greed.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ A perceptual belief update in cortical hierarchies is reflected in mismatch responses - such as the mismatch negativity, an automatic brain response to unexpected sounds - peaking roughly 100 to 250 milliseconds after the surprising event.

◦ Spinal reflex arcs that cancel proprioceptive prediction error act within tens of milliseconds.

◦ Interoceptive states evolve over seconds to minutes, the timescale of heartbeat, breathing, and visceral change.

◦ A single time constant for free-energy minimisation as such: REFUSED, because the principle is claimed to hold at every timescale from reflex to evolution, so no one value is defensible.

• MODES.

◦ Perceptual mode, updating beliefs to fit sensations, engaged when sensory precision is high and action is withheld.

◦ Active mode, changing the world to fit predictions, engaged when the agent commits to a plan and proprioceptive predictions are given high precision.

◦ Exploratory mode, dominated by epistemic value when uncertainty is high, switching to exploitative mode, dominated by pragmatic value, once uncertainty is resolved - the switch is automatic because information gain shrinks as beliefs sharpen.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Hallucination and delusion, modelled as prediction gain set too high relative to sensory evidence, so the model overrides the world.

◦ Anxiety and panic, modelled as miscalibrated interoceptive predictions that read ordinary bodily signals as alarming.

◦ Pathological inaction or compulsive checking, modelled as preference and precision settings that make every option's expected free energy nearly equal or make uncertainty never feel resolved.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called belief that food is in room one, with initial value zero point five.
Create a number variable called cue reliability with initial value zero point nine.
Create a list called actions containing check the cue, enter room one, and enter room two.
Define a function that returns the entropy of a belief, as the negative sum over both options of probability times the logarithm of probability.
For each decision round, do the following.
    For each action in the actions list, do the following.
        If the action is check the cue, set its pragmatic value to a small negative checking cost, and set its epistemic value to the current entropy minus the expected entropy after seeing the cue.
        If the action is enter a room, set its epistemic value to zero, and set its pragmatic value to the believed probability that the food is in that room, times the preference strength.
        Calculate the action score as the pragmatic value plus the epistemic value.
    Choose the action with the highest score.
    If the chosen action is check the cue, sample a cue observation from the world, and update the belief with Bayes rule using the cue reliability.
    Otherwise, enter the chosen room, report whether the food was found, and stop.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for logarithms and the random module for sampling.
import math, random

# Create a variable holding the true food room, sampled at random from room one and room two.
true_food_room = random.choice([1, 2])
# Create a number variable called belief_room_one with initial value zero point five.
belief_room_one = 0.5
# Create a number variable called cue_reliability with initial value zero point nine.
cue_reliability = 0.9
# Create a number variable called preference_strength with initial value two point zero.
preference_strength = 2.0

# Define a function that returns the entropy of a two-option belief.
def entropy(p):
    # If the belief is certain either way, return zero.
    if p <= 0.0 or p >= 1.0:
        return 0.0
    # Return the negative sum of probability times log probability for both options.
    return -(p * math.log(p) + (1 - p) * math.log(1 - p))

# Define a function that returns the belief after a cue observation, by Bayes rule.
def updated_belief(p, cue_says_one):
    # Set the likelihood of this cue if food is in room one, from the cue reliability.
    like_one = cue_reliability if cue_says_one else 1 - cue_reliability
    # Set the likelihood of this cue if food is in room two, from the cue reliability.
    like_two = 1 - cue_reliability if cue_says_one else cue_reliability
    # Return the normalised posterior probability that food is in room one.
    return (p * like_one) / (p * like_one + (1 - p) * like_two)

# For each decision round from one to five, do the following.
for decision_round in range(1, 6):
    # Calculate the probability that the cue would say room one, under the current belief.
    prob_cue_one = belief_room_one * cue_reliability + (1 - belief_room_one) * (1 - cue_reliability)
    # Calculate the expected entropy after checking the cue, averaged over both cue outcomes.
    expected_entropy = prob_cue_one * entropy(updated_belief(belief_room_one, True)) + (1 - prob_cue_one) * entropy(updated_belief(belief_room_one, False))
    # Set the score of checking as the expected entropy reduction minus a small checking cost.
    score_check = entropy(belief_room_one) - expected_entropy - 0.05
    # Set the score of entering room one as the believed chance of food there times the preference strength.
    score_room_one = belief_room_one * preference_strength - preference_strength
    # Set the score of entering room two as the believed chance of food there times the preference strength.
    score_room_two = (1 - belief_room_one) * preference_strength - preference_strength
    # Collect the three scores in a dictionary keyed by action name.
    scores = {"check": score_check, "enter room 1": score_room_one, "enter room 2": score_room_two}
    # Choose the action with the highest score.
    action = max(scores, key=scores.get)
    # Print the round, the belief, and the chosen action.
    print("round", decision_round, "belief food in room 1 =", round(belief_room_one, 3), "->", action)
    # If the chosen action is to check the cue, observe and update the belief.
    if action == "check":
        # Sample whether the cue truthfully points at the food room, using the cue reliability.
        truthful = random.random() < cue_reliability
        # Set the cue reading to point at room one when truth and the food location agree.
        cue_says_one = (true_food_room == 1) == truthful
        # Update the belief with Bayes rule using the cue reading.
        belief_room_one = updated_belief(belief_room_one, cue_says_one)
    # Otherwise, enter the chosen room, report the result, and stop.
    else:
        # Set the chosen room number from the action name.
        chosen_room = 1 if action == "enter room 1" else 2
        # Print whether the agent found the food, and leave the loop.
        print("entered room", chosen_room, "- food found:", chosen_room == true_food_room)
        break

CHAPTER 58. REPRESENTATION, SYMBOLS, AND THE ARCHITECTURE OF THOUGHT (FRAMEWORK)

This chapter takes up the oldest and deepest quarrel in the science of mind, the quarrel over what a thought is made of.

One camp says thoughts are built like sentences, out of discrete symbols combined by rules, so that having a mind is a bit like having an inner language.

Another camp says thoughts are patterns of activity spread across a web of simple units, with no inner sentences at all, so that meaning is a matter of pattern rather than of language.

In systems terms the quarrel is about the data format of cognition: discrete structured records processed by rule application, or continuous distributed vectors processed by pattern transformation.

This is not a dry technicality; it decides what kind of thing we should try to build if we want to build a mind, and it has run for forty years without a clean winner.

The chapter also confronts two problems that have haunted every attempt to make representation work - how symbols get their meaning, and how a mind decides what is relevant - and it closes with the question of whether the mind is one general-purpose machine or a bundle of specialised ones.

The tag framework signals that this chapter supplies the conceptual tools and debates that the theories of whole minds, coming later in the outline, will draw upon.


58.1 The language of thought

This section lays out the most influential version of the symbols-and-rules picture.

The language of thought hypothesis holds that thinking literally happens in a kind of mental language, with its own words and its own grammar, distinct from any spoken language like English.

The section explains what that language is supposed to be and why its defenders think it is forced on us by the very shape of human thought.


58.1.1 Mentalese and the representational theory of mind

Let us define the central proposal and the philosopher behind it.

The language of thought hypothesis was put forward most forcefully by the philosopher Jerry Fodor, especially in his 1975 book The Language of Thought, and it is one of the most important ideas in modern philosophy of mind.

Fodor's claim is that there is an inner symbolic system, often nicknamed Mentalese, in which our thinking is actually carried out, so that when you believe it is raining there is, somewhere in your cognitive machinery, a symbolic structure that means it is raining, put together from more basic symbols according to rules.

Mentalese is not English or any other public language; it is supposed to be the underlying code that all human thought runs in, which is why speakers of different languages can nonetheless share the same thoughts.

This sits inside a broader view called the representational theory of mind, which needs unpacking in two halves.

A representation is anything that stands for something else - a word, a picture, a symbol - and the representational theory of mind says the mind works by storing and manipulating internal representations that stand for things and situations in the world.

The theory adds a crucial second half about what beliefs and desires really are: to believe that it is raining is to have a particular mental representation, meaning it is raining, held in a particular functional role, the belief role, while to want it to stop raining is to have a related representation held in the desire role.

Thinking, on this account, is computation over these symbols: the mind transforms one symbolic structure into another according to rules, much as a computer transforms strings of code, which is why this view is the philosophical backbone of the classical, symbol-processing approach to artificial intelligence.

As a system specification, Mentalese defines a storage format of typed, composable records; an instruction set of rule applications over those records, with each rule application taking on the order of tens of milliseconds if the production-cycle estimates from the architecture chapters carry over; and two registers, belief and desire, distinguished not by content but by the functional role the record is held in.

The great appeal of the view is that it neatly explains how thoughts can be about things and how reasoning can be truth-preserving, and the great burden it carries, addressed later in this chapter, is explaining how those inner symbols come to mean anything at all.


58.1.2 Productivity, systematicity, and compositionality

This sub-section gives the three properties of thought that defenders treat as the decisive evidence for a language-like inner code, and they are best learned through examples.

Productivity is the fact that you can understand and produce an effectively unlimited number of new thoughts you have never met before.

No one had ever considered the sentence a purple giraffe is reading Tuesday to the moon before you read it just now, yet you grasped it instantly, and this endless novelty from finite means cries out for explanation.

Systematicity is the fact that the ability to think certain thoughts comes bundled with the ability to think related ones, in a non-accidental pattern.

Anyone who can think John loves Mary can also think Mary loves John; you never meet a mind that can think the first but is constitutionally unable to think the second, and this reliable bundling looks like no coincidence.

Compositionality is the underlying explanation the language-of-thought camp offers for both: it is the principle that the meaning of a complex thought is determined by the meanings of its parts and the way they are put together.

Because John, loves, and Mary are reusable parts with stable meanings, and because there are rules for combining them, you automatically get both the endless novelty of productivity and the reliable bundling of systematicity, all from a small stock of symbols and a grammar for arranging them.

In systems terms these three properties are an engineering constraint on any candidate architecture: the representation format must support unbounded composition from a finite part inventory, guaranteed recombination of any parts once learned, and meaning that is a deterministic function of parts plus structure.

The argument, then, is an inference to the best explanation: the easiest way to explain why thought is productive, systematic, and compositional is to suppose that thoughts really do have parts and structure, that is, that there really is a language of thought.

This is a genuinely powerful argument, and it sets the challenge that the rival camp, connectionism, has spent decades trying to answer, which is the subject of the next section.


58.2 The classical and connectionist debate

This section stages the central confrontation of the chapter.

On one side stands the classical view just described, that the mind is a symbol-manipulating system with a language-like structure.

On the other stands connectionism, the view that the mind is a neural network of simple interconnected units whose knowledge lives in the strengths of their connections rather than in stored symbols.

The section follows the argument through its famous opening challenge, the replies it provoked, and its surprising return in the age of modern artificial intelligence.


58.2.1 The systematicity challenge

This sub-section states the objection that has organised the whole debate since the late 1980s.

In 1988 Jerry Fodor and Zenon Pylyshyn published a long and forceful article, Connectionism and Cognitive Architecture: A Critical Analysis, which threw down a challenge that connectionists have been answering ever since.

Their argument, boiled down, was this: thought is systematic, as the previous section explained, and the classical view explains that systematicity naturally, because a symbol structure literally contains reusable parts that can be recombined.

A connectionist network, they charged, has no such built-in parts; it is a soup of activation across units, and nothing in its basic design guarantees that a network able to represent John loves Mary must also be able to represent Mary loves John.

Therefore, they concluded, insofar as connectionist networks do manage to be systematic, they must be doing so by secretly implementing a classical symbol system underneath, in which case connectionism is not a rival theory of the mind's architecture but merely a story about how the brain's hardware might run the real, symbolic software.

The force of the challenge is that it does not deny neural networks can be built or can learn; it denies that they explain the structured character of thought without smuggling in the very symbols they claimed to replace.

As a systems contrast, the two sides make different guarantees: the classical architecture guarantees recombination by construction, at the cost of needing a separate story about learning, while the connectionist architecture guarantees learning by construction, at the cost of needing a separate story about recombination.

This put the burden squarely on connectionists to show either that their networks can be genuinely systematic on their own terms, or that human thought is less rigidly systematic than Fodor and Pylyshyn assumed, and both replies were duly attempted.


58.2.2 The connectionist replies and tensor-product binding

This sub-section covers the most important technical answer to the challenge.

The central difficulty for a neural network is called the binding problem for representation: how can a network keep track of which role each thing plays, so that John-as-lover and Mary-as-loved do not smear together into a mere set containing John and Mary with no who-did-what-to-whom?

The most influential answer came from Paul Smolensky, who proposed a mathematical technique called tensor-product binding in work through the late 1980s and early 1990s.

The idea, in plain terms, is to represent each element of a thought as a pattern of activity for its content - a pattern for John, a pattern for Mary - and to separately represent each structural slot as another pattern - a pattern for the lover role, a pattern for the loved role.

Binding a filler to a role is then done by a specific mathematical combination, the tensor product, which fuses the John pattern with the lover-role pattern into a single composite pattern that keeps the two locked together, so the network can tell John-as-lover from John-as-loved.

By adding up such role-filler bindings, a network can encode a whole structured thought as one big activity pattern, and crucially it can later pull the pieces back out, which shows a network can carry genuine structure without a classical list of symbols.

As a mechanism, the binder takes role vectors and filler vectors as inputs, publishes one superimposed composite pattern as output, holds nothing between operations but the fixed role and filler vocabularies, and decomposes on demand by projecting the composite back through a chosen role vector - exactly the operation the code sample at the end of this chapter performs.

Smolensky offered this as proof that connectionism could answer the systematicity challenge on its own ground, honouring structure while remaining a network rather than a symbol processor.

Fodor and his collaborator Brian McLaughlin replied in 1990 that the trick did not fully work, arguing that tensor-product representations have their constituents only in a weak sense - the parts can be extracted by computation but are not literally present and causally active in the way classical symbols are - so the deep explanatory advantage of the classical view survived.

The exchange never reached a knock-out on either side, and it left the field with a sophisticated toolkit for building structure into networks and a lingering philosophical disagreement about whether that structure is the real thing or a clever imitation.


58.2.3 The modern reprise: systematic generalisation in neural networks

This sub-section brings the decades-old debate right up to the present, because it has been reborn inside modern artificial intelligence.

The old philosophical question turned into a concrete engineering test the moment powerful neural networks began doing impressive things, because one could now simply measure whether they generalise systematically.

Systematic generalisation means handling new combinations of familiar parts: if a system has learned the word jump and has learned to do things twice, it should be able to jump twice the first time it is asked, without special training on that exact combination.

In 2018 the researchers Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni built a clean test of this, a task called SCAN in which a network learns to turn simple commands into sequences of actions, and they arranged it so the test demanded new combinations of words the network had only seen separately.

Their result was a sharp rediscovery of Fodor and Pylyshyn's point: standard sequence-learning networks did nearly perfectly when the test items resembled the training items, but failed badly when success required recombining known parts in genuinely new ways, which is exactly the systematicity that classical symbols deliver for free.

This shows the forty-year-old debate was not idle philosophy; the same crack reopened in the most advanced learning systems of the day.

The story does not end in defeat for networks, however.

In 2023 Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni reported in the journal Nature that a network trained with a technique called meta-learning - roughly, training the network on a stream of little learning problems so that it learns how to recombine parts in general, rather than memorising any one mapping - could reach human-level systematic generalisation on these tasks.

In systems terms the finding relocates compositionality from the architecture to the training regime: recombination becomes a learned mode of operation, switched on by the right distribution of training problems, rather than a wired-in property of the data format.

The careful lesson for a beginner is balanced: systematic, compositional generalisation does not come automatically to neural networks and remains a real weakness of many of them, yet it is not proven impossible either, and it appears to be something a network can be taught to do rather than something it must have wired in from the start.

That balance is why the classical-versus-connectionist question is best regarded not as won by either side but as reshaped, with modern work trying to get the structure-respecting strengths of symbols and the learning strengths of networks in one system, which is a central ambition for projects like konnectome.


58.3 The hard problems of representation

This section confronts two deep difficulties that any theory of internal representation must eventually face, whichever side of the previous debate it favours.

The first is how a symbol inside a head, or a pattern inside a network, comes to be about anything in the world at all.

The second is how a mind manages to focus on what matters and ignore the endless things that do not, in a world where almost anything could in principle be relevant.

Both problems are famous for being easy to state and stubbornly hard to solve.


58.3.1 The symbol grounding problem restated

This sub-section revisits, in the setting of this chapter, a problem introduced earlier in the outline, because it strikes right at the language-of-thought view.

The symbol grounding problem, named and sharpened by the cognitive scientist Stevan Harnad in a 1990 paper, asks how the symbols inside a mind or a computer come to have meaning rather than being empty tokens.

Harnad's vivid way of posing it was to imagine trying to learn a first language purely from a dictionary written in that same unknown language: every word is defined only by other words you also do not know, so you spin forever among meaningless symbols and never touch anything real.

A pure symbol system, like the classical language of thought or a traditional artificial-intelligence program, seems to face just this predicament, because its symbols are defined only by their relations to other symbols and rules, with no anchor to the world outside the system.

Harnad's proposed cure was grounding through the senses and the body: at least some symbols must be tied directly to the system's own perception and action - the symbol for red hooked to the actual detection of red things, the symbol for grasp hooked to actual grasping - so that meaning can climb up from that sensory footing rather than floating free.

In systems terms grounding is an interface requirement: a representation system needs at least some channels whose values are set by transducers - devices that convert physical energy into signals - rather than by other representations, so that the reference of the base vocabulary is fixed outside the loop of symbols defining symbols.

This connects the whole debate of this chapter back to the embodied and enactive ideas of Chapter 56, because grounding is essentially the demand that symbols be rooted in a body's real dealings with a real world.

The problem has taken on fresh urgency with today's large language models, which learn from vast amounts of text and can be seen as a modern version of the dictionary-go-round, learning words only from other words, and researchers now actively debate how much such systems really understand and whether adding images, sound, and action - so-called multimodal grounding - genuinely solves the problem or only softens it, a question that is very much open.


58.3.2 The frame problem and the problem of relevance

This sub-section explains a difficulty that many regard as the single hardest obstacle for building a general mind.

The frame problem began as a narrow technical puzzle in artificial intelligence, first named by John McCarthy and Patrick Hayes in 1969, about how a reasoning program should keep track of what stays the same when an action happens.

If a robot moves a cup, it should update the cup's location but somehow know, without checking every fact it holds, that moving the cup did not change the colour of the walls, the day of the week, or the price of tea, and stating all the things that do not change turns out to be maddeningly hard.

Philosophers, above all Jerry Fodor and Daniel Dennett, broadened this into a far deeper worry usually called the problem of relevance.

The problem of relevance is this: in any real situation, an unbounded number of facts might conceivably bear on what to do, and there is no obvious way for a mind to zero in on the few that actually matter without somehow already reviewing the countless ones that do not.

When you plan a trip you effortlessly ignore that you own an umbrella of a certain colour and that Rome was founded long ago, yet in some odd circumstance either fact could be the crucial one, so relevance cannot simply be fixed in advance by a rule.

Fodor argued this makes central cognition - the open-ended, bring-anything-to-bear part of thinking, as opposed to walled-off perception - especially resistant to explanation, and he expressed his pessimism in a wry law that the more global and free-ranging a cognitive process is, the less anyone understands it.

The reason this cuts against the classical symbol picture is that a system of symbols and rules seems to have no efficient way to survey its whole store of knowledge for relevance without grinding to a halt, whereas humans do it in an instant and usually without effort.

In systems terms the problem is a scaling failure: exhaustive relevance checking costs time proportional to the size of the knowledge store, which for a lifetime of knowledge is intractable, yet human retrieval of the relevant fact typically completes within about a second, so whatever mechanism the brain uses, it is not exhaustive search.

A fair statement for a beginner is that the frame and relevance problems remain genuinely unsolved in the general case; they are a large part of why common sense has proven so much harder to build than narrow expertise, and they set a real bar that any candidate architecture of mind, konnectome included, has to face honestly.


58.4 Modularity

This section addresses the final structural question of the chapter, whether the mind is one thing or many.

Modularity is the idea that the mind is made up of separate, specialised subsystems - modules - each dedicated to a particular job, rather than being one flexible general-purpose processor.

The section contrasts a limited version of this idea with a far more sweeping one, and then returns to the relevance problem to explain why the disagreement matters.


58.4.1 Fodorian and massive modularity

This sub-section lays out the two main versions of the modularity idea and who argued for each.

The influential starting point is Jerry Fodor's 1983 book The Modularity of Mind, which proposed what is now called Fodorian modularity.

Fodor argued that the input systems of the mind - perception and language, the parts that take in sensory signals and decode speech - are modules, and he gave a list of properties that make something a module.

The key properties are that a module is domain-specific, meaning it handles only one narrow kind of information such as vision or grammar; that it is mandatory, meaning it runs automatically whether you want it to or not; that it is fast; and above all that it is informationally encapsulated, meaning it does its work using only its own limited store of information and cannot consult everything else the mind knows.

In systems terms a Fodorian module is a sealed service: a fixed input format, a fixed output format, a private database, no read access to the rest of the system, and a fast, mandatory execution path - and encapsulation is precisely what buys the speed, because a process that consults nothing beyond its own store has nothing to wait for.

The classic evidence for encapsulation is a visual illusion that persists even after you learn it is an illusion: the two lines in the Muller-Lyer figure keep looking unequal in length no matter how firmly you know they are equal, because your visual module cannot be talked out of its output by your beliefs.

Crucially, Fodor held that only the input systems are modular, and that central cognition - reasoning, believing, deciding - is precisely not modular but open and unencapsulated, which is why, on his view, it falls prey to the relevance problem and resists scientific understanding.

The rival and much bolder view, called massive modularity, was developed by evolutionary psychologists such as Leda Cosmides and John Tooby and defended philosophically by Peter Carruthers in his 2006 book The Architecture of the Mind.

Massive modularity claims that the whole mind, all the way up through reasoning and decision, is composed of many special-purpose modules, each shaped by evolution to solve a specific recurring problem faced by our ancestors, such as detecting cheaters in social exchange, choosing mates, or avoiding contamination.

On this view there is no single general-purpose thinker at the centre; what feels like general intelligence is the combined output of a large committee of specialised devices, and the appeal of the theory is that it explains how a mind could be built up by natural selection acting on one problem at a time.

The two views frame a real spectrum, from a mostly general mind with a few modular senses to a mind that is modular through and through, and where the truth lies is still debated.


58.4.2 The problem of central, isotropic cognition

This closing sub-section explains the sticking point that keeps the modularity debate alive, and it ties the whole chapter together.

The word isotropic is borrowed from physics, where it means the same in every direction, and Fodor used it to describe a troubling feature of central thinking: in principle, any piece of knowledge you have can be brought to bear on any problem, so information flows in from every direction with no fixed walls.

Central cognition is also what Fodor called Quinean, after the philosopher Willard Van Orman Quine, meaning that whether you should believe something can depend on your entire web of beliefs at once, the way a scientist judging a new theory may have to weigh it against everything else science holds.

These two features - isotropic and Quinean - are exactly what makes central cognition powerful and flexible, and exactly what makes the relevance problem of the previous section so severe, because a system open to everything has no easy way to avoid considering everything.

In systems terms the two camps predict differently: massive modularity predicts that central reasoning should show domain-specific speedups, domain-specific failures, and dissociations where one reasoning domain breaks while others survive, while the general-engine view predicts broadly correlated performance across domains and a single bottleneck that any hard problem competes for.

Fodor's pointed conclusion was that modularity works as an account of the mind's edges, the input systems, precisely because those systems are walled off and limited, but that the same trick cannot be extended to the open, isotropic centre, and that is why he thought the hardest part of the mind was also the least understood.

This is where the massive-modularity camp pushes back hardest, insisting that even the centre is really a collection of specialised modules and that the appearance of open, anything-goes reasoning is a kind of illusion produced by many narrow devices working together, though critics doubt a pile of specialists can ever capture the genuine flexibility of human thought.

The reason a beginner should care, and the reason this makes a fitting close to the chapter, is that the whole matter bears directly on how one would build a mind: a designer who believes in massive modularity will assemble many special-purpose components, while a designer who believes central cognition is genuinely general and isotropic will search for one flexible reasoning engine and must then confront the still-unsolved relevance problem head-on.

That unresolved choice - many specialised machines or one general one, and how either could tame relevance - is one of the central open questions this outline carries forward into its later treatment of complete cognitive architectures, and it is one of the deepest questions facing any project, konnectome among them, that hopes to build a mind rather than merely a clever tool.


58.5 Chapter systems treatment

The process modelled here is structured representation by role-filler binding: composing the thought John loves Mary from vector parts, superimposing the bindings into one pattern, and decomposing that pattern to recover who did what to whom.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Filler vectors, formatted as fixed-length lists of numbers standing for the content elements such as John and Mary, sourced from the system's learned vocabulary.

◦ Role vectors, formatted as fixed-length lists of numbers standing for the structural slots such as lover and loved, sourced from the system's structural vocabulary.

◦ A query role, formatted as a role vector, sourced from whatever process wants to read a slot of the composed thought.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A composite thought pattern, formatted as a matrix that is the sum of the role-filler tensor products, consumed by memory and by downstream inference.

◦ A decoded filler, formatted as the vocabulary item whose vector best matches the unbinding result, consumed by whatever process asked the query.

• STATE.

◦ The fixed role and filler vocabularies, and the current composite pattern; nothing else persists between bind and unbind operations.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Vector dimensionality, which sets capacity: more dimensions allow more near-orthogonal roles and fillers before crosstalk corrupts decoding.

◦ The number of bindings superimposed in one composite, which trades expressiveness against interference.

◦ The similarity threshold below which a decoded filler is rejected as noise.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ If binding is carried out by the rule-firing machinery of a production system, one composition or decomposition step costs on the order of one production cycle, about 50 milliseconds.

◦ Human comprehension of a simple subject-verb-object sentence, the behavioural envelope for composing such a structure, completes within roughly one to two seconds at normal speech rates.

◦ A neural time constant for tensor-product binding specifically: REFUSED, because tensor-product binding is a mathematical proposal whose neural implementation and timing have not been established.

• MODES.

◦ Composition mode, building the composite from role-filler pairs, triggered by the arrival of a structured input to encode.

◦ Decomposition mode, projecting the composite through a query role to recover a filler, triggered by a downstream request to read a slot.

◦ Superposition mode, holding several bindings in one pattern, entered whenever more than one pair is bound and exited when the pattern is cleared.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Crosstalk: with too many bindings or insufficiently distinct vectors, unbinding returns a blend, so John-as-lover bleeds into Mary-as-loved - the vector version of a binding error.

◦ Illusory conjunctions, in which features or fillers from different objects are recombined wrongly, as reported in divided-attention experiments.

◦ Loss of systematicity: a network that never acquires clean role vectors can store familiar combinations yet fail on novel recombinations, which is exactly the failure the SCAN experiments measured.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list called vocabulary that maps each name, John and Mary and Kim, to a four-number filler vector.
Create a list called roles that maps the lover role and the loved role each to a four-number vector, chosen at right angles to each other.
Define a function called bind that takes a filler vector and a role vector and returns their outer product as a four-by-four matrix.
Define a function called unbind that takes a composite matrix and a role vector and returns the vector produced by multiplying the matrix by the role vector.
Define a function called nearest that takes a vector and returns the vocabulary name whose vector has the highest dot product with it.
Create a matrix called thought filled with zeros.
Add the binding of the John vector with the lover role to the thought matrix.
Add the binding of the Mary vector with the loved role to the thought matrix.
Print the name nearest to the result of unbinding the thought with the lover role.
Print the name nearest to the result of unbinding the thought with the loved role.
Create a second thought matrix by binding Mary as lover and John as loved.
Print the decoded slots of the second thought, showing that the same parts in swapped roles yield the reversed sentence.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a dictionary called vocabulary mapping each name to a four-number filler vector.
vocabulary = {"John": [1.0, 0.0, 1.0, 0.0], "Mary": [0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 1.0], "Kim": [1.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0]}
# Create a dictionary called roles mapping each role to a vector, with the two roles at right angles.
roles = {"lover": [1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0], "loved": [0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0]}

# Define a function called bind that returns the outer product of a filler and a role.
def bind(filler, role):
    # Return the matrix whose entry at row i and column j is filler i times role j.
    return [[f * r for r in role] for f in filler]

# Define a function called add_into that adds one matrix into another, entry by entry.
def add_into(target, matrix):
    # For each row index and column index, add the matrix entry to the target entry.
    for i in range(len(target)):
        for j in range(len(target[i])):
            target[i][j] = target[i][j] + matrix[i][j]

# Define a function called unbind that multiplies a composite matrix by a role vector.
def unbind(composite, role):
    # Return the vector whose entry i is the dot product of row i with the role vector.
    return [sum(row[j] * role[j] for j in range(len(role))) for row in composite]

# Define a function called nearest that returns the vocabulary name best matching a vector.
def nearest(vector):
    # Return the name whose filler vector has the highest dot product with the vector.
    return max(vocabulary, key=lambda name: sum(a * b for a, b in zip(vocabulary[name], vector)))

# Define a function called compose that builds a thought matrix from a lover and a loved.
def compose(lover_name, loved_name):
    # Create a four-by-four matrix called thought filled with zeros.
    thought = [[0.0] * 4 for _ in range(4)]
    # Add the binding of the lover filler with the lover role into the thought.
    add_into(thought, bind(vocabulary[lover_name], roles["lover"]))
    # Add the binding of the loved filler with the loved role into the thought.
    add_into(thought, bind(vocabulary[loved_name], roles["loved"]))
    # Return the composed thought matrix.
    return thought

# Compose the thought John loves Mary as one superimposed pattern.
thought_one = compose("John", "Mary")
# Print the filler decoded from the lover slot and from the loved slot of the first thought.
print("thought one:", nearest(unbind(thought_one, roles["lover"])), "loves", nearest(unbind(thought_one, roles["loved"])))
# Compose the reversed thought Mary loves John from the same parts in swapped roles.
thought_two = compose("Mary", "John")
# Print the decoded slots of the second thought, showing the reversed sentence.
print("thought two:", nearest(unbind(thought_two, roles["lover"])), "loves", nearest(unbind(thought_two, roles["loved"])))


================================================================================

PART FOURTEEN. COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURES: UNIFIED THEORIES OF MIND

================================================================================

CHAPTER 59. WHAT A COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE IS (ARCHITECTURE)

This chapter introduces one of the biggest ideas in the science of the mind: the notion of a cognitive architecture.

A cognitive architecture is a proposed blueprint of the fixed machinery of thinking, the part of the mind that stays the same no matter what task you happen to be doing.

Read as an engineered system, an architecture is a specification: it names the memories (the state), the processors that read and write them, the communication channels between them, the tunable parameters, and the clock rate at which the whole assembly runs.

The idea matters because most research studies one small ability at a time, like memory for a list of words or the speed of noticing a light, while a cognitive architecture tries to say how all of those abilities fit together inside a single working mind.

In this chapter we will build up the concept slowly, meet the argument that the mind needs one unified theory rather than a hundred separate ones, list the jobs any mind has to do, and then survey the main families of architectures that researchers have built.


59.1 The concept

This section explains what people mean by the word architecture when they are talking about the mind, and why that word was borrowed from building design and computer engineering.

The short version is that an architecture is the stable framework, and knowledge is the changing content that gets poured into it.


59.1.1 The fixed architecture against the variable knowledge that runs on it

The central idea here is a split between two things: a fixed part that does not change from moment to moment, and a variable part that does.

Think of a modern computer.

The hardware and the operating system are fixed for the whole time you own the machine.

The documents, photos, and programs you load onto it change all the time.

A cognitive architecture is meant to be like the fixed part: the built-in structure and processes of the mind that stay constant across every task, every day, and every topic.

The variable part is your knowledge, meaning the specific facts, skills, and memories you happen to have picked up.

Here technical jargon is worth pausing on: by knowledge, architecture researchers mean any content the mind holds and uses, from a fact like Paris is in France to a skill like how to tie a shoelace.

The claim is that the same fixed machinery lets one person become a chef and another become a violinist, because the machinery is identical but the knowledge loaded onto it differs.

An everyday way to picture it is a kitchen.

The stove, oven, sink, and counters are the fixed architecture.

The ingredients and recipes are the variable knowledge.

You can cook thousands of different meals without ever changing the kitchen, and that is exactly the sort of stability an architecture is supposed to have.

In systems terms, the architecture is the processor design and instruction set, while knowledge is the program and the data: the input to the pair is the task environment, the output is behaviour, and the architecture's own state changes only on the slow timescale of development, while knowledge changes on the fast timescale of learning, minutes to years.

Researchers care about this split because if you can pin down the fixed part, you have found something deep and general about how minds work, rather than just a fact about one particular skill.


59.1.2 The distinction from a single-task model

This sub-section contrasts an architecture with something narrower called a single-task model.

A single-task model is a small theory or computer program built to explain just one behaviour, such as how quickly people read a word, or how they decide whether two shapes are the same.

Single-task models are extremely common in psychology, and they are useful, because focusing on one thing lets you be precise about it.

The weakness is that a mind is not a stack of unrelated gadgets.

The same person who reads words also remembers faces, plans a route home, and feels frustrated in traffic, and all of that happens inside one head using overlapping machinery.

A cognitive architecture is deliberately the opposite of a single-task model: it is meant to run many different tasks using one shared set of parts, so that reading, remembering, and planning all draw on the same memory and the same decision process.

An analogy is the difference between a single kitchen gadget and a whole kitchen.

An egg slicer does exactly one job.

A kitchen can produce breakfast, a birthday cake, and a soup, because its parts combine flexibly.

In systems language, a single-task model is a dedicated circuit with one input format and one output format, while an architecture is a general-purpose platform whose interfaces must accept any task the environment can pose, which is a far stronger requirement on the design.

The test of an architecture, then, is breadth: can this one framework, without being rebuilt, take on a task its designers did not have in mind when they made it.

That breadth is hard to achieve, which is why architectures are ambitious and why relatively few of them exist compared with the huge number of single-task models.


59.1.3 Where an architecture sits among Marr's levels

To place architectures precisely, it helps to use a famous three-way distinction from the vision scientist David Marr, published in his 1982 book Vision.

Marr argued that any information-processing system, including the brain, can and should be described at three separate levels of analysis, and that confusing the levels causes muddled thinking.

The first level is the computational level, which asks what problem is being solved and why: for vision, the goal of recovering the shapes of objects from patterns of light.

The second level is the algorithmic level, which asks what procedure and what representations are used to solve that problem: the specific step-by-step recipe and the form the information takes.

Here representation is jargon meaning a way of standing in for information, such as a list of numbers, a picture, or a symbol.

The third level is the implementation level, which asks how the procedure is physically carried out: in the brain, that means neurons and their connections; in a computer, transistors.

A cognitive architecture lives mainly at Marr's middle level, the algorithmic one, because it specifies the representations the mind uses and the processes that operate on them.

Some architectures reach downward toward the implementation level by trying to match brain regions or by using simulated neurons, and some reach upward by taking seriously what problems the mind evolved to solve.

In systems terms the three levels are the requirements document, the software design, and the hardware, and an architecture is the software design: it fixes data structures and control flow while leaving the physical substrate open.

The useful takeaway for a beginner is that an architecture is not mainly a theory of neurons and not mainly a theory of life goals; it is a theory of the mental machinery in between, the format of thoughts and the operations that shuffle them around.


59.2 Unified theories of cognition

This section introduces the dream that motivated the whole field: the idea that psychology should aim for one grand theory that ties everything together.

The person most associated with this dream is Allen Newell, an American scientist who helped found both artificial intelligence and cognitive psychology.


59.2.1 Newell's argument that cognition needs one theory, not many

In 1990 Allen Newell published a book called Unified Theories of Cognition, based on lectures he had given, and in it he made a pointed complaint about his own field.

His complaint was that psychology had become a heap of small, disconnected findings, each explained by its own little model, with nothing to hold them together.

Newell argued that this was a scientific dead end, because you can always invent a fresh mini-theory for each new experiment, and doing so never forces your ideas to be consistent with each other.

His proposal was that researchers should try to build a single unified theory of cognition, one framework required to account for memory, perception, language, problem solving, and the rest all at once.

The discipline of a unified theory is that every piece has to work with every other piece, so a choice you make to explain memory constrains what you are allowed to say about attention.

This is a debate about method rather than a mechanism, and the two sides predict different things in systems terms: the unified camp predicts that one fixed set of modules and parameters can fit data across many tasks without retuning, while the many-models camp predicts that each task will keep demanding its own free parameters and that forcing one platform will degrade the fits.

Newell did not claim to have finished such a theory; he offered his own architecture, called Soar, as a candidate and an example of the effort, not as the final answer.

It is fair to note that not everyone agreed then or agrees now.

Many psychologists still find focused single-task models more productive, and some doubt that one theory can or should cover everything.

But Newell's challenge reshaped the field, and the very existence of cognitive architectures is largely his legacy.


59.2.2 The functional criteria a mind must satisfy

Newell did not just say build one theory; he tried to say what such a theory would have to explain, by listing the functions a real mind must perform.

The word functional here means defined by what it does rather than what it is made of, so a functional criterion is a job the mind must accomplish, regardless of whether neurons or silicon do it.

Newell offered lists of requirements that a human cognitive architecture would have to satisfy in order to count as genuinely mind-like.

These included things like behaving flexibly as a function of the environment, showing adaptive and goal-directed behaviour, operating in real time, using vast amounts of knowledge, using natural language, and learning from experience.

Read as engineering, this is a requirements specification: real-time operation is a latency budget of a few hundred milliseconds per decision, vast knowledge is a storage and retrieval requirement, and flexibility is a demand that the input interface accept arbitrary task descriptions.

The point of such a list is to raise the bar: a toy model that does one clever trick but cannot learn, cannot use language, and cannot act in real time has not really explained a mind.

By writing the requirements down, Newell turned a vague ambition into a checklist that any proposed architecture could be measured against.

This checklist idea is important because it gives the field a shared standard, so that different research groups building different architectures can at least ask the same questions about each one.


59.2.3 The Newell test as a multi-criterion evaluation

The checklist idea was later sharpened into something now called the Newell Test, in an influential 2003 article by John Anderson and Christian Lebiere in the journal Behavioral and Brain Sciences.

Anderson and Lebiere took Newell's overlapping lists and distilled them into twelve criteria for judging a theory of cognition.

Their twelve were, in plain words: behaving flexibly, adapting behaviour to reach goals, operating in real time, holding up under real-world complexity, using a vast store of knowledge, integrating diverse knowledge, using natural language, learning from the environment, showing development from infancy to adulthood, arising through evolution, and being realizable in the brain, together with dynamic responsiveness to changing situations.

The word multi-criterion simply means judged by many standards at once rather than a single score.

Their key argument was that no theory should be praised or dismissed on one dimension alone; instead each theory should be graded on every criterion, and its pattern of strengths and weaknesses laid bare.

To demonstrate, they graded two rivals: classical connectionism, meaning neural-network style models, and their own architecture ACT-R.

They concluded that connectionism scored well on learning and development but poorly on handling symbols and structured knowledge, while ACT-R scored well precisely because it combined a symbolic level with a sub-symbolic one.

In systems terms the Newell Test is a benchmark suite: instead of one score on one workload, a candidate architecture is run against twelve workloads, and its acceptance report is the full grade sheet.

Whether or not you accept their verdicts, the deeper lesson is the method: honest evaluation means showing where your favourite theory is weak, not just where it shines.


59.3 The functional requirements of any mind

This section walks through the jobs a mind has to do, grouped into a few clusters, so that a beginner can see the full scope of what an architecture must deliver.

Think of it as a job description for a mind, written before we look at any particular candidate for the post.


59.3.1 Memory, learning, perception, and action

At the most basic level, a mind must take in information, hold onto information, improve with experience, and do something in the world.

Perception is the intake: turning raw signals from the eyes, ears, skin, and other senses into usable information about what is out there.

Memory is the holding: keeping information available over time, from a few seconds of holding a phone number in mind up to a lifetime of remembering your childhood home.

Architects usually distinguish a short-term or working memory, which holds a small amount of information you are actively using right now, roughly four chunks for a few seconds unless refreshed, from long-term memory, which stores knowledge more or less permanently.

Learning is the improving: changing the mind's knowledge or skills as a result of experience, so that next time you do better or faster.

Action is the output: moving muscles, speaking, or otherwise affecting the environment based on what you have perceived and decided.

As a system, perception is the input driver running on a timescale of tens to hundreds of milliseconds, working memory is the fast volatile store, long-term memory is the slow persistent store, learning is the background write process, and action is the output driver, and every architecture must implement all five interfaces.

An everyday illustration ties them together: you hear a kettle whistle (perception), recall that this means the water is boiling (memory), get quicker at responding to that sound over the years (learning), and reach out to switch it off (action).


59.3.2 Decision, goal management, and attention under bounded resources

Beyond the basics, a mind must choose what to do, keep track of what it is trying to achieve, and focus its limited capacity wisely.

Decision means selecting one option out of several, such as which route to take or which word to say next.

Goal management means holding and organizing the things you are trying to accomplish, including breaking a big goal like cook dinner into smaller sub-goals like boil the pasta and heat the sauce.

Attention means directing limited processing capacity toward some information and away from the rest, because a mind cannot fully process everything at once.

The crucial phrase is bounded resources, which is jargon for the plain fact that a real mind has limits: limited time, limited memory, limited attention, and limited energy.

This idea is often called bounded rationality, a term from the economist and cognitive scientist Herbert Simon, meaning that people make reasonable decisions within their limits rather than perfect decisions with unlimited thinking.

In systems terms these three are a scheduler: goals form a priority stack, attention is the allocation of a narrow processing channel, and decision is the arbitration step that commits the channel to one option per cycle, on a characteristic timescale of a few hundred milliseconds per deliberate choice.

An architecture that assumed infinite memory or instant, cost-free thinking would be unrealistic, so a good architecture must show how a limited system still manages to act sensibly.

For example, when you walk into a crowded party looking for a friend, you cannot inspect every face at once; attention lets you scan a few at a time, and goal management keeps you searching until you succeed or give up.


59.3.3 Metacognition, motivation, and emotion

The most advanced requirements concern a mind thinking about itself, wanting things, and feeling things.

Metacognition means cognition about cognition, that is, the mind monitoring and controlling its own thinking, such as noticing that you do not understand a sentence and choosing to reread it.

Motivation means the forces that energize and direct behaviour, the reasons a system does anything at all, from hunger to curiosity to the wish to finish a job.

Emotion means states like fear, joy, or frustration that colour thinking, shape priorities, and prepare the body and mind to respond.

For a long time these were treated as outside the core of cognition, sometimes dismissed as messy extras, but most researchers now agree that a complete theory of mind must include them.

The reason is that motivation decides which goals get pursued, emotion rapidly flags what matters and adjusts behaviour, and metacognition lets the system correct and manage itself.

In systems terms, motivation supplies the reward signal that sets goal priorities, emotion is a fast global broadcast that re-tunes parameters like thresholds and gains within seconds, and metacognition is a monitoring loop that reads the system's own performance signals and issues control commands back to it.

It is honest to say this cluster is where architectures are weakest and where researchers most disagree, because feelings and self-awareness are genuinely hard to pin down and measure.

Some architectures, which we will meet later, make motivation and emotion central, while others leave them mostly untouched, and there is no settled consensus yet on the right approach.


59.4 The taxonomy of architectures

A taxonomy is a way of sorting things into groups, the way biologists sort living things into families.

This section gives the standard sorting of cognitive architectures into a few broad families, so you have a map before we tour individual examples.


59.4.1 The symbolic, the emergent, and the hybrid

The most common taxonomy splits architectures into three families based on how they represent and process information: symbolic, emergent, and hybrid.

Symbolic architectures represent knowledge using discrete symbols and explicit rules, much like sentences and if-then instructions, so that a thought is built out of nameable parts you could in principle read off.

An everyday image is a filing cabinet full of written rules and labelled cards; thinking is manipulating those cards according to the rules.

Emergent architectures, also called connectionist or neural, represent knowledge in the pattern of activity and connection strengths across many simple units loosely inspired by neurons, so that a thought is a spread of activity rather than a single symbol.

Here emergent means that intelligent behaviour arises from the interaction of many small, unintelligent parts, none of which contains the whole idea by itself, the way a wave emerges from many water molecules.

Hybrid architectures deliberately combine both styles, using symbols and rules for some jobs and neural-style distributed processing for others, on the bet that the mind itself uses both.

In systems terms the split is a choice of data format and processor: symbolic systems use structured records processed by a matcher, emergent systems use numeric vectors processed by weighted sums, and hybrids define a translation interface between the two formats.

Each family has real strengths and real weaknesses: symbolic systems handle structured reasoning and language cleanly but can be brittle and hard to make learn; emergent systems learn gracefully and tolerate noise but struggle with precise rules and structured symbols; hybrids try to get the best of both, at the cost of greater complexity.

There is no universal agreement on which family is correct, and the three-way split is a useful map rather than a proven fact about the brain.


59.4.2 The forty-year survey and the landscape of the field

To see the whole landscape at once, it helps to look at a large survey published by Iuliia Kotseruba and John Tsotsos, which reviewed roughly forty years of cognitive-architecture research.

Their paper, whose final version appeared in 2020 in the journal Artificial Intelligence Review, examined a curated set of 84 architectures, of which they counted 49 as still actively developed at the time.

They noted that the true number of architectures ever proposed runs into the hundreds, so even a big survey covers only part of a sprawling field.

They organized the field using the same symbolic, emergent, and hybrid families described above, and they compared architectures on core abilities such as perception, attention, action selection, memory, learning, and reasoning.

They also surveyed practical uses, reviewing hundreds of real projects in which architectures had been applied to things like robotics, human-computer interaction, and games.

This sub-section is a piece of history rather than a mechanism, and in systems terms its lesson is a comparison of interface coverage: the survey graded each architecture on which of the standard subsystems it actually implements, and found that no single design yet implements them all well.

Two honest lessons come out of such a survey.

First, the field is large, lively, and fragmented, with many architectures pursuing different bets rather than converging on one winner.

Second, most architectures remain research tools rather than finished theories of the mind, and no single architecture yet meets all of Newell's criteria, so the grand unified theory Newell called for is still a work in progress.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Sensory input from the task environment, arriving as continuous perceptual signals that the architecture's perception subsystem converts into internal representations.

◦ Task instructions and goals, arriving as structured descriptions that are loaded into the goal store.

◦ Reward and feedback signals from the environment, arriving as scalar outcomes that drive the learning subsystem.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Motor commands and speech, sent to the body's effectors, which are the muscles and organs that act on the world.

◦ Behavioural predictions such as reaction times and error rates, consumed by experimenters comparing the architecture against human data.

• STATE.

◦ Working memory holding the current goal, the current situation, and a handful of active items.

◦ Long-term memory holding the accumulated knowledge, both facts and skills.

◦ The fixed architectural structure itself, which by definition does not change with the task.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Working memory capacity, decay rates, learning rates, decision thresholds, and the duration of one processing cycle; each concrete architecture fixes its own values.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ One elementary cognitive cycle: about 50 milliseconds, the grain adopted by the major production-system architectures.

◦ Deliberate decision or simple reaction: roughly 200 to 500 milliseconds.

◦ Working memory span: about four chunks held over seconds.

◦ Knowledge growth: minutes to years, the timescale of learning rather than of the fixed architecture.

• MODES.

◦ Routine mode, in which stored knowledge directly drives behaviour, switching to deliberative mode when stored knowledge is insufficient and the system must search, plan, or subgoal; the trigger is the failure of a direct match between situation and knowledge.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Overload when task demands exceed working memory capacity, producing forgetting of goals and steps; brittleness when knowledge does not cover the situation; and for the science itself, the failure mode is fragmentation, a heap of single-task models with no unifying account.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called long_term_memory that holds knowledge items.
Create a list variable called working_memory with no items.
Create a text variable called goal with initial value the current task goal.
While the goal is not achieved, repeat the following cycle.
    Read the current input from the environment and add it to working_memory.
    Find every knowledge item in long_term_memory whose condition matches working_memory.
    If at least one item matches, do the following.
        Select the best matching item.
        Apply the selected item's action to working_memory and to the environment.
        Remove the matched condition from working_memory, since it was consumed.
    Otherwise, do the following.
        Create a new sub-goal to resolve the missing knowledge.
        Set goal to the new sub-goal.
    Remove from working_memory any item older than the capacity allows.
    Advance the simulated clock by one cycle of 50 milliseconds.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a list variable called long_term_memory holding condition and action pairs.
long_term_memory = [
    # Add a rule: if the kettle whistles, switch it off.
    ("kettle whistles", "switch off kettle"),
    # Add a rule: if the kettle is off, pour the water.
    ("kettle off", "pour water"),
    # Add a rule: if the water is poured, the goal is done.
    ("water poured", "done"),
]

# Create a list variable called percepts holding the stream of inputs.
percepts = ["kettle whistles", "kettle off", "water poured"]

# Create a list variable called working_memory with no items.
working_memory = []

# Create a number variable called clock_ms with initial value zero.
clock_ms = 0

# Create a number variable called capacity with value four chunks.
capacity = 4

# For each percept in the stream, run one architectural cycle.
for percept in percepts:
    # Add the percept to working_memory.
    working_memory.append(percept)
    # Keep only the most recent items up to the capacity.
    working_memory = working_memory[-capacity:]
    # Create a variable called chosen with no value yet.
    chosen = None
    # For each condition and action pair in long_term_memory, test for a match.
    for condition, action in long_term_memory:
        # If the condition is present in working_memory, select this pair.
        if condition in working_memory:
            # Set chosen to the action and stop searching.
            chosen = action
            break
    # Advance the clock by one 50 millisecond cycle.
    clock_ms = clock_ms + 50
    # If a rule was chosen, act; otherwise report an impasse.
    if chosen:
        # Print the time and the action taken.
        print(clock_ms, "ms:", chosen)
        # Remove the matched condition from working_memory, since it was consumed.
        working_memory.remove(condition)
    else:
        # Print the time and the impasse, the trigger for deliberation.
        print(clock_ms, "ms: impasse, create sub-goal")


CHAPTER 60. SYMBOLIC AND PRODUCTION-SYSTEM ARCHITECTURES (ARCHITECTURE)

This chapter looks closely at the symbolic family, and especially at a workhorse design within it called a production system.

A production system is jargon for a style of program built out of many if-then rules, where each rule is called a production, and thinking proceeds by repeatedly finding a rule whose if part matches the current situation and carrying out its then part.

As a system, every production architecture runs the same three-step engine: match the rules against working memory, select among the matching rules, and fire the winner's action, with one pass through the loop taking about 50 milliseconds of simulated human time.

The two most developed and most studied cognitive architectures in the world, Soar and ACT-R, are both production systems, and most of this chapter is devoted to explaining how they work in plain terms.

We will then meet three further production-system architectures, each of which made its own distinctive bet about what matters most in a mind.


60.1 Soar

Soar is one of the two flagship cognitive architectures, first developed in the 1980s by Allen Newell, John Laird, and Paul Rosenbloom, and still actively maintained today, mainly under John Laird.

The guiding idea of Soar is that all intelligent activity can be cast as searching for a way to reach a goal, and that a small set of uniform mechanisms can carry out that search across every kind of task.


60.1.1 Problem spaces and the decision cycle

Soar frames every task as movement through a problem space, which is jargon for the set of all situations you could be in plus the actions that move you between them.

A simple example is a maze: the problem space is every spot you could stand and every step you could take, and solving the maze means finding a path through that space from start to goal.

In Soar, the current situation is called a state, and the actions that change one state into another are called operators.

Soar runs continuously through a repeating loop called the decision cycle, which you can think of as the heartbeat of the system.

Modern descriptions break each decision cycle into phases: taking in new input from the senses, proposing which operators are relevant right now, comparing and selecting one operator, applying it to change the state, and sending any output to the muscles or effectors.

The comparisons in the selection phase are made using preferences, which are bits of knowledge saying things like this operator is better than that one, and Soar gathers all such preferences before committing to a choice.

In systems terms the decision cycle is a pipeline whose input is the sensory buffer, whose output is one selected operator plus any motor commands, whose state is the working-memory description of the current problem-space state, and whose characteristic period is on the order of 50 milliseconds per cycle when Soar is used to model human timing.

The important beginner takeaway is that Soar never chooses blindly; on every cycle it lets all of its relevant knowledge speak, then picks the operator that its knowledge most supports.


60.1.2 Impasses and automatic subgoaling

Sometimes Soar's knowledge is not enough to make a clean choice, and this is where one of its most elegant ideas comes in.

When the available preferences do not point to a single best operator, whether because none is proposed, several are tied, or the choice is contradictory, Soar reaches what it calls an impasse.

An impasse is simply a moment of being stuck, the mental equivalent of pausing because you do not know what to do next.

Instead of crashing or guessing, Soar responds by automatically creating a new sub-goal whose whole purpose is to resolve the impasse, a process called automatic subgoaling.

In plain terms, when Soar cannot decide what to do, it sets itself a smaller problem, namely figure out what to do, and it attacks that smaller problem with exactly the same decision cycle and problem-space search it uses for everything else.

As a mechanism, the impasse is an exception handler: its input is a failed selection phase, its output is a new goal pushed onto a goal stack, and its timescale is immediate, one cycle, though resolving the sub-goal may take many cycles of search.

This is powerful because it gives Soar a uniform account of many advanced abilities: planning, reasoning about its own choices, and breaking hard problems into easier ones all fall out of the same impasse-and-subgoal machinery.

An everyday parallel: if you are cooking and suddenly cannot decide which pan to use, you stop and pose a little side question, which pan is right for this, solve that, and then continue with the main recipe.

Soar makes that stop-and-solve-a-side-problem move a built-in, automatic feature of the whole system.


60.1.3 Chunking, reinforcement learning, and the memory systems

Soar would be slow if it had to reason its way through the same impasse every time, so it learns, and its original and most famous learning mechanism is called chunking.

Chunking works like this: when Soar resolves an impasse in a sub-goal, it records a new rule that captures the lesson learned, linking the situation that caused the impasse to the answer that resolved it.

The next time a similar situation arises, that new rule fires immediately and there is no impasse at all, so effortful problem solving gradually turns into automatic, fast responding.

This mirrors human experience: a beginner driver thinks hard about every gear change, while an expert just does it, because practice has compiled the deliberate steps into automatic skill.

Newer versions of Soar add reinforcement learning, which is jargon for learning from rewards and punishments by adjusting the value attached to choices based on how well they turned out.

Chunking and reinforcement learning complement each other: chunking creates new rules to handle situations, and reinforcement learning gradually tunes the preferences among competing operators so that the more rewarding ones win out over time.

In systems terms, chunking takes a resolved sub-goal trace as input and writes a new production to procedural memory as output, a one-shot compilation, while reinforcement learning takes reward signals as input and makes small numeric updates to operator preferences over many trials.

Modern Soar also contains several distinct long-term memories, each mirroring a kind of human memory.

There is procedural memory, holding the if-then rules for how to do things; semantic memory, holding general facts about the world; and episodic memory, holding records of specific past experiences, like a diary of what happened and when.

All of these feed the same central decision cycle, so the takeaway is that Soar is not one trick but a coordinated set of memories and learning mechanisms wrapped around a single, uniform way of making decisions.


60.2 ACT-R

ACT-R is the other flagship cognitive architecture, developed over several decades chiefly by John Anderson at Carnegie Mellon University.

The name stands for Adaptive Control of Thought - Rational, and its guiding idea is that the mind is finely tuned by experience to the statistics of the environment, so that its behaviour is rational given what it has encountered.

Where Soar emphasizes uniform search, ACT-R emphasizes a modular design closely tied to the brain and a careful account of the timing and probability of behaviour.


60.2.1 The modules, the buffers, and their mapping to the brain

ACT-R pictures the mind as a set of separate modules, each specialized for a different job and each thought to correspond to particular regions of the brain.

There are perceptual modules, such as a visual module for seeing and an aural module for hearing, and motor modules, such as a manual module for hand movements and a vocal module for speech.

There are two central memory modules: a declarative module holding facts and a procedural module holding rules, which we will detail shortly.

There are also modules for tracking the current problem state and control state, which keep track of what the system is working on.

Crucially, the modules do not talk to each other directly; each communicates through a small holding area called a buffer that can contain only one item at a time.

This one-item-at-a-time limit is ACT-R's way of building in the narrowness of human thought, the fact that we can only focus on so little at once, and it is a major source of the architecture's realism.

A central procedural system watches the contents of all the buffers and coordinates the whole system by firing rules based on what it sees there.

In systems terms the buffers are the architecture's bus: each module runs in parallel on its own internal timescale, but the modules exchange information only through single-slot registers, so the bus is the bottleneck that serializes thought.

A distinctive feature of ACT-R is that its modules are mapped onto specific brain areas: for instance the declarative module is associated with regions around the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, the procedural module with the basal ganglia deep in the brain, and the visual and manual modules with the corresponding sensory and motor areas.

This brain mapping lets researchers make and test predictions against brain-imaging data, giving ACT-R an unusually direct bridge from a psychological theory down toward the biology.


60.2.2 Declarative chunks and procedural rules

ACT-R divides long-term knowledge into two kinds, matching a distinction psychologists draw between knowing that and knowing how.

Declarative knowledge is knowing that, the facts and memories you could in principle state out loud, and ACT-R stores each such fact as a small record-like structure called a chunk.

A chunk might encode a fact like four plus three equals seven, or a memory like the meeting was on Tuesday, bundling together a few related pieces of information into one unit.

Beware that ACT-R uses the word chunk for a stored fact, which is different from Soar's use of chunking for learning a new rule; the shared word is a historical accident, and the two ideas are not the same.

Procedural knowledge is knowing how, the skills for doing things, and ACT-R stores these as production rules, each an if-then statement that inspects the buffers and, if its conditions match, takes an action such as retrieving a fact or moving a hand.

Only one production rule fires at a time, and firing one takes a fixed small amount of simulated time, 50 milliseconds by default, about a twentieth of a second, which is part of how ACT-R predicts how long tasks take.

So in ACT-R, thinking is a chain of single rule firings, each of which reads the current mental state from the buffers and updates it, gradually retrieving facts and issuing actions until the goal is met.

As a system, a production's input is the buffer contents, its output is a set of buffer requests such as retrieve this fact or press this key, and the timescale is fixed at one 50 millisecond firing plus whatever latency the requested module adds.

This clean split between factual chunks and procedural rules makes ACT-R models both readable and testable, because a modeller can point to exactly which facts and which skills are being used.


60.2.3 The subsymbolic layer: activation, utility, and the learning equations

Above we described ACT-R's symbolic level, the discrete chunks and rules; but ACT-R also has a subsymbolic level, and this is what gives it much of its power and precision.

Subsymbolic means below the level of named symbols: instead of a fact simply being present or absent, each chunk and each rule carries continuous numerical quantities that govern how it behaves.

For declarative chunks, the key quantity is activation, a number reflecting how likely and how useful that fact is right now, computed from how often and how recently it has been used plus how well it fits the current context.

The base-level part of activation is computed from the history of uses: each past use contributes an amount that decays as a power of the time since that use, with a decay exponent whose standard value is 0.5, and the contributions are summed and passed through a logarithm.

Activation has concrete, testable consequences: a chunk with higher activation is retrieved faster and more reliably, while a chunk with activation below a retrieval threshold is slow to come to mind or fails to be retrieved at all, which is ACT-R's account of forgetting.

This directly models everyday memory: a fact you use daily springs to mind instantly, while one you have not thought about in years is slow to surface or simply will not come, exactly as low activation predicts.

For procedural rules, the key quantity is utility, a number summarizing how rewarding it has been to use that rule in the past, so that when several rules could fire, the one with the highest utility, plus a little noise, tends to win; this noisy competition is ACT-R's conflict resolution, the mechanism that picks one rule when several match.

Both quantities change through learning equations, which are mathematical formulas that update activation and utility with experience: activation rises with practice and decays with disuse, and utility is adjusted toward the rewards that actually followed each choice, a form of reinforcement learning.

In systems terms the subsymbolic layer is a numeric control plane over the symbolic data plane: its inputs are usage events and rewards, its outputs are retrieval latencies, retrieval failures, and rule choices, and its timescales run from the tens of milliseconds of a single retrieval to the days of slow decay.

The reason this matters is that the equations let ACT-R produce precise numbers, predicted reaction times in fractions of a second and predicted error rates as percentages, which can be checked directly against how real people perform.

That combination of a readable symbolic story on top and exact quantitative predictions underneath is the heart of why ACT-R has been so widely used across psychology.


60.3 The other production-system architectures

Soar and ACT-R are the giants, but they are not the only production-system architectures, and this section introduces three others, each of which pushed hard on a particular question.

Meeting them shows that the symbolic family is a spread of different bets, not a single design.


60.3.1 EPIC and the parallel peripheral processors

EPIC, which stands for Executive-Process Interactive Control, was developed in the 1990s by David Kieras and David Meyer to answer one main question: how do people do two things at once.

Its distinctive bet is on parallelism in the peripheral systems, meaning the sensory and motor machinery that surrounds central thought.

The word peripheral here means the outer processors that handle perception and movement, as opposed to the central processor that handles reasoning, by analogy with a computer's peripherals like its keyboard and printer.

EPIC surrounds a central production-rule processor with several perceptual and motor processors, for vision, hearing, hands, and speech, and crucially it lets all of these run at the same time rather than one after another.

Even its central cognitive processor is unusual in that it can fire many production rules in parallel on each cycle, rather than the strictly one-at-a-time firing of ACT-R, while keeping the cycle itself at the standard 50 millisecond grain.

Because so much runs in parallel, EPIC predicts that the true bottleneck in doing two tasks at once is often not raw thinking capacity but the physical limits of the peripherals, for example that you have only one pair of eyes and two hands, plus the strategies people use to schedule those shared resources.

In systems terms EPIC's inputs are simulated visual and auditory events, its outputs are timed motor acts, its state is distributed across independently running processors, and its scientific output is a schedule, a millisecond-level timeline showing where the parallel streams collide on shared effectors.

EPIC has been especially influential in human-computer interaction, where it is used to predict how long skilled users take to operate an interface and where the real slow points lie.

The lasting lesson from EPIC is that a great deal of the structure of human multitasking comes from the body and the senses, not only from a central thinking engine.


60.3.2 PRODIGY and the integration of planning with learning

PRODIGY was a research architecture developed from the mid-1980s at Carnegie Mellon University, associated with Jaime Carbonell, Manuela Veloso, and colleagues, and its central concern was planning.

Planning is jargon for working out a sequence of actions in advance that will get you from a starting situation to a goal, like plotting all the moves to solve a puzzle before making the first one.

PRODIGY's core planning method was means-ends analysis, an old and intuitive strategy that repeatedly asks what is the difference between where I am and where I want to be, and then picks an action that reduces that difference.

The distinctive bet of PRODIGY was to weld planning tightly together with learning, so that the system did not just make plans but got better at making them over time.

At each point where the planner had to make a choice, it could learn search-control rules, which are rules that guide future choices so the planner does not repeat the same wasted effort.

Importantly, PRODIGY learned from failures as well as successes: when a chosen path led to a dead end, it analyzed why and formed a rule to avoid that mistake in similar situations later.

It supported several learning methods at once, all sharing the common purpose of making planning faster and smarter with experience.

As a system, the planner's input is a start state and a goal description, its output is an action sequence, its state is the search tree explored so far, and the learner sits beside it consuming search traces and publishing control rules that prune future search, so planning time falls with experience.

The lasting lesson from PRODIGY is that planning and learning are natural partners, because a planner that remembers what worked and what failed steadily turns slow deliberation into quick, informed choices.


60.3.3 ICARUS and the architecture for physical agents

ICARUS is a cognitive architecture developed chiefly by Pat Langley and Dongkyu Choi, and its guiding concern is agents that live and act in the physical world, whether real robots or simulated bodies.

An agent is jargon for any system that perceives its surroundings and acts on them to pursue goals, and a physical agent is one whose actions move a body through an environment rather than just shuffling abstract symbols.

ICARUS's distinctive bet is that perception and action should be first-class parts of the architecture, tightly bound to its knowledge, rather than added on at the edges.

It organizes knowledge into two matching kinds: concepts, which describe situations the agent can recognize in the world, such as an object being on top of another, and skills, which describe the actions the agent can take to achieve goals.

Both concepts and skills are arranged in hierarchies, meaning big ones are built from smaller ones, so a complex skill like clear the table is composed of simpler skills like pick up and put down.

On every cycle ICARUS perceives the current scene, recognizes which concepts are true of it, and then selects and executes skills to move toward its goals, blending moment-to-moment reactive behaviour with longer-range problem solving when needed.

In systems terms each ICARUS cycle takes a perceptual snapshot as input, publishes motor commands as output, and holds as state the set of concepts currently believed true plus the active goal and skill path, with the cycle repeating fast enough to keep pace with a changing physical scene.

This tight loop between recognizing the world and acting in it is what makes ICARUS well suited to embodied tasks, where an agent must continually keep its thoughts in step with a changing physical situation.

The lasting lesson from ICARUS is that for a mind attached to a body, perception, concepts, and skills have to be woven together from the ground up, because such an agent cannot afford to treat thinking and acting as separate stages.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Perceptual encodings placed into working memory or into perceptual buffers by the vision, hearing, and other input modules.

◦ The current goal and problem state, held as structured symbolic elements in working memory.

◦ Reward signals from the environment or the task, consumed by the utility and preference learning equations.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ One selected production firing or operator application per cycle, updating working memory.

◦ Motor and speech commands sent to effector modules, and in modelling use, predicted reaction times and error rates for comparison with human data.

◦ Newly learned rules, written into procedural memory by chunking or rule compilation.

• STATE.

◦ Working memory or the buffer set, holding the current symbolic description of the situation.

◦ Procedural memory of if-then productions, declarative memory of fact chunks, and in Soar also episodic and semantic stores.

◦ The goal stack of active goals and sub-goals.

◦ Subsymbolic quantities: activation values on chunks, utility or preference values on rules.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Cycle time, default 50 milliseconds per production firing.

◦ Base-level decay exponent, standard value 0.5 in ACT-R.

◦ Retrieval threshold and latency scaling factor for declarative memory.

◦ Utility noise level and utility learning rate for conflict resolution.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ One production cycle: about 50 milliseconds.

◦ A declarative retrieval: tens to hundreds of milliseconds, lengthening as activation falls.

◦ A simple keypress through a motor module: on the order of 200 to 300 milliseconds from stimulus to response in fitted models.

◦ Base-level activation decay: hours to days for rarely used chunks, following the power-law decay with exponent 0.5.

• MODES.

◦ Routine firing mode, one matched rule per cycle, switching in Soar to impasse mode with automatic subgoaling when preferences fail to select a unique operator; the trigger is a tie, a conflict, or no proposed operator.

◦ Deliberate novice mode versus compiled expert mode; the trigger for the transition is learning, chunking in Soar or production compilation and utility tuning in ACT-R.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Retrieval failure and slowed retrieval when activation decays below threshold, modelling forgetting.

◦ Goal loss under interruption because the goal state is a single fragile structure.

◦ Brittleness when no production matches a novel situation, and errors of habit when a high-utility rule fires in a context where it is wrong.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called use_times holding the past times each fact was used.
Create a number variable called decay with value 0.5.
Create a number variable called threshold with value 0.0.
Define a function called activation that takes a fact and the current time.
    Create a number variable called total with initial value zero.
    For each past use time of the fact, calculate the age as the current time minus the use time, raise the age to the power of negative decay, and add the result to total.
    Return the logarithm of total.
While the goal is not achieved, repeat the production cycle.
    Find every production whose condition matches the buffers.
    For each matching production, calculate its utility plus a small random noise value.
    Select the production with the highest noisy utility.
    Fire the selected production and advance the clock by 50 milliseconds.
    If the fired production requests a retrieval, do the following.
        Calculate the activation of each candidate fact at the current time.
        If the best activation is above threshold, place that fact in the retrieval buffer.
        Otherwise, report a retrieval failure.
    If a reward arrives, move each fired production's utility a small step toward the reward.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Bring in the math and random modules.
import math, random

# Create a dictionary of facts, each with its list of past use times in seconds.
facts = {"7+6=13": [10.0, 60.0, 110.0], "8+5=13": [30.0]}

# Create a number variable called decay with value 0.5.
decay = 0.5

# Create a number variable called threshold with value negative 1.0.
threshold = -1.0

# Define a function called activation taking use times and the current time.
def activation(times, now):
    # Sum each past use's contribution, the age raised to the power of negative decay.
    total = sum((now - t) ** (-decay) for t in times if now > t)
    # Return the logarithm of the total, or negative infinity if nothing was summed.
    return math.log(total) if total > 0 else float("-inf")

# Create a dictionary of productions, each with a utility value.
utilities = {"retrieve-sum": 4.0, "count-up": 2.0}

# Create a number variable called clock with initial value 120 seconds.
clock = 120.0

# Repeat the match, select, fire cycle three times.
for cycle in range(3):
    # For each production, calculate its utility plus Gaussian noise.
    noisy = {p: u + random.gauss(0, 0.5) for p, u in utilities.items()}
    # Select the production with the highest noisy utility.
    winner = max(noisy, key=noisy.get)
    # Advance the clock by one 50 millisecond firing.
    clock = clock + 0.050
    # Print the cycle number and the winning production.
    print("cycle", cycle, "fired", winner)
    # If the winner requests a retrieval, run the declarative retrieval.
    if winner == "retrieve-sum":
        # Calculate the activation of each fact at the current time.
        acts = {f: activation(ts, clock) for f, ts in facts.items()}
        # Select the fact with the highest activation.
        best = max(acts, key=acts.get)
        # If the best activation is above threshold, retrieve it; otherwise fail.
        if acts[best] > threshold:
            # Print the retrieved fact and its activation.
            print("  retrieved", best, "activation", round(acts[best], 2))
        else:
            # Print a retrieval failure.
            print("  retrieval failure")
        # Reward the successful strategy by moving its utility toward the reward of 5.
        utilities[winner] += 0.2 * (5.0 - utilities[winner])


CHAPTER 61. CONNECTIONIST AND EMERGENT ARCHITECTURES (ARCHITECTURE)

This chapter turns to the second great family, the emergent or connectionist architectures, which take their inspiration from the brain rather than from the logic of rules.

Connectionist is jargon for an approach that models the mind as a network of many simple, neuron-like units that pass signals along weighted connections, so that knowledge lives in the pattern of connection strengths rather than in explicit written rules.

As systems, these architectures replace the matcher and the rule store with a different engine: the state is a vector of unit activities, the parameters are the connection weights, one processing step is a weighted sum passed through a squashing function, and learning is a slow background process that adjusts the weights.

The big promise of this family is that intelligence can emerge from the cooperation of many simple parts, and that such systems learn naturally from experience and cope gracefully with noise and damage.

We will start with the founding tradition, then examine three influential examples that range from brain-detailed models to systems that recover the power of symbols using vectors of numbers.


61.1 The parallel-distributed-processing tradition

This section introduces the intellectual movement that revived neural-network thinking in psychology in the 1980s, known as parallel distributed processing.

Its ideas underpin everything else in this chapter and much of modern artificial intelligence too.


61.1.1 The founding principles

Parallel distributed processing, usually shortened to PDP, was launched into the mainstream by a two-volume book of that name published in 1986 by David Rumelhart, James McClelland, and a group of collaborators known as the PDP Research Group.

The name captures two founding principles.

Parallel means that many simple processing units work at the same time, side by side, rather than one step after another as in a conventional program.

Distributed means that any single piece of knowledge is spread across the pattern of activity over many units, and each unit takes part in representing many different pieces of knowledge, so there is no single spot where one idea is stored.

The units are loosely modelled on neurons: each receives numerical signals from others, adds them up, and passes on a signal of its own, and the connections between units carry weights, which are numbers that set how strongly one unit influences another.

Knowledge in such a network is nothing but the whole set of connection weights, and learning is the gradual adjustment of those weights, most famously by a procedure called backpropagation that nudges each weight to reduce the network's errors.

In systems terms a PDP network's input is a vector clamped onto its input units, its output is the vector that settles on its output units, its state is the activity pattern, its parameters are the weights, and its two timescales are fast settling of activity within a trial and slow weight change across many trials.

Distributed representation brings real advantages: the network degrades gracefully, meaning it still works reasonably if some units are damaged, and it generalizes naturally, treating similar inputs similarly because they produce overlapping patterns of activity.

These properties feel brain-like, since real brains also keep working after minor damage and naturally see the resemblance between similar things, which is a large part of why the PDP approach was so influential.


61.1.2 Emergence as an explanatory strategy

The deepest idea in this tradition is emergence, and it represents a genuinely different way of explaining behaviour.

Emergence means that a complex, orderly behaviour arises from the interaction of many simple parts following simple local rules, without any part containing or directing the overall behaviour.

A natural example is a flock of birds: each bird only follows a few simple rules about its neighbours, yet the flock as a whole sweeps and turns in graceful coordinated shapes that no single bird planned.

Applied to the mind, the emergentist strategy says we should not write down the rule of grammar or the rule of categorization directly; instead we should build a network of simple units and let the rule-like behaviour emerge from learning.

This contrasts sharply with the symbolic approach of the previous chapter, where rules are stated explicitly and stored as such.

A celebrated example is the past tense of English verbs: rather than programming in the rule add -ed, PDP researchers trained a network on many examples, and the network came to produce regular and irregular past tenses, and even to make the sort of overgeneralization errors children make, such as saying goed, all without any explicit rule.

The pay-off of emergence as an explanatory strategy is that it can capture the soft, graded, exception-riddled character of much human behaviour, which rigid rules often handle badly.

This sub-section describes a debate as much as a mechanism, and the two sides predict differently in systems terms: the emergentist side predicts graded, similarity-driven behaviour with soft failures and exception effects, while the symbolic side predicts sharp, systematic generalization to any well-formed input regardless of similarity to training, and human data show a mixture, which is why the debate has run since the 1980s without settling.

The honest counterpoint, which symbolic researchers press, is that some human abilities, especially structured reasoning and language, look genuinely rule-like and systematic, and it remains debated how fully emergence alone can account for them.


61.2 Leabra

Leabra is a connectionist architecture developed by Randall O'Reilly and colleagues that aims for strong biological realism, meaning it tries to respect what is actually known about how real neurons and brain circuits behave.

Its name is an acronym for Local, Error-driven and Associative, Biologically realistic Algorithm, which already advertises its central bet: that a single network can combine several learning principles in a brain-plausible way.


61.2.1 The combination of error-driven and Hebbian learning

Leabra's signature idea is that the brain uses two complementary kinds of learning at once, and that a realistic model should include both.

The first kind is Hebbian learning, named after the psychologist Donald Hebb, and often summarized as neurons that fire together wire together, meaning that when two units are active at the same time the connection between them strengthens.

Hebbian learning is good at soaking up the statistical structure of the world, noticing which things tend to occur together, but on its own it is undirected and does not aim at any particular outcome.

The second kind is error-driven learning, in which connection weights are adjusted specifically to reduce the difference between what the network produced and what it should have produced, so learning is steered toward correct answers.

Error-driven learning is powerful and goal-directed but, in its pure textbook form, is often criticized as biologically unrealistic.

Leabra's contribution is to blend the two, so that every weight change is a mix of a Hebbian component that captures co-occurrence and an error-driven component that pushes toward correct performance, using a biologically motivated version of error-driven learning that avoids the least realistic assumptions.

As a system, each Leabra weight update takes as input the local activities of the two connected units in an expectation phase and an outcome phase, and publishes a small weight change that is a weighted mix of the Hebbian and error terms, with a learning-rate parameter setting the step size and inhibitory competition constraining how many units may be active.

Leabra also builds in other brain-like features, notably inhibitory competition among units, which keeps only a small fraction of units active at once, producing what are called sparse representations that resemble the selective firing seen in real cortex.

The takeaway is that Leabra tries to be both a working learning system and a faithful model of cortical biology, rather than sacrificing one goal for the other.


61.2.2 The prefrontal and basal-ganglia model of working memory and control

Leabra's most influential application is a detailed model of how the brain holds information in mind and controls its own thinking, built around two brain structures.

The prefrontal cortex is the front part of the brain, just behind the forehead, long associated with working memory and planning; working memory is the ability to keep information active and available for a short time while you use it.

The basal ganglia are a cluster of structures deep in the brain, known to be involved in selecting actions and in learning from rewards.

O'Reilly and Michael Frank built a model, published in 2006 and often called PBWM, for Prefrontal cortex, Basal ganglia, Working Memory, that explains how these two structures cooperate to manage working memory.

The core insight is a gating mechanism: the prefrontal cortex can hold information stably over time, and the basal ganglia act like a gate that decides when to let new information in and when to protect what is already being held.

An everyday analogy is a doorway with a guard: the prefrontal cortex is a room where you keep the things you are currently thinking about, and the basal ganglia are the guard who decides which new items to admit and when to keep the door shut so current contents are not disturbed.

Crucially, the model learns when to open and close this gate through reinforcement learning driven by reward signals, believed in the brain to be carried by the chemical dopamine, so the system discovers on its own the right moments to update its working memory.

In systems terms PBWM is a set of gated registers: the inputs are the current stimulus and a reward signal, the outputs are task responses, the state is the maintained prefrontal activity pattern, the gate is a binary update-or-protect mode per register, and the trigger for switching modes is the learned gating signal from the basal ganglia.

This matters because controlled, flexible behaviour, the ability to hold a goal in mind, ignore distractions, and update when appropriate, is one of the hardest things for any model to capture, and the prefrontal and basal-ganglia account gives a concrete, biologically grounded story of how it could work.


61.3 The neural engineering framework and Spaun

This section covers an approach that tries to have it both ways: to build models out of realistic spiking neurons while still performing the structured, symbol-like tasks that connectionist models often struggle with.

It was developed principally by Chris Eliasmith and colleagues at the University of Waterloo, and it culminated in a famous large-scale brain model called Spaun.


61.3.1 The three principles of representation, transformation, and dynamics

The foundation is the Neural Engineering Framework, usually shortened to NEF, a set of mathematical methods for building networks of simulated neurons that carry out desired computations.

Spiking neurons is jargon for model neurons that communicate with brief electrical pulses called spikes, just as real neurons do, rather than with the smooth numerical signals of simpler network models, which makes NEF models unusually close to real brain activity.

The NEF rests on three principles.

The first is representation: a group of neurons can stand for a mathematical vector, which is just an ordered list of numbers, through the combined pattern of their spiking, so that populations of cells encode quantities like a position or a colour.

The second is transformation: the connections between two groups of neurons can be set so that the receiving group computes some function of what the sending group represents, for example adding two quantities or comparing them, so that computation is built right into the wiring.

The third is dynamics: by wiring a group of neurons back onto itself with recurrent connections, the represented values can change over time in controlled ways, which lets the network hold information, build up quantities, and generate movements that unfold in time.

Together these three principles amount to a recipe: decide what quantities your neurons should represent, decide what computations should transform them, and decide how they should evolve over time, and the NEF tells you how to set the connections to achieve it.

In systems terms the NEF is a compiler: the source program is a set of vector variables, functions, and differential equations, the target hardware is a population of spiking neurons whose membranes and synapses filter signals on timescales of a few milliseconds to a few tens of milliseconds, and the compiler's output is the connection weights that make the neurons implement the program.

The importance of the NEF is that it turns building a spiking brain model from guesswork into something like engineering, which is exactly what its name promises.


61.3.2 The semantic pointer architecture

On top of the NEF sits the Semantic Pointer Architecture, usually shortened to SPA, which is Eliasmith's proposal for how such neural machinery can support full-blown cognition.

The key concept is the semantic pointer, and the phrase is worth unpacking slowly.

A pointer, borrowed from computer science, is a small item that stands in for a larger body of information and can be used to fetch it, rather like a library call number that points to a whole book.

Semantic means related to meaning, so a semantic pointer is a compact vector that both stands in for a rich concept, so it can be shuffled around cheaply like a symbol, and still carries a compressed trace of the concept's meaning, so it is not an arbitrary tag.

This gives SPA the best of both worlds: semantic pointers can be combined and manipulated with the structured operations symbols allow, yet they are patterns of neural activity built and processed by the NEF, keeping the model biologically grounded.

To combine semantic pointers into structured thoughts, SPA uses mathematical operations on the vectors that can bind items together, for instance tying the role subject to the filler dog, and later pull them apart again, which lets the system represent structured propositions rather than isolated concepts; in the SPA the binding operation is circular convolution, the same operation we will meet in the vector-symbolic section below.

As a system, the SPA's inputs are perceptual vectors compressed into pointers, its outputs are pointers decompressed into motor programs, its state is the set of pointers currently active in its buffers, and an action-selection loop modelled on the basal ganglia routes pointers between buffers on a timescale comparable to the production cycles of the previous chapter.

The importance of SPA is that it offers a concrete answer to a long-standing challenge: how a brain made of neurons could nonetheless carry out the systematic, structured, symbol-like reasoning that human thought clearly involves.


61.3.3 Spaun as a large-scale functioning brain model

Spaun, which stands for Semantic Pointer Architecture Unified Network, is the showpiece that put all of these ideas together, unveiled in 2012 by Eliasmith and colleagues and reported in the journal Science.

Spaun is a simulated brain built from about 2.5 million spiking neurons, wired up according to the NEF and the SPA and organized into components loosely corresponding to real brain areas, including a single eye for input and a simulated arm for drawing its answers.

What made Spaun striking is that this one fixed model, without being rewired between tasks, could perform eight different tasks, including copying handwritten digits, recognizing and continuing number patterns, remembering lists, doing simple arithmetic, and answering questions, switching between them based on instructions given through its eye.

That breadth is exactly the unified, multi-task behaviour that cognitive architectures aim for, achieved here entirely with simulated spiking neurons producing physical actions through a modelled arm.

Spaun also reproduced human-like details, such as remembering the beginning and end of a list better than the middle, and its neurons behaved in ways comparable to recordings from real brains, giving it a rare double grounding in both behaviour and biology.

In systems terms Spaun's input interface is a 28 by 28 pixel image stream into its eye, its output interface is joint commands to a two-joint arm, its state is the spiking activity and working-memory pointers across its modelled brain regions, and its mode switch is the instruction digit it sees, which reconfigures the routing of pointers without any rewiring.

It is fair to keep the achievement in proportion: Spaun is far smaller and far less capable than a real brain, which has tens of billions of neurons, it is slow to simulate, and it handles only a fixed set of tasks, so it is a landmark demonstration rather than a finished model of the mind.

Even so, Spaun stands as one of the most complete demonstrations that a single, biologically grounded neural model can perceive, remember, reason, and act, and it remains a reference point for the ambition of building a working brain.


61.4 Vector-symbolic architectures and hyperdimensional computing

This final section covers a family of methods that pursue the same goal as the semantic pointer idea, structured symbol-like reasoning in a distributed, brain-friendly form, but as a general mathematical toolkit in its own right.

These go by two names, vector symbolic architectures and hyperdimensional computing, and they are now often discussed together as one field.


61.4.1 High-dimensional vectors and the algebra of binding and bundling

The starting point is to represent every concept as a very long list of numbers, a high-dimensional vector, often with thousands of elements, which is where the word hyperdimensional comes from.

A striking mathematical fact makes this work: in spaces of very high dimension, two randomly chosen vectors are almost always nearly unrelated to each other, so you can hand out a distinct random vector to each concept and be confident they will not accidentally clash.

On these vectors the approach defines a small algebra, meaning a handful of operations you can perform to combine and manipulate them, and two operations are central.

Bundling, also called superposition, combines several vectors into one, typically by adding them element by element, and it produces a result that is similar to each of its ingredients, so bundling is how you represent a set or a collection, the vector equivalent of a bag holding several items.

Binding combines two vectors into a new one that is dissimilar to both, and it is how you tie two things together into a pair, for example linking a role like colour to a filler like red, so binding is the vector equivalent of gluing two items into a labelled unit.

Binding comes with an inverse, an unbinding operation that lets you recover one member of a bound pair if you know the other, which is what makes the structures useful rather than one-way scrambles.

With just these operations, and one more that reorders a vector's elements to mark sequence, you can build up structured records, lists, trees, and simple sentences, all as single vectors of the same fixed length, which can then be compared for similarity by a simple numerical measure.

In systems terms the algebra is an instruction set over one fixed data type: the inputs to each operation are vectors of a set dimension, the output is a vector of the same dimension, every operation is a single parallel pass over the elements, and the readout operation is a similarity comparison against a stored codebook of known concept vectors.

The beginner takeaway is that this is a way of doing the structured, symbol-like work of thought using nothing but big vectors of numbers and a few tidy operations on them.


61.4.2 The family of models and their binding operators

Vector symbolic architectures are not a single model but a family, and the members differ mainly in what kind of vectors they use and, above all, in how they define the binding operation.

The term vector symbolic architecture was coined by the psychologist Ross Gayler, while the closely related term hyperdimensional computing was introduced by the computer scientist and neuroscientist Pentti Kanerva, and today the two labels name overlapping views of the same family.

One influential member is Holographic Reduced Representations, developed by Tony Plate in the 1990s, which uses vectors of ordinary numbers and binds them with a mathematical operation called circular convolution, a way of blending two lists into one of the same length.

Another member, often called the Multiply-Add-Permute scheme associated with Gayler, uses vectors whose entries are just plus one or minus one and binds them by simply multiplying the two vectors element by element, which is fast and easy to compute.

Kanerva's Binary Spatter Codes use vectors of zeros and ones and bind them with the exclusive-or operation, a basic logical operation that returns one when two inputs differ, again giving a cheap and hardware-friendly binding.

The reason there are several schemes is that each strikes a different balance among ease of computation, how cleanly items can be recovered, and how well the method suits particular hardware, so no single member is best for every purpose.

In systems terms the family members share one interface and differ in one internal operator: all take vectors in and give vectors out, but the binding operator trades exactness of unbinding against computational cost, with element-wise sign multiplication being its own inverse and cheapest, while circular convolution needs an approximate inverse but composes more smoothly with graded, real-valued representations.

For a beginner the pattern to notice is that all these models share the same overall plan, concepts as high-dimensional vectors combined by binding and bundling, and differ mainly in the arithmetic details of how binding is carried out.


61.4.3 The solution to variable binding and its robustness

The deepest reason to care about this family is that it offers a clean answer to a classic difficulty for brain-style models known as the variable binding problem.

The variable binding problem is the challenge of representing which value goes with which slot, for instance keeping straight that in the cat chased the dog it was the cat doing the chasing and the dog being chased, and not the other way around, without the two roles getting confused.

Simple neural networks that just blend everything into one activity pattern have long struggled with this, because they tend to lose track of what is attached to what, an issue raised forcefully by critics of connectionism in the late 1980s.

Vector symbolic architectures solve it directly with the binding operation: you bind the role chaser to the filler cat and the role chased to the filler dog, add the two bound pairs together into one vector, and later use unbinding to ask who was the chaser and correctly recover cat.

This gives a distributed, neuron-friendly system genuine structured representation, the ability to hold and query who-did-what-to-whom, which was exactly the capacity symbolic critics said connectionist models lacked.

As a mechanism, the query pipeline takes as input one sentence vector and one role vector, applies the inverse binding, and outputs the codebook entry most similar to the result, with the whole operation being a fixed small number of parallel passes regardless of how much structure the sentence vector holds.

A further attraction is robustness, meaning the representations tolerate error and noise well: because information is spread across thousands of vector elements, corrupting or losing some of them degrades the answer only gradually rather than destroying it, much as a smudged photograph is still recognizable.

This graceful tolerance, together with the fact that the operations are simple and highly parallel, has made hyperdimensional computing attractive not only as a theory of how brains might bind variables but also as a practical, energy-efficient style of computing for real hardware.

The honest summary is that vector symbolic architectures provide one of the most promising bridges between the two great families of this book, keeping the learning and robustness of the emergent approach while recovering the structured, symbol-like power of the symbolic approach.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Input vectors clamped onto input units, encoding stimuli such as images, sounds, or concept codes.

◦ Target or reward signals used by error-driven and reinforcement learning to steer weight changes.

◦ For vector-symbolic systems, role and filler vectors drawn from a codebook of known concepts.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Output activity vectors, decoded into categories, quantities, or motor commands.

◦ In spiking models such as Spaun, timed motor trajectories through a simulated arm.

◦ Similarity scores against the codebook, which serve as the readout of vector-symbolic queries.

• STATE.

◦ The activity pattern across all units, the fast state that carries the current thought.

◦ The connection weights, the slow state that carries all learned knowledge.

◦ In gated models such as PBWM, the maintained working-memory pattern in the simulated prefrontal cortex.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Learning rate, the mix ratio between Hebbian and error-driven components, the inhibitory sparseness level, the vector dimensionality in vector-symbolic systems, and synaptic and membrane filter constants in spiking models.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Neuron membrane integration: on the order of 10 to 20 milliseconds in standard spiking-neuron models.

◦ Network settling on an interpretation: tens to a few hundred milliseconds of simulated time.

◦ Weight learning: many trials, so minutes to days of experience.

◦ Gating decisions in the prefrontal and basal-ganglia model: REFUSED as a single number, because the model ties gate timing to task events and dopamine signals rather than one fixed interval.

• MODES.

◦ Processing mode, activity flowing through fixed weights, versus learning mode, weights updating from the just-completed activity; the trigger for learning is the arrival of an outcome, error, or reward signal.

◦ In gated working-memory models, update mode versus maintain mode for each memory store, switched by the learned basal-ganglia gating signal.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Graceful degradation under damage and noise, shading into wrong-but-similar responses rather than crashes.

◦ Overgeneralization errors during learning, such as producing goed for went.

◦ Catastrophic interference when new learning overwrites old weights too quickly, and in vector-symbolic memories, retrieval crosstalk when too many pairs are bundled into one vector of too low a dimension.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called dimension with value 1000.
Define a function called random_sign_vector.
    Create a list called vector.
    Repeat dimension times: choose plus one or minus one at random and add it to vector.
    Return vector.
Create a codebook that maps each concept name to a random sign vector.
Define a function called bind that takes two vectors.
    For each position, multiply the two elements at that position, and collect the products into a new vector.
    Return the new vector.
Define a function called bundle that takes a list of vectors.
    For each position, add the elements at that position across all the vectors, take the sign of the sum, and collect the signs into a new vector.
    Return the new vector.
Create a sentence vector by binding the chaser role to the cat filler, binding the chased role to the dog filler, and bundling the two bound pairs.
To ask who was the chaser, bind the sentence vector with the chaser role vector, because sign-vector binding is its own inverse.
For each concept in the codebook, calculate the similarity between the unbound vector and the concept vector as the average of the position-wise products.
Report the concept with the highest similarity as the answer.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Bring in the random module.
import random

# Create a number variable called dimension with value 1000.
dimension = 1000

# Define a function called random_sign_vector returning a vector of plus and minus ones.
def random_sign_vector():
    # Return a list of dimension random choices between plus one and minus one.
    return [random.choice([1, -1]) for _ in range(dimension)]

# Define a function called bind that multiplies two vectors position by position.
def bind(a, b):
    # Return the list of position-wise products.
    return [x * y for x, y in zip(a, b)]

# Define a function called bundle that adds vectors and keeps only the sign.
def bundle(vectors):
    # For each position, sum across the vectors and take the sign of the sum.
    return [1 if sum(vals) >= 0 else -1 for vals in zip(*vectors)]

# Define a function called similarity as the average position-wise product.
def similarity(a, b):
    # Return the sum of the products divided by the dimension.
    return sum(x * y for x, y in zip(a, b)) / dimension

# Create a codebook mapping each concept name to a random sign vector.
codebook = {name: random_sign_vector() for name in
            ["cat", "dog", "chaser", "chased"]}

# Create the sentence vector by bundling the two bound role and filler pairs.
sentence = bundle([bind(codebook["chaser"], codebook["cat"]),
                   bind(codebook["chased"], codebook["dog"])])

# To ask who was the chaser, bind the sentence with the chaser role vector.
probe = bind(sentence, codebook["chaser"])

# For each filler concept, calculate its similarity to the probe.
scores = {name: similarity(probe, codebook[name]) for name in ["cat", "dog"]}

# Report the concept with the highest similarity as the answer.
print("the chaser was:", max(scores, key=scores.get), scores)

CHAPTER 62. HYBRID ARCHITECTURES (ARCHITECTURE)

This chapter is about a family of blueprints for a whole thinking machine that deliberately refuse to pick a single method.

A cognitive architecture is a proposed design for the fixed machinery of a mind, the permanent parts that stay the same no matter what the mind happens to be thinking about.

A hybrid architecture is one that mixes two very different styles of building that machinery, and it does so on purpose because each style is good at something the other is bad at.

The first style is symbolic, which means it stores knowledge as clear-cut symbols and rules, rather like sentences and if-then statements you could read on paper.

The second style is connectionist, which means it stores knowledge as patterns of activity spread across many simple units wired together, rather like the way a brain spreads a memory across many neurons.

Symbolic systems are excellent at careful step-by-step reasoning but poor at learning fuzzy patterns from raw experience, while connectionist systems are excellent at learning fuzzy patterns but poor at exact reasoning, so a hybrid tries to get the best of both.

Read as an engineered system, a hybrid architecture is a machine with two coupled processing channels sharing one stream of inputs and one stream of outputs, plus an arbitration mechanism that decides, moment to moment, which channel's answer to trust.

This chapter walks through the best known hybrids one at a time, and for each one it explains, in plain terms, what the designer was trying to solve and how the pieces fit together.


62.1 CLARION

This section introduces CLARION, a hybrid architecture built around a single big idea, which is that a mind has two layers of knowledge, one you can put into words and one you cannot, and that the two layers constantly teach each other.

CLARION was created by the research group of Ron Sun, a cognitive scientist, and its name is an acronym for Connectionist Learning with Adaptive Rule Induction On-line.


62.1.1 The explicit and implicit levels

The central claim of CLARION is that human knowledge comes in two kinds at once, and that any honest model of the mind has to represent both.

Explicit knowledge is knowledge you can state out loud, inspect, and reason about deliberately, such as the rule "if the light is red, then stop".

Implicit knowledge is knowledge you have but cannot easily put into words, such as the feel of riding a bicycle or the hunch that a chess move is strong.

CLARION gives each of these its own home inside every part of the system, so it has what its designers call a dual representational structure.

The explicit level is stored in a symbolic form, meaning as tidy rules and clearly labelled items that the system can point at and manipulate.

The implicit level is stored in a connectionist form, meaning as the weights of a small neural network, which is a web of simple units whose connection strengths encode the knowledge in a smeared-out, hard-to-read way.

In systems terms, the two levels are parallel processors over the same input: the state of the world enters both at once, the implicit level outputs a graded action preference computed from learned weights, the explicit level outputs a discrete action recommended by any matching rule, and a weighted combination of the two becomes the behaviour, with the implicit channel typically fast and always available and the explicit channel slower and sometimes silent.

A helpful everyday picture is the experienced driver who reacts correctly to a sudden hazard before they could possibly explain in words what they just did, and who only afterward puts the reaction into a spoken rule.

The distinctive bet of CLARION is that these two levels are not the same knowledge written twice, but genuinely different, and that intelligent behaviour comes from their interaction rather than from either one alone.

Because the model keeps both levels for every task, it can reproduce a wide range of laboratory findings in which people plainly know how to do something before they can describe how they do it.


62.1.2 The action-centred, non-action-centred, motivational, and metacognitive subsystems

CLARION is not a single undivided blob, but a set of four cooperating subsystems, each responsible for a different job, and each one carrying the two-level implicit-and-explicit structure inside it.

The action-centred subsystem (ACS) is the part that decides what to do, meaning it chooses actions moment to moment, and it is the subsystem where the driving-and-reacting sort of skill lives.

The non-action-centred subsystem (NACS) is the part that holds general knowledge about the world that is not tied to any one action, such as facts, concepts, and associations, the sort of thing you would call semantic memory.

The motivational subsystem (MS) is the part that supplies the drives and needs that give behaviour its purpose, answering the question of why the system wants to do anything at all, for example needs for food, for safety, or for social approval.

The metacognitive subsystem (MCS) is the part that monitors and regulates the rest, meaning it watches how the other subsystems are doing and adjusts them, for instance by changing how much the system relies on careful rules versus quick intuition.

The word metacognition here means thinking about one's own thinking, the mind keeping an eye on itself.

As a system diagram, the ACS and NACS are the two main processing pipelines, the MS publishes drive strengths that set the goals the ACS pursues, and the MCS reads performance signals from all of them and publishes control parameters back, such as the mixing weight between explicit and implicit output, so the MCS is a feedback controller sitting above the plant.

The reason Sun separates motivation and metacognition into their own subsystems is a deliberate stance, namely that a complete mind is not just a reasoning engine but also a wanting-and-self-governing thing, and that leaving out drives and self-monitoring would leave out much of what makes cognition humanlike.

These four subsystems talking to one another are what let CLARION model not only pure problem solving but also social behaviour, personality, and emotion.


62.1.3 Bottom-up learning and rule extraction

The signature learning idea in CLARION is bottom-up learning, and it is worth slowing down on because it reverses the order most people assume.

Most teaching assumes top-down learning, where you are first told an explicit rule and then practise until it becomes automatic, so the explicit knowledge comes first and the implicit skill grows out of it.

CLARION emphasises the opposite direction, in which the implicit skill comes first, learned gradually through trial and error by the connectionist network, and the explicit rule is then extracted afterward from that skill.

The mechanism that does this is called rule extraction, which means the system watches which of its own trial-and-error actions tended to work well and then crystallises those successes into a clean symbolic rule it can state and reuse.

Mechanically, rule extraction is a thresholded transfer between stores: the input is the running record of state, action, and outcome kept by the implicit level, the output is a new if-then rule written into the explicit store, and the trigger is a success statistic for a state-action pair crossing an extraction threshold, after which the rule is itself monitored and is generalised when it keeps working and shrunk or deleted when it fails.

An everyday parallel is a cook who learns by feel over many meals how much salt a dish needs, and only later writes down "about half a teaspoon per pot" as a rule they could hand to someone else.

This bottom-up story matters because a great deal of human expertise really does seem to run this way, with the doing coming before the explaining, and CLARION was one of the first architectures to put that ordering at its centre.

The two directions are not exclusive in CLARION, since it also allows top-down flow, but the emphasis on learning implicit-first and then reading rules off the result is what sets the architecture apart.


62.2 Sigma

This section introduces Sigma, written with the Greek letter that looks like a capital E lying on its side, an architecture whose ambition is to build the whole mind out of a single, uniform mathematical substrate.

Sigma was developed by Paul Rosenbloom and colleagues, and it grows out of the same lineage as the older Soar architecture while taking a very different technical route.


62.2.1 The graphical-model substrate and message passing

The engineering heart of Sigma is that everything the system does is expressed as one kind of structure called a graphical model, and more precisely a factor graph.

A graphical model is a way of drawing how a set of quantities depend on one another as a network of nodes and links, so that reasoning about the whole becomes a matter of passing information along the links.

A factor graph, the particular variety Sigma uses, is a network with two sorts of nodes, one sort standing for variables, meaning the things you might want to know, and the other sort standing for factors, meaning the local rules that say how those variables constrain each other.

The way computation happens on such a graph is called message passing, and the intuition is that each node repeatedly sends its neighbours a short summary of what it currently believes, the neighbours update in light of the messages they receive, and the whole graph settles toward a consistent answer.

The specific method Sigma uses is a variant of the summary-product algorithm, which is a well-studied recipe for doing exactly this kind of message passing efficiently.

Seen as a system, one Sigma cognitive cycle takes perceptual evidence as input, runs message passing until the graph settles, which is the elaboration phase, then commits changes such as a selected action or an updated memory, which is the adaptation phase, so the timescale of thought is set by how many message-passing sweeps fit inside a cycle.

The reason this substrate is powerful is that many different-looking mental operations, such as recognising a pattern, recalling a fact, weighing probabilities, and choosing an action, can all be recast as message passing on a factor graph, so a single engine can serve them all.

Factor graphs are also flexible enough to carry both symbolic information, such as discrete facts, and subsymbolic information, such as continuous probabilities, in the same representation, which is exactly what a hybrid needs.


62.2.2 The grand-unification and functional-elegance goals

Sigma is guided by an explicit list of goals, and two of them give the architecture its character, so it is worth naming them plainly.

Grand unification is the goal of covering not just the tidy reasoning parts of a mind but also the messier parts, such as perception and emotion, all within one uniform framework rather than bolting separate special-purpose modules together.

Functional elegance is the goal of achieving that broad coverage from a small set of general mechanisms, so that the mind is explained by a few deep principles applied widely rather than by a large grab-bag of tricks.

Two further stated goals round out the set, namely generic cognition, meaning the ability to handle many kinds of task, and sufficient efficiency, meaning the system must run fast enough to be practical.

The everyday appeal of functional elegance is the same appeal a physicist feels when a handful of equations explain a huge range of phenomena, the sense that a simple core generating rich behaviour is more likely to be true than a sprawling patchwork.

In systems terms this is a debate about module count: a grand-unified design predicts that one engine with different parameter settings reproduces perception, memory, and choice alike, while a modular design predicts that each capacity needs its own distinct mechanism, and the two predict different failure patterns when the shared engine is stressed.

It is fair to note that Sigma is a research programme rather than a finished mind, and its claim to grand unification is a promissory direction being tested piece by piece, not a settled accomplishment.

Sigma matters within this survey because it represents one clear answer to the deepest question about hybrids, which is whether the symbolic and the connectionist can be fused in one uniform language rather than merely glued side by side.


62.3 LIDA

This section introduces LIDA, an architecture whose organising idea is drawn straight from a leading theory of consciousness, and which tries to model the moment-by-moment rhythm of a mind reacting to its world.

LIDA was developed by Stan Franklin and the Cognitive Computing Research Group, and its name stands for Learning Intelligent Distribution Agent, the earlier non-learning version having been called IDA.


62.3.1 The global-workspace implementation

LIDA is built as a working, computational implementation of Global Workspace Theory, a theory of how conscious awareness works that is covered more fully later in this outline.

The rough picture behind Global Workspace Theory is a theatre, in which a great many specialist processors work away in the dark in parallel, and only the small amount of information that wins a competition gets lit by a spotlight and broadcast to the whole audience, that broadcast being what we experience as a conscious moment.

LIDA turns this picture into machinery, so that in the system many small, specialised processes each build up pieces of an interpretation of the current situation, and then compete for attention.

The winner of that competition is broadcast widely across the system, and this broadcast is what makes the winning information available to all the other parts at once, so that learning and action selection can use it.

A key building block LIDA uses to make all this happen is the codelet, which is a small, semi-independent piece of code that does one narrow job, such as noticing a particular feature, and which runs alongside many other codelets like a crowd of tiny specialists.

As a system, the workspace is a shared buffer with a strict capacity, the codelets are asynchronous producers writing candidate content into it, the attention competition is an arbiter that selects the highest-salience coalition, and the broadcast is a one-to-all publish operation whose payload every memory and action module subscribes to.

The value of LIDA is that it takes a famous but somewhat metaphorical theory of awareness and forces it to become concrete enough to run as a program and generate testable predictions about timing and behaviour.


62.3.2 The cognitive cycle as the atom of cognition

The central unit of LIDA is the cognitive cycle, which the architecture treats as the basic atom out of which all mental life is built, the smallest complete beat of a mind at work.

A single cognitive cycle is a fast loop that runs in three phases, and understanding those three phases is the key to understanding LIDA.

The first phase is understanding, in which the system senses its environment and updates its inner picture of what is going on, drawing on memory to recognise and interpret what it perceives.

The second phase is attention, in which a competition decides which part of that updated picture is most important right now, and the winner is broadcast globally, becoming the momentary content of consciousness.

The third phase is action selection, in which the system, now that the important information has been broadcast to everyone, chooses a suitable response and carries it out.

LIDA proposes that these cycles run very quickly, on the order of several per second, and that higher, slower mental activities such as deliberation and planning are built out of many of these fast cycles strung together and coordinated.

The systems reading is that the cycle is the clock of the whole machine: its input is one sample of the world, its output is at most one selected behaviour, its period of a few hundred milliseconds sets the fastest rate at which conscious content can change, and everything slower, such as planning, is implemented as chains of cycles rather than as a separate mechanism.

The everyday intuition is that a mind is not a single grand computation but a rapid heartbeat of sense-attend-act repeating again and again, with each beat feeding the next.

Calling the cycle the atom of cognition is a strong theoretical claim, namely that if you understand this one repeating loop and how loops chain together, you have the building block for everything else the mind does.


62.4 The reasoning and knowledge-store architectures

This section groups together architectures whose main concern is knowledge itself, meaning how a mind can reason and store what it knows when it can never know everything and never has enough time or memory to be perfect.

These systems come out of the artificial general intelligence community, whose aim is not to model one laboratory task but to build a single system with broad, flexible, humanlike competence.


62.4.1 NARS and reasoning under insufficient knowledge and resources

NARS, which stands for Non-Axiomatic Reasoning System, is an architecture built by Pei Wang over several decades around one uncompromising starting assumption about the human condition.

That assumption is called the Assumption of Insufficient Knowledge and Resources (AIKR), and it says that a real intelligence must always work while knowing too little, having too little time, and having too little memory, and can never wait until it has the full picture.

The word non-axiomatic in the name captures the consequence of this assumption, because an axiomatic system is one that starts from a fixed set of truths taken as certain, whereas NARS refuses to treat anything as permanently certain.

Instead, every belief in NARS is held only tentatively, is based on the evidence experience has supplied so far, and can be revised the moment new evidence arrives, so knowledge is always provisional.

To make this work, NARS uses its own logic, called Non-Axiomatic Logic (NAL), in which each statement carries a measure of how much evidence supports it and how strongly, rather than being simply true or false.

Because it can never examine everything, NARS organises its knowledge into concepts and uses a priority-based scheduler, which is a mechanism that decides which few thoughts to work on next based on their urgency and importance, deliberately leaving the rest untouched for now.

As a system, NARS is an anytime inference engine: its inputs are a stream of experience sentences each stamped with evidence counts, its state is a bounded concept memory under constant eviction pressure, its output at any interruption point is the best answer derivable so far, and its key parameters are the priority and durability values that ration processing time across concepts.

The everyday parallel is a busy person with an overflowing inbox who cannot read every message, and who therefore must constantly judge which item deserves attention next while accepting that some will never be reached.

NARS matters because it takes seriously a fact that many tidy models quietly ignore, namely that intelligence is defined precisely by having to cope well despite never having enough to be sure.


62.4.2 OpenCog, the AtomSpace, and cognitive synergy

OpenCog is an architecture led by Ben Goertzel and collaborators, and its aim is openly to build toward artificial general intelligence rather than to model any single narrow skill.

The centrepiece of OpenCog is the AtomSpace, which is a large shared memory that stores all of the system's knowledge as a network of linked items called atoms.

An atom is a small unit of meaning, and atoms come in two families, nodes, which stand for things or concepts, and links, which stand for relationships between them, so that the whole of the system's knowledge forms one big interconnected graph.

This graph is a metagraph, meaning links can connect not only nodes but also other links, which lets it represent quite intricate structured knowledge, and every atom can also carry numerical values such as how true or how important it is.

The most important design idea in OpenCog is cognitive synergy, and it is worth stating plainly because it is the whole bet of the project.

Cognitive synergy is the claim that several different reasoning and learning methods, each weak on its own, can help one another out when they all work over the same shared knowledge store, so that where one method gets stuck another can lend a hand.

In systems terms the AtomSpace is a shared blackboard: multiple inference and learning processes subscribe to it, each publishes its partial results back into it, and the architecture's bet is that the coupling through shared state turns several weak processes into one stronger whole, with the risk being contention and interference on the shared store.

The everyday parallel is a committee of specialists with very different skills who, precisely because they share one common workspace and can hand problems back and forth, together solve problems none of them could solve alone.

OpenCog is best understood as an ambitious and still-maturing research programme, and it is honest to say that a full working general intelligence has not been achieved by it or by anyone, so its ideas are proposals under active development.


62.4.3 OpenCog Hyperon and the MeTTa language

OpenCog Hyperon is the newer, rebuilt version of OpenCog, and the earlier system is now called OpenCog Classic to distinguish the two.

Hyperon is a redesign intended to be more scalable, meaning able to grow to much larger amounts of knowledge and computing power, and it is being developed by the SingularityNET Foundation together with the OpenCog community.

The distinctive new ingredient in Hyperon is a programming language called MeTTa, whose name stands for Meta Type Talk, designed specifically for the kind of computation an artificial general intelligence would need.

MeTTa is unusual in two ways that are worth explaining simply.

First, it is a self-modifying language, meaning that programs written in it can rewrite themselves and each other, which fits a mind that is supposed to learn and reshape its own reasoning over time.

Second, it is meant to be written both by human designers, who script parts of the system's thinking, and by the system's own learning algorithms, so the boundary between the program and the knowledge it works on is deliberately blurred.

Hyperon keeps the AtomSpace idea from Classic, so knowledge still lives in a large graph of atoms, but MeTTa provides a more uniform way to express both the knowledge and the operations that transform it.

From a systems standpoint the change is that code and data now live in the same store and share the same format, so the system's own programs become inputs and outputs of its learning processes, which removes a boundary most software keeps fixed and makes self-modification a first-class operation.

Because Hyperon is recent and still being built, its promise should be read as a direction of travel rather than a demonstrated general intelligence, and its claims remain to be proven in practice.


62.5 The motivational architectures

This section covers hybrids whose special contribution is to put wanting and feeling at the centre, on the view that a mind without drives and emotions is not a full mind but only a calculator.

These architectures ask where goals come from in the first place, and how emotion shapes and steers thinking rather than merely decorating it.


62.5.1 MicroPsi and the Psi theory of motivation and emotion

MicroPsi is an architecture built by Joscha Bach, and it is a computer implementation of the Psi theory, a theory of mind proposed by the psychologist Dietrich Dorner.

The distinctive feature of the Psi theory is that it starts not from reasoning but from needs, treating an agent as a creature driven by a set of underlying demands that it must keep satisfied.

The theory builds up its picture of motivation and emotion through a chain of concepts, and it helps to walk the chain in order.

A demand is a basic need that can fall out of balance, such as a need for energy, for water, for safety, or for social bonding.

An urge is the signal that arises when a demand is unmet, a felt pressure pushing the agent to do something about it.

A motive is an urge that has become attached to a particular goal, so that the general pressure of hunger becomes the specific aim of getting to the kitchen.

On top of these, the theory adds cognitive modulators, which are global settings that adjust how the whole mind operates, for example how fast it acts, how widely it pays attention, and how deeply it thinks.

In this account, emotion is not a separate add-on but emerges from the particular configuration of these modulators together with the state of the urges, so a feeling is, in effect, a whole-system mode of operating.

The systems reading is a layered control loop: each demand is a regulated variable with a set point, the urge is the error signal proportional to the deviation, the motive is the error signal bound to a goal that action selection can pursue, and the modulators are global gain settings, so an emotion is a point in the modulator parameter space rather than a module of its own.

The everyday intuition is that when you are anxious you act faster, scan more widely, and think less deeply, and the Psi theory treats exactly that kind of shift as what an emotion is.

MicroPsi matters because it offers a concrete, runnable proposal for how motivation and emotion could be woven into the machinery of cognition from the ground up, rather than treated as afterthoughts.


62.5.2 DUAL and AMBR and emergent macro-behaviour from micro-agents

DUAL is a hybrid architecture developed by Boicho Kokinov and his team at the New Bulgarian University, and it takes a strikingly different approach to being hybrid.

Most hybrids are hybrid at the large scale, meaning they have a separate symbolic module bolted next to a separate connectionist module.

DUAL is instead hybrid at the small scale, because it is made of a great many tiny agents, sometimes called daemons, and each single agent is itself both symbolic and connectionist at once.

Each little agent carries a scrap of symbolic content, such as a small frame of structured knowledge, and at the same time carries connectionist properties, such as an activation level that says how active it currently is and weighted links that spread activation to its neighbours.

The important consequence is that the intelligent behaviour of the whole system is not written down anywhere in advance, but emerges from the swarming interaction of these many small hybrid agents forming and dissolving temporary coalitions.

Emergence here means that large, organised behaviour arises out of the local interactions of many simple parts, without any single part being in charge, rather as the coordinated turns of a flock of birds arise from each bird reacting only to its neighbours.

As a system, each micro-agent's inputs are the activation arriving over its weighted links, its output is its own activation and its symbolic content when active enough to compute, its speed of processing scales with its activation, and there is no central controller, so the global state is simply the current pattern of active coalitions.

Built on top of DUAL is a model called AMBR, which stands for Associative Memory-Based Reasoning, and it is a model of how people make analogies.

An analogy is seeing that one situation is structured like another, as when you understand electricity by likening it to water flowing in pipes.

AMBR treats analogy-making not as a single neat procedure but as the emergent result of several overlapping processes running together, including perceiving the situation, retrieving related memories, mapping one situation onto another, and learning from the result.

The lesson of DUAL and AMBR for this chapter is that hybridity can be pushed all the way down to the level of individual agents, and that some of the mind's most creative feats, such as analogy, may be emergent crowd behaviour rather than the output of any one dedicated part.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Environment state observations, delivered each cycle as a feature vector or symbol structure from the perception front end.

◦ Reward and outcome feedback, a scalar success or failure signal from the environment or an internal evaluator, consumed by the implicit learning channel.

◦ Drive and demand levels, scalar need signals from the motivational subsystem that set which goals action selection pursues.

◦ Instructed knowledge, explicit rules or facts supplied by a teacher or programmer for top-down flow.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Selected actions, discrete commands per decision cycle, consumed by the motor or environment interface.

◦ Extracted explicit rules, if-then structures written to the symbolic store and available for report, teaching, and inspection.

◦ Broadcast content, in workspace-style hybrids such as LIDA, the winning coalition published to all modules at once.

◦ Control adjustments, metacognitive settings such as the explicit-versus-implicit mixing weight, consumed by the processing subsystems.

• STATE.

◦ Connection weights of the implicit network, the slowly changing statistical skill store.

◦ The explicit rule and fact base, including per-rule success statistics used to decide generalisation and deletion.

◦ Current activations, the working pattern in the network, the workspace, or the agent population, refreshed every cycle.

◦ Drive levels and modulator settings, the motivational and emotional configuration of the whole system.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Learning rate of the implicit channel, controlling how fast weights move per outcome.

◦ Rule extraction threshold, the success statistic a state-action pair must cross before an explicit rule is created.

◦ Explicit-versus-implicit mixing weight, the arbitration gain between the two channels.

◦ Exploration rate, the probability of trying a non-preferred action to gather new experience.

◦ Attention and priority budgets, in NARS-style and workspace-style systems, the fraction of processing given to each competing item.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ One decision or cognitive cycle: several cycles per second in LIDA's proposal, in the region of a few hundred milliseconds per beat, consistent with the production-rule cycle of about 50 milliseconds for a single rule firing in production-system relatives.

◦ Implicit skill learning: REFUSED as a single number, because trial-and-error weight learning spans minutes to years depending on task and practice schedule.

◦ Rule extraction: REFUSED, because the literature ties it to accumulated success counts rather than to a clock time.

◦ Modulator and emotion shifts in Psi-style systems: REFUSED, because published implementations treat these as parameterised rather than empirically fixed.

• MODES.

◦ Implicit-dominant mode, where behaviour is driven mainly by the network, triggered by novelty of the domain, time pressure, or absence of applicable rules.

◦ Explicit-dominant mode, where behaviour is driven mainly by rules, triggered by available matching rules, instruction, or metacognitive demand for care.

◦ Bottom-up learning mode, where success statistics are converted into new rules, triggered by the extraction threshold being crossed.

◦ Top-down learning mode, where taught rules are compiled into implicit skill through practice, triggered by repeated successful rule use.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Implicit-explicit dissociation errors, where the system does the right thing but reports the wrong rule, or recites the right rule but acts against it.

◦ Premature or overgeneral rule extraction, crystallising a spurious regularity from a lucky streak, the machine analogue of superstition.

◦ Arbitration failure, weighting the wrong channel for the situation, as when deliberate rule-following disrupts a fluent skill, the choking-under-pressure pattern.

◦ Blackboard contention in shared-store designs, where multiple processes overwrite or starve one another on the common memory.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a dictionary called weights that maps each state and action pair to a number with initial value zero.
Create a dictionary called counts that maps each state and action pair to a success count and a trial count, both starting at zero.
Create an empty list called rules.
Create a number variable called extraction threshold with initial value 0.7.
Create a number variable called minimum trials with initial value 10.
For each episode in the training run, repeat the following.
    Observe the current state from the environment.
    Search the rules list for a rule whose condition matches the current state.
    If a matching rule is found, set the chosen action to the action named by that rule.
    Otherwise, with a small exploration probability choose a random action, and otherwise choose the action whose weight for the current state is largest.
    Perform the chosen action and receive an outcome signal of success or failure from the environment.
    If the outcome is success, increase the weight for the current state and chosen action by the learning rate times the difference between one and that weight.
    If the outcome is failure, decrease the weight for the current state and chosen action by the learning rate times that weight.
    Increase the trial count for the current state and chosen action by one.
    If the outcome is success, increase the success count for the current state and chosen action by one.
    Calculate the confidence as the success count divided by the trial count for the current state and chosen action.
    If the trial count is at least the minimum trials and the confidence is greater than the extraction threshold and no matching rule already exists, create a rule stating that in this state one should take this action, and append it to the rules list.
Report the final rules list as the explicit knowledge extracted from the implicit skill.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for exploration and for the simulated environment.
import random

# Create a dictionary called weights that maps each state and action pair to a number with initial value zero.
weights = {}
# Create a dictionary called counts that maps each state and action pair to a success and trial count pair.
counts = {}
# Create an empty list called rules.
rules = []
# Create the parameter variables for learning rate, extraction threshold, minimum trials, and exploration.
learning_rate, threshold, min_trials, explore = 0.2, 0.7, 10, 0.1
# Create the list of possible states and the list of possible actions.
states, actions = ["wet_road", "dry_road"], ["slow_down", "speed_up"]

# Define a function that returns success or failure for a state and action, as the environment.
def environment(state, action):
    # If the road is wet, slowing down usually succeeds and speeding up usually fails.
    if state == "wet_road":
        # Return success with probability 0.9 for slowing down and 0.2 for speeding up.
        return random.random() < (0.9 if action == "slow_down" else 0.2)
    # Otherwise, on a dry road, speeding up usually succeeds.
    return random.random() < (0.85 if action == "speed_up" else 0.4)

# For each episode number from zero up to but not including two thousand, repeat the trial loop.
for episode in range(2000):
    # Observe the current state by sampling one state at random.
    state = random.choice(states)
    # Search the rules list for a rule whose condition matches the current state.
    match = next((r for r in rules if r[0] == state), None)
    # If a matching rule is found, set the chosen action to the action named by that rule.
    if match:
        action = match[1]
    # Otherwise, with the exploration probability choose a random action, else the highest-weight action.
    else:
        action = random.choice(actions) if random.random() < explore else max(
            actions, key=lambda a: weights.get((state, a), 0.0))
    # Perform the chosen action and receive a success or failure outcome from the environment.
    success = environment(state, action)
    # Look up the current weight for the state and action pair, defaulting to zero.
    w = weights.get((state, action), 0.0)
    # Move the weight toward one on success and toward zero on failure, scaled by the learning rate.
    weights[(state, action)] = w + learning_rate * ((1.0 - w) if success else (0.0 - w))
    # Look up the success and trial counts for the state and action pair, defaulting to zero and zero.
    s, t = counts.get((state, action), (0, 0))
    # Increase the trial count by one, and the success count by one only on success.
    s, t = s + (1 if success else 0), t + 1
    # Store the updated counts back into the counts dictionary.
    counts[(state, action)] = (s, t)
    # Calculate the confidence as the success count divided by the trial count.
    confidence = s / t
    # If enough trials have occurred and confidence exceeds the threshold and no rule exists, extract a rule.
    if t >= min_trials and confidence > threshold and match is None:
        # Append the new explicit rule for this state and action to the rules list.
        rules.append((state, action))

# For each extracted rule, print it in readable if-then form with its confidence.
for state, action in rules:
    # Print the rule condition, the rule action, and the observed confidence.
    s, t = counts[(state, action)]
    print("IF", state, "THEN", action, "confidence", round(s / t, 2))


CHAPTER 63. THE COMMON MODEL OF COGNITION AND GLOBAL THEORIES (ARCHITECTURE)

This chapter steps back from individual architectures to ask a bigger question, which is whether the many competing designs have started to agree with one another about what a mind must contain.

The surprising answer explored here is that, after decades of separate work, several leading architectures converged on a shared skeleton, and researchers wrote that shared skeleton down and called it the Common Model of Cognition.

The chapter also introduces the broad theories, especially about attention and consciousness, that keep reappearing inside these architectures and that inform their design.


63.1 The Common Model of Cognition

This section presents the Common Model of Cognition, which is not itself a working program but a written statement of the points on which the major architectures now agree.

It matters because a genuine consensus, hard-won from independent efforts, is one of the strongest kinds of evidence a young science can offer about which of its ideas are likely to be right.


63.1.1 The origin and the naming as the standard model of the mind

The Common Model of Cognition was introduced in 2017 by three senior architecture researchers, John Laird, Christian Lebiere, and Paul Rosenbloom.

They first named it the Standard Model of the Mind, borrowing the phrase deliberately from physics, where the Standard Model is the agreed-upon core theory of fundamental particles that a whole community shares.

The borrowing carried a clear message, namely that the study of mind might be mature enough to have its own agreed core, a set of commitments that most serious researchers would sign.

The name was later softened to the Common Model of Cognition, partly to avoid overstating how settled things are and to make clear the model is a developing consensus rather than a finished law.

The consensus was distilled chiefly from three long-running architectures that had been built largely independently, namely Soar, ACT-R, and Sigma, all of which are covered elsewhere in this outline.

It is important to be honest about what the model is not, because its own authors stress that it is abstract, deliberately incomplete, and not something you can run as a program.

In systems language, the Common Model is a reference architecture rather than an implementation: it specifies the required components and the data paths between them, and it deliberately leaves the internal algorithms of each component unspecified, which is exactly the level at which the community could agree.

It includes only what the community can actually agree is necessary for a humanlike mind, and it leaves the many still-disputed matters out on purpose, which is precisely what makes the agreement meaningful.


63.1.2 The consensus modules: perception, motor, working memory, declarative and procedural memory

The Common Model says that a humanlike mind is organised into a small number of major components, and the agreement on this short list is the model's central content.

There are five components in the standard statement, and each one is easy to describe in everyday terms.

Perception is the component that turns incoming signals from the senses into usable internal information, the mind's way of taking in the world.

The motor component, sometimes called action, is the component that turns the mind's decisions into movements and outputs, the mind's way of acting on the world.

Working memory is a central holding area where information from all the other components comes together and is worked on, rather like a workbench or a whiteboard where the current problem is laid out.

Declarative memory is the long-term store of facts and events, the knowledge that something is the case, such as that Paris is a city or that you ate breakfast this morning.

Procedural memory is the long-term store of skills and rules for acting, the knowledge of how to do things, and in the Common Model it is specifically a production system, meaning a store of if-then rules called productions that fire when their conditions are met.

The arrangement is that working memory sits in the middle as the shared workspace, the perception and motor components connect it to the outside world, and the two long-term memories feed knowledge into it and receive new knowledge from it.

The data-flow reading is a hub-and-spoke bus: working memory is the hub through which all traffic passes, perception writes to it, motor reads from it, declarative memory answers retrieval requests posted on it, and procedural memory watches it and fires the matching production, with working memory limited to about four chunks at a time and a production cycle of about 50 milliseconds setting the clock.

The everyday picture is a workshop, with a central bench, a door for materials coming in and finished goods going out, a filing cabinet of facts, and a rack of tools-and-techniques, all serving work done on the bench.


63.1.3 The consensus commitments: symbolic-plus-subsymbolic, pervasive learning, bounded rationality

Beyond the list of parts, the Common Model also agrees on several deeper commitments about how those parts work, and these commitments are where the real theoretical bite lies.

The first commitment is that the mind is both symbolic and subsymbolic at the same time, which is the hybrid stance made into a shared principle.

This means each piece of knowledge has a symbolic side, a clear structured content, and a subsymbolic side, a set of numerical quantities such as how active, how useful, or how reliable it is, and both sides matter for how the mind behaves.

The second commitment is pervasive learning, meaning that the mind is not a fixed device that merely applies knowledge but is constantly changing, with learning happening throughout the system as a normal part of ordinary processing rather than in a separate training phase.

The third commitment is bounded rationality, a term from the economist and cognitive scientist Herbert Simon, which means that the mind tries to act sensibly but always within hard limits on its time, memory, and computing power.

Bounded rationality is the honest middle path between two extremes, rejecting both the fantasy of a perfect flawless reasoner and the caricature of a purely irrational one, and instead describing a mind that does the best it reasonably can with what it has.

In systems terms the three commitments translate directly: every stored item carries both a structure and a set of numeric metadata, every module runs its own online learning rule as a side effect of normal operation, and the whole machine is specified under hard resource budgets rather than as an idealised optimiser.

Taken together these three commitments say that the agreed mind is a hybrid, ever-learning, resource-limited system, and that is a substantive picture that rules out many simpler proposals.


63.1.4 The extensions under discussion: metacognition, emotion, and the two systems

The Common Model is a living document, and there is active discussion about what should be added to it as the consensus grows, which this sub-section surveys.

One proposed extension is metacognition, the mind's monitoring and control of its own thinking, on the view that a full mind must be able to notice when it is uncertain, when it is stuck, and when it should change strategy.

Recent published proposals have argued in detail for adding a metacognitive layer to the model, though it is not yet part of the settled core, so this remains a matter under discussion rather than an agreed addition.

A second proposed extension is emotion, on the view, shared with motivational architectures like MicroPsi, that feelings are not decorative but genuinely shape attention, memory, and decision, and that leaving them out leaves the model incomplete.

Here too there are worked-out proposals for how emotion might be folded into the Common Model, and here too the matter is still open rather than resolved.

A third topic under discussion is the relationship to the famous two-systems idea, the distinction between fast automatic intuition and slow deliberate reasoning, and researchers have written about how that popular distinction maps onto the Common Model's machinery.

Because these are debates rather than mechanisms, it helps to state what each side predicts in systems terms: adding metacognition predicts a measurable monitoring signal and strategy switches the base model cannot produce, adding emotion predicts global parameter shifts that change speed and breadth of processing under load, and the two-systems mapping predicts that fast responses bypass the slow retrieval path while deliberate ones occupy working memory for many cycles.

The healthy way to read all of this is that the core of the model is stable and agreed, while a well-defined frontier of proposed extensions is being debated openly, which is exactly how a maturing science should look.


63.2 The global theories that inform architectures

This section turns from the engineering consensus to the broad psychological theories that keep showing up inside architectures, especially theories about how a mind brings its scattered parts together into one coherent stream.

These are theories rather than blueprints, but they supply the guiding pictures that architects reach for when they decide how the parts of a mind should be organised.


63.2.1 Global workspace theory and the theatre metaphor

Global Workspace Theory is a theory of how a mind with many parallel specialist processes manages to have a single, unified stream of awareness and coordinated action, and it was proposed by the psychologist Bernard Baars.

Its guiding picture is the theatre of the mind, and the metaphor is worth laying out because so many architectures, LIDA above all, are built on it.

In the metaphor the mind is a theatre full of specialised processors working in parallel in the dark, each an expert at some narrow job, and most of them unconscious most of the time.

There is a stage, which stands for working memory, a limited space where only a little can be present at once.

There is a spotlight, which stands for attention, picking out one small portion of what is on the stage.

Whatever the spotlight illuminates is then broadcast to the whole audience of specialist processors, and that global broadcast, that making-available-to-everyone, is what the theory identifies with conscious awareness.

The point of the metaphor is functional, explaining why consciousness might exist at all, namely that a global broadcast lets many separate expert systems share the same important information and coordinate their work around it.

As a system, the theory specifies a many-producers, one-channel, many-consumers topology: parallel modules publish candidate content, a competition selects one item at a time for the limited-capacity channel, and the selected item is broadcast to every module, so consciousness is identified with the transmission on the shared bus rather than with any single module.

This theory is attractive to architecture builders precisely because it is about integration, the problem of getting many separate parts to act as one, which is the core problem any whole-mind design must solve.


63.2.2 The global neuronal workspace and ignition

The Global Neuronal Workspace is the version of the theory that ties the theatre metaphor down to actual brain machinery, and it was developed mainly by the neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene together with Jean-Pierre Changeux and Lionel Naccache.

Where Baars gave a functional metaphor, Dehaene and colleagues proposed a physical implementation, saying that the workspace is realised by a particular kind of neuron, those with long-range connections that reach across distant regions of the brain, concentrated in the frontal and parietal cortex.

The most striking prediction of this version is a phenomenon called ignition, and the idea is vivid enough to picture directly.

Ignition is a sudden, large, brain-wide surge of coordinated neural activity that occurs when a stimulus crosses from being processed unconsciously to being consciously perceived, rather like a fire that smoulders quietly and then all at once flares up and spreads.

Below the threshold, a stimulus is handled locally and quietly by a few regions and never reaches awareness, but once it crosses the threshold the long-range network ignites and the information is broadcast widely, and that is the moment of conscious access.

In systems terms ignition is a nonlinear threshold on a recurrent network: input strength below threshold decays locally, input strength above threshold triggers self-sustaining positive feedback across the long-range loops, and the reported signature is a late, widespread wave of activity beginning roughly 300 milliseconds after the stimulus, which distinguishes seen from unseen trials.

This gives the theory testable teeth, because ignition should be visible in brain recordings as a specific late, widespread pattern of activity that distinguishes stimuli people report seeing from those they do not.

The Global Neuronal Workspace is influential precisely because it converts a philosophical metaphor into concrete, measurable claims about timing and brain circuits, though, as later chapters discuss, it remains one contested theory of consciousness among several.


63.2.3 The society of mind

The Society of Mind is a theory put forward by Marvin Minsky, one of the founders of artificial intelligence, and it offers a very different guiding picture from the single theatre.

Its central image is that the mind is not one unified thing at all but a society, a large collection of many small, simple, mindless parts that Minsky called agents.

Each agent on its own is stupid, able to do only some tiny job, and none of them is intelligent, yet the claim is that intelligence emerges from the way huge numbers of these simple agents are organised and interact.

The everyday parallel is a large human organisation, in which no single clerk understands or controls the whole enterprise, yet the coordinated activity of many limited individuals produces sophisticated collective behaviour.

Minsky's picture deliberately has no single boss and no central stage, which contrasts sharply with the spotlight-and-broadcast picture of global workspace theory, and this contrast frames a real and ongoing debate.

That debate is between centralised pictures of the mind, in which one shared workspace ties everything together, and distributed pictures, in which order emerges from many local interactions with no centre, and different architectures lean different ways.

The two sides predict differently in systems terms: a workspace design predicts a single measurable bottleneck, serial conscious access, and a global broadcast signature, while a society design predicts no privileged channel, graceful degradation when any part fails, and coordination visible only as patterns across many local links.

The Society of Mind matters here because it is the intellectual ancestor of the micro-agent architectures such as DUAL, and because it keeps the field honest about the possibility that unity of mind might be an appearance produced by a crowd rather than the work of any central part.


63.3 The convergence narrative

This section examines the story that ties the chapter together, namely that independent lines of work have been drifting toward a common picture of the mind, and asks carefully what that drift does and does not prove.

It is a section about how to interpret agreement, which is a subtle matter, because agreement can be a sign of truth or merely a sign of shared habits.


63.3.1 How independent architectures converged on a shared structure

The convergence narrative is the observation that architectures built by different teams, for different reasons, over several decades, gradually came to look alike in their basic structure.

Soar, ACT-R, and Sigma did not set out to agree, and they differ greatly in their inner workings, yet all three ended up with a central working memory, separate stores for facts and for skills, a rule-based procedural component, and links to perception and action.

The Common Model of Cognition is simply the written record of that convergence, the shared skeleton read off from the systems that grew toward it.

The reason this is impressive is that convergence from independent starting points is a familiar signature of getting something right, in the same way that different explorers drawing similar maps of a coastline suggests the coastline is really shaped that way.

Part of the explanation is that all these architectures were held to the same demanding standard, having to account for a wide range of the same human experimental data, and being forced to fit the same reality tends to push different designs toward the same answers.

In systems language, the shared constraint set acted like a shared specification: any design required to reproduce human reaction times, error patterns, and learning curves under bounded resources keeps rediscovering the same bus-and-stores topology, which is evidence that the topology is forced by the data rather than by taste.

So the convergence is not a coincidence of fashion but at least partly a response to shared constraints from human behaviour, which strengthens the case that the shared structure reflects something real.


63.3.2 What the convergence does and does not establish

It would be easy to overread the convergence, so this final sub-section is a careful weighing of what it is and is not good evidence for.

What the convergence does establish is that the shared skeleton is a strong, well-tested engineering consensus, a design that many independent groups found they needed in order to cover a broad range of human performance, which is genuine and hard-won.

What the convergence does not establish is that this skeleton is the final or the only possible truth about the mind, because several qualifications must be kept firmly in view.

First, the converging architectures were not wholly independent, since their builders read one another's work, shared a research culture, and inherited common assumptions, so some of the agreement may reflect shared intellectual ancestry rather than shared discovery of fact.

Second, the Common Model is admittedly incomplete, leaving out contested but possibly essential matters such as emotion, consciousness, and much of learning, so agreement on a partial skeleton is not agreement on a whole mind.

Third, the whole family shares a broadly symbolic-plus-subsymbolic, production-system style, and rival traditions, such as the purely dynamical, embodied, and enactive approaches, would draw the map quite differently, so the consensus is a consensus within one school more than across all of them.

Put in systems terms, the rival traditions predict a different architecture altogether: a dynamical or enactive account predicts continuous coupled variables with no discrete working memory buffer and no production cycle, so the debate is empirically live and the two families predict different fine-grained timing signatures.

The balanced conclusion is that the convergence is real and valuable and is probably the safest ground the field currently has to build on, while remaining a working consensus open to revision rather than a proven and complete account of the mind.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Sensory signals from the environment, raw or feature-coded input consumed by the perception component.

◦ Task goals and instructions, structures placed into working memory by perception or by prior cycles.

◦ Retrieval results, declarative chunks returned by long-term memory in answer to posted requests.

◦ Outcome feedback, reward and error signals consumed by the pervasive learning mechanisms in every component.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Motor commands, discrete actions issued by the motor component to the body or environment.

◦ Working memory updates, the changed contents of the central buffer, visible to all components on the hub.

◦ New long-term knowledge, freshly stored declarative chunks and newly compiled or tuned productions.

◦ In workspace theories, a global broadcast, the selected conscious content published to all specialist processors.

• STATE.

◦ Working memory contents, the current small set of active chunks on the central bus.

◦ Declarative memory, the fact store with per-chunk activation and reliability values.

◦ Procedural memory, the production store with per-rule utility values.

◦ Perceptual and motor buffers, the in-flight input interpretations and pending actions.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Working memory capacity, about four chunks in the human case.

◦ Production cycle time, the clock period of the procedural matcher.

◦ Retrieval threshold and noise, controlling which declarative chunks can be recalled and how reliably.

◦ Learning rates for utility tuning, chunk strengthening, and compilation.

◦ In workspace variants, the ignition threshold, the input strength needed to trigger global broadcast.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Production cycle: about 50 milliseconds per rule firing, the consensus figure inherited from ACT-R and Soar.

◦ Working memory span: about four chunks, a capacity rather than a duration, held only while actively maintained.

◦ Conscious access in the Global Neuronal Workspace: ignition beginning roughly 300 milliseconds after stimulus onset, the late widespread signature separating seen from unseen.

◦ Declarative retrieval latency: REFUSED as a single value, because it varies with chunk activation from tens of milliseconds to failure, and the model makes it a function, not a constant.

• MODES.

◦ Reactive mode, where a single production fires directly off the current situation, triggered by a confident match and no impasse.

◦ Deliberative mode, where many cycles chain through working memory to search and plan, triggered by an impasse or novel goal.

◦ Learning-in-passing mode, always on under the pervasive-learning commitment, with every cycle nudging utilities and activations.

◦ Below-threshold versus ignited processing in workspace variants, switched by stimulus strength and attention crossing the ignition threshold.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Working memory overflow, losing task-relevant chunks when more than the capacity is needed, producing slips and place-losing errors.

◦ Retrieval failure and misretrieval, blocked or wrong facts when activations mislead, the tip-of-the-tongue pattern.

◦ Bottleneck congestion, degraded dual-task performance when two demanding streams contend for the serial cycle.

◦ Overreading the consensus, a failure of the field rather than the machine, mistaking a within-school agreement for a proven law.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list called working memory that is empty and has a capacity of four chunks.
Create a dictionary called declarative memory mapping fact names to fact values.
Create a list called procedural memory holding production rules, each with a condition, an action, and a utility number.
Repeat the following decision cycle until the goal in working memory is marked complete.
    Ask the perception component for the current observation and form it into a chunk.
    Add the observation chunk to working memory.
    If working memory holds more chunks than its capacity, remove the oldest chunks until it fits.
    Find every production rule whose condition matches some chunk in working memory.
    If no rule matches, post a retrieval request naming the most recent chunk to declarative memory.
        If declarative memory holds a matching fact, add that fact to working memory as a new chunk.
        Otherwise, mark the goal as failed and stop the cycle.
    Otherwise, select the matching rule with the highest utility.
    If the selected rule's action is a motor action, send the action to the motor component and record the outcome.
    Otherwise, apply the rule's action to working memory by adding or changing chunks.
    Adjust the selected rule's utility upward if the outcome was good and downward if it was bad.
Report the contents of working memory as the result of the run.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a list called working memory that starts empty, with a capacity of four chunks.
working_memory, CAPACITY = [], 4
# Create a dictionary called declarative memory mapping fact names to fact values.
declarative = {"paris": "city", "goal_answer": "city"}
# Create a list of production rules, each holding a condition word, an action, and a utility number.
procedural = [
    # Rule one: if a question chunk is present, request a retrieval of its topic.
    ["question", "retrieve", 0.6],
    # Rule two: if a fact chunk is present, answer using the fact.
    ["fact", "answer", 0.8],
]

# Define a function that sends an answer to the motor component by printing it.
def motor(text):
    # Print the answer text as the outward action.
    print("MOTOR OUTPUT:", text)

# Place the perceived question about paris into working memory as the starting chunk.
working_memory.append(("question", "paris"))
# Repeat the decision cycle up to ten times, each cycle standing for about fifty milliseconds.
for cycle in range(10):
    # If working memory holds more chunks than its capacity, remove the oldest chunks until it fits.
    while len(working_memory) > CAPACITY:
        working_memory.pop(0)
    # Find every rule whose condition word matches the type of some chunk in working memory.
    matches = [r for r in procedural if any(c[0] == r[0] for c in working_memory)]
    # If no rule matches, stop the cycle because the system has reached an impasse.
    if not matches:
        break
    # Select the matching rule with the highest utility number.
    rule = max(matches, key=lambda r: r[2])
    # If the selected action is a retrieval, ask declarative memory for the topic of the question chunk.
    if rule[1] == "retrieve":
        # Find the question chunk and look up its topic in declarative memory.
        topic = next(c[1] for c in working_memory if c[0] == "question")
        # If declarative memory holds the fact, add it to working memory as a fact chunk.
        if topic in declarative:
            working_memory.append(("fact", topic, declarative[topic]))
        # Increase the rule's utility slightly because the retrieval succeeded.
        rule[2] = rule[2] + 0.05
    # Otherwise, if the selected action is answering, send the fact to the motor component and finish.
    elif rule[1] == "answer":
        # Find the fact chunk in working memory.
        fact = next(c for c in working_memory if c[0] == "fact")
        # Send the assembled answer sentence to the motor component.
        motor(fact[1] + " is a " + fact[2])
        # Increase the rule's utility slightly because the goal was achieved, then stop.
        rule[2] = rule[2] + 0.05
        break


CHAPTER 64. CROSS-CUTTING MECHANISMS, EVALUATION, AND APPLICATIONS (ARCHITECTURE)

This chapter looks across the whole family of architectures rather than at any single one, and it does three things in turn.

First it identifies the recurring mechanisms that show up, in one form or another, in nearly every architecture, so that you can see the common toolkit beneath the different names.

Then it asks the hard question of how anyone can tell whether an architecture is any good, which is the problem of evaluation.

Finally it surveys what these architectures are actually used for in the world, which is the test of whether all this theory earns its keep.


64.1 The shared mechanisms

This section pulls out the handful of jobs that every whole-mind design has to solve, and shows the range of ways the field has solved each one, so the reader can recognise the same underlying function wearing different costumes.


64.1.1 The memory systems across architectures

Almost every cognitive architecture divides its memory into several distinct stores rather than using one undifferentiated pool, and the pattern of division is remarkably consistent.

The most common split is between a short-term working memory, the small active workspace holding what the system is dealing with right now, and one or more long-term memories that hold knowledge lastingly.

The long-term side is itself usually split again, mirroring a distinction from human psychology, between declarative memory for facts and events and procedural memory for skills and rules.

For example ACT-R, whose name stands for Adaptive Control of Thought - Rational, keeps declarative chunks of fact separate from procedural production rules, Soar keeps several long-term memories including one for facts and one for procedures, and the Common Model enshrines exactly this factual-versus-skill division as part of its agreed core.

The systems reading is that the stores differ on every engineering axis at once: working memory is small, fast, and volatile, declarative memory is large, slower, and content-addressed by cue similarity, and procedural memory is write-slow but execute-fast, matched against the current state on every cycle.

The reason this division recurs is that the two kinds of knowledge behave differently, since a fact can be learned in one exposure and stated at once, whereas a skill is built up gradually through practice and is hard to put into words, and a single store cannot do justice to both.

Recognising this shared pattern is useful because it lets you see past surface differences in naming and notice that most architectures are making the same basic bet about how memory should be carved up.


64.1.2 The learning mechanisms: chunking, reinforcement, instance-based, and evolutionary

Architectures also share a small toolkit of learning mechanisms, and it helps to name the main four plainly, since almost every system uses some combination of them.

Chunking is learning by bundling several small steps that were just worked out into a single larger unit that can be used directly next time, so that a solution painfully assembled once becomes a ready-made shortcut later, and it is central to Soar.

Reinforcement learning is learning from the consequences of actions, gradually raising the tendency to take actions that led to reward and lowering the tendency to take actions that led to disappointment, the same trial-and-error principle that trains animals with treats.

Instance-based learning is learning by simply storing individual experienced episodes and then handling new situations by recalling and reusing the most similar past instances, so that knowing comes from remembering particular cases rather than from distilling general rules.

Evolutionary learning is learning by keeping a population of candidate solutions, letting the better ones survive and combine and mutate over many generations, and thereby discovering good structures through a designed imitation of natural selection.

As systems, the four differ in their inputs and timescales: chunking consumes a trace of a just-solved problem and writes one new rule immediately, reinforcement consumes a scalar reward and nudges numeric preferences over many trials, instance-based learning consumes whole episodes and pays its cost at recall time, and evolutionary learning consumes fitness scores over a population and operates on the slowest timescale of all, many generations.

Most architectures mix several of these, for example using reinforcement to tune which rules to prefer while using chunking to build new rules, and seeing them as a shared toolkit makes the differences between architectures easier to grasp as different recipes drawn from common ingredients.


64.1.3 Perception, action, and the grounding of symbols

Every architecture must connect to the world at both ends, taking information in through perception and pushing behaviour out through action, and how well they do this varies a great deal.

Perception is the front end that converts raw sensory signals into the internal items the rest of the system can reason with, and action is the back end that converts internal decisions into movements and outputs.

Historically many architectures treated these ends lightly, feeding in already-tidied symbolic descriptions and reading out abstract actions, because their designers were mainly interested in the reasoning in the middle.

That shortcut runs straight into the symbol grounding problem, which is the difficulty that a symbol inside a system means nothing on its own unless it is somehow connected to real perception and action in the world, just as a word in a dictionary defined only by other words never touches reality.

An architecture whose symbols are handed to it by a programmer has, in a sense, borrowed its meaning from the programmer, whereas an architecture that builds its symbols out of its own sensing and acting has a better claim to genuinely grounded knowledge.

In systems terms grounding is a question about where the transduction boundary sits: an ungrounded design takes clean symbols as its input format and emits abstract action labels, while a grounded design takes raw sensor streams as input, emits actuator commands as output, and must learn the mapping between the two in between, which is a far harder interface contract.

This is one of the main pressures pushing the field toward robotics and toward richer perception, because putting an architecture in a body that must sense and act for itself forces its symbols to be earned rather than given.

The honest state of affairs is that grounding remains only partly solved, and how thoroughly an architecture grounds its symbols is one of the clearest ways its maturity can be judged.


64.1.4 Attention, the central bottleneck, and resource allocation

Because no architecture has unlimited computing power, every one must have some way of deciding what to work on and what to ignore, and this is the function of attention within an architecture.

Attention in this setting means the mechanism that selects, from far more information and far more possible actions than the system could ever handle at once, the small portion it will actually process now.

Closely related is the idea of a central bottleneck, a narrow point through which only one, or very few, streams of processing can pass at a time, which forces the system to serialise, meaning to handle certain things one after another rather than all together.

This mirrors a well-documented human limit, since people are strikingly bad at doing two demanding thinking tasks at the very same instant, and architectures reproduce that limit through their own bottlenecks.

Global Workspace based systems such as LIDA embody the bottleneck as the competition for the single spotlight, so that only the winning content is broadcast, while production-system architectures embody it in the limited working memory and the choosing of a single action each cycle.

As a system, attention is a scheduler over a fixed budget: its inputs are the salience and priority values attached to competing items, its output is an admission decision per cycle, and its characteristic timescale is the decision cycle itself, so the cost of the bottleneck shows up as queuing delay whenever demand exceeds the single-channel capacity.

More broadly this is a problem of resource allocation, meaning the wise spending of a fixed budget of attention and computation, and how gracefully an architecture spends that budget is a large part of how humanlike its behaviour looks.


64.1.5 Metacognition, emotion, and motivation as modules

The final shared theme is that the more ambitious architectures include machinery for the mind watching, wanting, and feeling, not just the mind reasoning, and treat these as first-class parts rather than extras.

Metacognition, as a module, is the part that monitors the rest of the system and adjusts it, noticing for instance that the current approach is failing and that a different strategy is needed, and CLARION's metacognitive subsystem is a clear example.

Motivation, as a module, is the part that generates goals and drives in the first place, answering why the system does anything, and MicroPsi's demands and urges are a worked-out example of building motivation in from the ground.

Emotion, as a module or as an emergent state, is treated as a set of whole-system adjustments that change how the mind operates under different conditions, for example acting faster and attending more narrowly under threat, again as in MicroPsi's modulators.

Seen together the three form a supervisory control layer: motivation supplies the reference goals, emotion supplies global gain scheduling that retunes speed and breadth of processing, and metacognition supplies the feedback loop that monitors performance and switches strategies, all operating on a slower timescale than the basic decision cycle they govern.

The reason these appear is a shared recognition that a purely cold reasoning engine leaves out much of what actually drives and shapes human thought, and that a genuinely humanlike mind must want things, feel things, and govern itself.

At the same time these are the least settled parts of the field, which is exactly why, as the previous chapter noted, metacognition and emotion are proposed extensions to the Common Model still under debate rather than agreed core.


64.2 Evaluation

This section faces the awkward central question of the whole enterprise, which is how anyone can actually tell whether one architecture is better than another, or whether any of them is any good at all.

Evaluation is genuinely hard here, and being honest about that difficulty is more useful than pretending there is a clean scoreboard.


64.2.1 The fitting of human data across tasks

The main and most respected way an architecture earns credibility is by fitting human data, meaning by producing behaviour that matches, in detail, what real people do in real experiments.

Fitting the data means more than getting the right answer, since it means reproducing the fine grain of human performance, such as how long people take, which errors they make, and how they speed up with practice, across many different tasks.

The strongest form of this test is breadth, because a good architecture should account for many different phenomena, from memory to attention to problem solving, using the same fixed machinery rather than a fresh special model for each task.

ACT-R is often praised on exactly this ground, having been used to model an enormous range of laboratory tasks while keeping its core mechanisms and even many of its numerical settings the same, which is a serious achievement.

In systems terms an evaluation run is a pipeline: the inputs are the model, a task set, and the human reference data, the procedure holds core parameters fixed across tasks, the outputs are error scores per task such as mean squared difference on reaction times and error rates, and the summary statistic is fit averaged across tasks penalised by the number of free parameters.

The everyday standard being applied is that a theory that can bend to fit anything explains nothing, so the value lies in fitting a lot of independent data with a small, fixed set of assumptions.

Still, fitting human data has a well-known weakness, namely that a flexible model with enough adjustable numbers can sometimes match results without capturing the real mechanism, so careful evaluators also ask whether the fits generalise to new situations the model was not tuned on.


64.2.2 The problem of a unified benchmark across architectures

A benchmark is a shared, standardised test that lets you compare different systems fairly by running them all on the very same challenge, and the central difficulty of this section is that cognitive architectures have no good one.

In some fields benchmarks are everything, since machine-learning systems, for instance, compete on identical datasets so that progress can be measured cleanly, but architectures have resisted this kind of common yardstick.

There are several honest reasons for the lack, and it is worth naming them so the absence does not look like mere negligence.

Different architectures were built for different purposes and emphasise different capacities, so a single test would inevitably favour whatever it happened to measure and unfairly penalise systems designed for other things.

The architectures also differ in how much of the surrounding scaffolding, such as perception and the specific task knowledge, is hand-built versus learned, which makes it hard to know whether a good result reflects the architecture or the cleverness of the person who set it up.

There is also no agreement on what the single most important thing to measure even is, since breadth, human likeness, learning ability, and practical usefulness can all reasonably be prized, and they pull in different directions.

Stated as an interface problem, a fair benchmark would need a common input format every architecture can consume, a common output format every architecture can produce, and a declared budget for hand-built task knowledge, and no such shared interface contract currently exists, which is why the comparisons stay apples to oranges.

The consequence is that the field evaluates largely case by case, architecture by architecture and task by task, and the absence of a shared benchmark is widely recognised as a real weakness that makes progress harder to measure and claims harder to compare.


64.3 Applications

This section leaves theory behind and asks what cognitive architectures are actually good for in practice, because a design for a mind, however elegant, ultimately has to prove itself by doing useful work.

The applications fall into a few broad areas, and together they show that these architectures are not only philosophical exercises but working tools.


64.3.1 Human-behaviour and performance modelling

The first and most established application is using an architecture as a stand-in for a human being, in order to predict how real people will behave and perform.

The idea is that if an architecture genuinely captures how a mind works, you can put it in the place of a person doing a task and read off, in advance, how long the person will take, where they will make mistakes, and how a change to the task will help or hurt.

A major use is in the design of equipment and interfaces, where a modelled operator can be run through a proposed cockpit layout or software screen so that designers can find slow steps and likely errors before any real person is exposed to them.

This matters because testing designs on modelled minds is far faster, cheaper, and safer than running large studies with people at every step, especially in high-stakes settings such as aviation and driving.

Architectures such as ACT-R, and specialised systems like EPIC, whose name stands for Executive Process Interactive Control and which focuses on the fine timing of perception and movement, have been used exactly this way to predict human performance in demanding tasks.

As a system, the modelled operator is a simulator with the task interface as input, predicted keystroke-level timings and error locations as output, and a characteristic resolution of tens of milliseconds, which is what makes it useful for spotting bottlenecks in second-scale interactions.

The value of these predictions rests entirely on the architecture being an accurate model of the mind, which is why this application and the evaluation questions of the previous section are two sides of the same coin.


64.3.2 Intelligent tutoring systems

A second and notably successful application is the intelligent tutoring system, which is a computer teacher that adapts to each individual student, and it is arguably the field's clearest real-world win.

The most famous example is the Cognitive Tutor, a family of tutoring programs for subjects such as high-school mathematics, built by Carnegie Learning on the foundation of John Anderson's ACT-R theory.

The core trick is that the tutor contains a cognitive model of how a skilled student solves the problems, and it uses this model in two connected ways.

The first is model tracing, meaning the tutor follows along with each step the student takes and compares it against the steps its inner model would take, so it can recognise at once when a student goes wrong and offer help right there.

The second is knowledge tracing, meaning the tutor keeps a running estimate, for each separate skill, of the probability that this particular student has now mastered it, updating that estimate every time the student gets a relevant problem right or wrong.

In systems terms the tutor is an observer-controller pair: model tracing is the observer, taking the student's step stream as input and emitting a match-or-mismatch signal per step, and knowledge tracing is the state estimator, holding one mastery probability per skill and updating it on every observed outcome, with problem selection as the control output that steers practice toward low-mastery skills.

Using these estimates the tutor gives each student more practice on exactly the skills they have not yet mastered and less on the ones they have, which personalises the teaching in a way a single human teacher with thirty pupils cannot easily match.

Controlled studies of these tutors in real schools have reported meaningful learning gains over traditional classroom instruction, which makes intelligent tutoring one of the strongest pieces of evidence that architecture research can pay off in practice, though, as with all education research, exact effects vary with how and where the tutors are used.


64.3.3 Human-robot interaction and cognitive robotics

A third application places a cognitive architecture inside a robot, so that the robot's behaviour is driven by a model of a mind rather than by narrow special-purpose programming, and this area is called cognitive robotics.

The appeal is that a robot working alongside people in an unpredictable world needs many of the same capacities a mind needs, such as perceiving its surroundings, remembering, setting goals, planning, and adapting, which is exactly what an architecture is supposed to provide in an integrated way.

Human-robot interaction adds a further demand, namely that the robot should understand and cooperate with people, which calls for capacities such as taking turns, following shared attention, and forming some model of what its human partner knows and wants.

Putting an architecture in a robot also confronts it directly with the grounding problem discussed earlier, because a physical robot cannot be handed clean symbols by a programmer but must build its understanding out of its own noisy sensors and imperfect actuators.

The systems demand is real-time closure of the loop: sensor input arrives continuously, actuator commands must go out fast enough to keep the body safe, and any architecture whose decision cycle cannot keep pace with the world's own timescale fails in a way no offline simulation would reveal.

For this reason cognitive robotics is not only an application but also a demanding test bed, since a body in the real world exposes any gaps in an architecture's perception, action, and real-time coping that a tidy simulation would hide.

Architectures including Soar, ACT-R, and ICARUS, the last of which was designed with physical agents in mind, have been used to control robots, though robust, general, humanlike robot behaviour remains an unsolved and actively pursued goal rather than an accomplished fact.


64.3.4 Autonomous agents and synthetic characters

The fourth application uses architectures to drive software agents and characters that act on their own inside virtual worlds rather than in physical robots.

An autonomous agent here means a piece of software that pursues its own goals over time without step-by-step human control, for example a simulated soldier in a military training exercise or a non-player character in a game or simulation.

A synthetic character means such an agent designed specifically to seem like a believable person or creature, with apparent goals, memories, and emotions, so that people interacting with it find it convincing and lifelike.

Cognitive architectures are attractive for this because they can give a character genuine internal structure, so that its behaviour arises from remembering, wanting, and deciding rather than from a shallow script, which tends to make the character more flexible and more believable.

The motivational and emotional architectures are especially relevant here, since a character that has something like drives and feelings, as in the Psi-theory tradition, can react to events with a plausible inner life rather than a fixed set of canned responses.

In systems terms the character is the same architecture with a cheaper interface: its perception input is the game state rather than raw sensors and its motor output is a game command rather than a joint torque, which is why virtual worlds serve as an affordable middle step between pure simulation and full robotics.

A long-standing large-scale use is in training simulations, where architecture-driven agents play the roles of teammates, opponents, and bystanders so that human trainees can practise in realistic populated scenarios.

Across all four applications the common thread is the same, namely that whenever a task needs a whole coordinated mind rather than one narrow skill, an integrated cognitive architecture is a natural tool, and how well it performs in these roles is, in the end, the most demanding test of whether the theories in this part of the outline are on the right track.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Candidate model, an architecture with a fixed core parameter set, supplied by the modeller to the evaluation harness.

◦ Task battery, a set of task definitions each with stimuli and scoring procedure, drawn from the experimental literature.

◦ Human reference data, per-task behavioural measures such as mean reaction times, error rates, and learning curves.

◦ Application demands, in deployment, the sensor streams, student steps, or game states of the target setting.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Per-task fit scores, numeric discrepancy measures between model behaviour and human data, consumed by the modeller and reviewers.

◦ A breadth summary, the count of tasks fit acceptably under one fixed parameter set, the field's main credibility currency.

◦ Predicted human performance, timings and error locations, consumed by interface designers and tutors.

◦ Diagnosed weaknesses, the tasks and mechanisms where fits fail, feeding the next design revision.

• STATE.

◦ The frozen core parameter vector, held constant across all tasks in a breadth evaluation.

◦ Per-task knowledge scaffolding, the hand-built task rules and representations, which must be declared because they confound comparison.

◦ Accumulated fit records across tasks, the running scoreboard of the evaluation.

◦ In tutoring deployments, per-student mastery estimates, one probability per skill.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Number of free parameters permitted, the flexibility budget that fit scores must be penalised against.

◦ Fit criterion, the discrepancy measure chosen, such as squared error on reaction times or correlation on error patterns.

◦ Generalisation split, the division between tasks used for tuning and tasks held out for testing.

◦ Scaffolding budget, how much hand-built task knowledge each contestant is allowed.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Model-predicted behaviour is scored at the resolution of the human data, commonly tens of milliseconds for reaction times, anchored by the roughly 50 millisecond production cycle.

◦ Skill mastery in tutoring: REFUSED as a constant, because knowledge-tracing updates are per-opportunity and mastery time varies by skill and student.

◦ Robot control loop deadlines: REFUSED, because required rates depend on the platform and task, from milliseconds for balance to seconds for dialogue.

• MODES.

◦ Tuning mode, where parameters may move to fit the training tasks, entered when a new model or task is introduced.

◦ Frozen evaluation mode, where all parameters are locked and held-out tasks are run, entered when credibility is being claimed.

◦ Deployment mode, where the architecture serves as operator model, tutor, robot controller, or character, entered when fits are judged good enough to use.

◦ Diagnosis mode, where failures are traced to mechanisms, entered whenever a fit or a deployment falls short.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Overfitting, matching data through parameter flexibility rather than mechanism, exposed when held-out tasks fail.

◦ Scaffolding illusion, results that reflect the modeller's hand-built task knowledge rather than the architecture, the confound a missing benchmark cannot control.

◦ Benchmark bias, any single shared test unfairly favouring the capacities it happens to measure.

◦ Deployment mismatch, a model accurate in the laboratory failing in the field, as when a tutor mis-estimates mastery or a robot controller misses real-time deadlines.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list called task battery holding several tasks, each with a name, a difficulty number, and the human mean response time for that task.
Create a dictionary called model parameters holding a base time number and a time per difficulty step number.
Create an empty list called fit records.
For each task in the task battery, do the following.
    Calculate the model predicted time as the base time plus the time per difficulty step times the task difficulty.
    Calculate the error as the model predicted time minus the human mean time for the task.
    Calculate the squared error as the error times the error.
    Append the task name, the predicted time, the human time, and the squared error to the fit records.
Calculate the mean squared error as the sum of the squared errors divided by the number of tasks.
Calculate the root mean squared error as the square root of the mean squared error.
Count how many tasks have a prediction within ten percent of the human time, and call this the breadth count.
Print each fit record showing the task name, the predicted time, and the human time.
Print the root mean squared error and the breadth count as the overall evaluation of the model.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the math module for the square root function.
import math

# Create a list called task battery holding tasks, each with a name, a difficulty, and a human mean time in milliseconds.
task_battery = [
    # Each task gives its name, its difficulty in steps, and the observed human mean response time.
    ("simple_reaction", 1, 250.0),
    ("choice_reaction", 3, 420.0),
    ("mental_arithmetic", 8, 730.0),
    ("memory_scanning", 5, 520.0),
    ("problem_solving", 12, 950.0),
]
# Create a dictionary called model parameters holding a base time and a time per difficulty step.
params = {"base": 180.0, "per_step": 55.0}
# Create an empty list called fit records.
fit_records = []

# For each task in the task battery, compute the model prediction and its error.
for name, difficulty, human_time in task_battery:
    # Calculate the model predicted time as the base time plus the per-step time times the difficulty.
    predicted = params["base"] + params["per_step"] * difficulty
    # Calculate the error as the predicted time minus the human mean time.
    error = predicted - human_time
    # Calculate the squared error as the error times the error.
    squared_error = error * error
    # Append the task name, the predicted time, the human time, and the squared error to the fit records.
    fit_records.append((name, predicted, human_time, squared_error))

# Calculate the mean squared error as the sum of squared errors divided by the number of tasks.
mse = sum(rec[3] for rec in fit_records) / len(fit_records)
# Calculate the root mean squared error as the square root of the mean squared error.
rmse = math.sqrt(mse)
# Count how many tasks have a prediction within ten percent of the human time, as the breadth count.
breadth = sum(1 for rec in fit_records if abs(rec[1] - rec[2]) <= 0.1 * rec[2])

# For each fit record, print the task name, the predicted time, and the human time.
for name, predicted, human_time, squared_error in fit_records:
    # Print the comparison line for this task, rounding times to whole milliseconds.
    print(name, "predicted", round(predicted), "ms, human", round(human_time), "ms")
# Print the root mean squared error as the overall fit measure.
print("Root mean squared error:", round(rmse, 1), "ms")
# Print the breadth count as the number of tasks fit within ten percent under one fixed parameter set.
print("Tasks fit within ten percent:", breadth, "of", len(task_battery))


================================================================================

PART FIFTEEN. THE FRONTIER AND THE BRIDGE TO ARTIFICIAL GENERAL INTELLIGENCE

================================================================================

CHAPTER 65. PROGRAM INDUCTION AND THE PROBABILISTIC LANGUAGE OF THOUGHT (FRONTIER)

This chapter is about one of the boldest ideas at the meeting point of the science of mind and the science of machines.

The idea is that a concept in your head - what a dog is, what the number seven is, how a handwritten letter is drawn - might be stored not as a picture or a list of features, but as a little program, a recipe of steps for producing or recognising examples of the thing.

If that is true, then learning is a kind of programming, the mind writing short programs to explain what it sees, and a machine that learned the way we do would have to write such programs too.

Read as an engineered system, a program-induction learner takes observed examples as input, searches a space of candidate programs as its core operation, holds a growing library of reusable program parts as its state, and outputs the shortest program that explains the data well.

The word "frontier" in the chapter tag is honest: these are live research bets, not settled textbook facts, and this chapter tells you where the excitement is and where the doubts are.

We will meet three linked ideas: concepts as programs, a "probabilistic language of thought" in which those programs are written, and a broader agenda for building machines that learn and think the way people do.


65.1 Concepts as programs

This section introduces the central image of the whole chapter, so it is worth slowing down over.

A program, in plain terms, is a set of instructions that a machine can follow step by step to produce a result, the way a recipe produces a cake.

The claim here is that many human concepts behave like programs: compact, made of reusable parts, and able to generate endless new examples from a few simple rules.

The word "probabilistic" will keep appearing, and it just means "involving chance and degrees of belief" rather than fixed certainty, because the mind is rarely sure and must weigh possibilities.

In systems terms, a concept-as-program is a generative module: its input is a request to produce or evaluate an example, its output is either a generated instance or a probability score for an observed instance, and its stored form is the program text itself, which is far more compact than a table of remembered examples.


65.1.1 Bayesian program learning

Bayesian program learning is a specific, celebrated proposal that a concept is a probabilistic program, a recipe with some randomness built in, that can generate the examples we see.

The name honours Thomas Bayes, an eighteenth-century clergyman whose rule for updating beliefs in the light of evidence is the mathematical backbone of the approach, so "Bayesian" here means "reasoning about probabilities by combining what you expected beforehand with what you observe".

The landmark study was published in the journal Science in 2015 by Brenden Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua Tenenbaum, under the title "Human-level concept learning through probabilistic program induction".

Their test bed was handwriting.

They built a data set called Omniglot, which contains 1,623 different handwritten characters drawn from 50 different alphabets around the world, with each character produced by 20 different people.

The word "Omniglot" simply blends "omni", meaning all, with "glot", meaning tongue or language, so it is meant to be a collection of all the world's scripts.

The hard test they set is called one-shot learning, which means learning a brand new concept from a single example, something young children do easily and most machines of the time did badly.

Show a person one example of an unfamiliar letter and they can recognise other people's versions of it, draw new versions themselves, and even invent plausible new letters in the same style.

Their model captured this by treating each character as a program that builds the letter out of pen strokes, where each stroke is itself made of smaller sub-strokes, and the strokes are joined at relations like "start where the last stroke ended".

As a system, the learner subscribes to a single image of a new character, searches for the stroke program most likely to have drawn it, and publishes that program as the learned concept, which can then be run forwards to draw new examples or run backwards to classify other images.

Three ideas did the heavy lifting, and they are worth naming because they recur across the chapter.

The first is compositionality, which means building complex things by combining a small set of simpler parts, the way sentences are built from words.

The second is causality, which here means that the program mimics the real physical process that produced the data, in this case the actual motions of a pen, rather than just the finished ink.

The third is learning to learn, which means that experience with earlier concepts, such as earlier alphabets, tunes the system so that each new concept is easier to acquire.

The result was striking: the model learned new characters from one example about as accurately as human adults, and in "visual Turing test" style judging, people could not reliably tell the model's drawings from human ones.

A Turing test, named after the mathematician Alan Turing, is any test in which a judge tries to tell machine output from human output, and failing to tell them apart is taken as a mark of humanlike performance.

It is important to be even-handed about what this did and did not show.

It showed that a structured, program-like model with very little data could match humans on a task where large pattern-learning networks of the day needed far more examples.

It did not show that the brain literally stores letters as this exact kind of program, and it was limited to a fairly clean, well-defined domain.

The authors themselves followed up in 2019 with an "Omniglot challenge" progress report, honestly concluding that even several years later, machines were still not learning these concepts in a fully humanlike way, so the problem remains open.


65.1.2 Library learning and wake-sleep program synthesis

If concepts are programs, a natural next question is where the reusable parts, the building blocks, come from.

This sub-section is about a system that tries to grow its own toolbox of parts while it learns, rather than being handed the parts in advance.

The system is called DreamCoder, described by Kevin Ellis and colleagues, including Joshua Tenenbaum and Armando Solar-Lezama, in work published around 2020 and 2021.

Program synthesis, the phrase in the heading, means getting a computer to write programs by itself to solve tasks, given only examples of what the answer should look like.

Library learning means that as the system solves many small problems, it notices chunks of code that keep proving useful and files them away as new named building blocks, exactly as a human programmer factors out a helper routine to reuse later.

Over time the library deepens, so that early crude solutions become the raw material from which higher-level concepts are composed, and later problems that once looked hard become easy because the right building block already exists.

The learning method is called wake-sleep, a two-phase cycle inspired by an older idea in machine learning and loosely evocative of the roles of waking and sleeping in the brain.

In the "wake" phase the system is awake and working, searching for programs that solve the current tasks using the library it has so far, guided by a neural network that has learned to guess promising solutions.

In the "sleep" phase the system steps back from the data, reviews the programs it found, distils out common patterns into new library concepts, and even dreams up practice problems for itself to train its guessing network.

A neural network, for readers meeting the term, is a computing system loosely inspired by brain cells, made of many simple units whose connection strengths are adjusted by experience so the whole learns from examples.

In systems terms this is a two-mode controller: the wake mode consumes tasks and the current library and produces solved programs, the sleep mode consumes those programs and produces an enriched library and a better search heuristic, and the alternation between modes is scheduled by the training loop rather than by the data.

DreamCoder was shown to work across eight varied domains, from making lists and sorting to drawing pictures and rediscovering simple laws of physics, learning concepts a human would recognise, such as the idea of a vector or of sorting.

The reason this matters for a science of mind is that it is a working demonstration of a system that bootstraps, meaning it lifts itself up by its own effort, building richer and richer concepts out of poorer ones, which is one candidate story for how human conceptual knowledge grows over a lifetime.

The honest caveat is that these systems still work best in tidy, formal domains and are far from the open, messy richness of everyday human concepts, so the demonstration is a proof of principle rather than a finished model of the mind.


65.2 The probabilistic language of thought

This section names the medium in which all these little programs are supposed to be written.

The phrase "language of thought" is old and comes from the philosopher Jerry Fodor, who argued in the 1970s that thinking happens in an internal, language-like code, sometimes nicknamed "mentalese", with its own words and grammar.

The newer twist, "probabilistic", adds chance and uncertainty to that code, so that thoughts are not rigid logical statements but recipes that can express "probably", "usually", and "it depends".

The proposal is that this probabilistic code is general purpose, one shared format in which the mind can frame perception, physical intuition, and reasoning about other people alike.

In systems terms the claim is architectural: instead of many special-purpose formats, one intermediate representation carries every kind of thought, the way a single machine code underlies many different applications on one computer.


65.2.1 The probabilistic-programming substrates

A substrate is the underlying material or foundation on which something is built, so a "probabilistic-programming substrate" is the concrete computer language in which these thought-programs can actually be written and run.

The key tool is a class of computer languages called probabilistic programming languages, which let you write down a model of how some part of the world randomly generates data, and then automatically run the model backwards to infer likely causes from observed effects.

The founding example in this line of cognitive science is a language called Church, introduced in 2008 by Noah Goodman, Vikash Mansinghka, Daniel Roy, Keith Bonawitz, and Joshua Tenenbaum, and named in honour of the logician Alonzo Church.

Church was built on top of a well-known style of programming from the Lisp and Scheme tradition, extended so that any part of a program can make a random choice, which lets a short program stand for a rich space of possible worlds.

The theoretical claim attached to these tools is the probabilistic language of thought hypothesis, put forward by Goodman, Tenenbaum, and Tobias Gerstenberg, that concepts are functions in such a probabilistic mental code and that thinking is running and conditioning these programs.

To "condition" a program means to fix some facts as observed and ask the program what else is then likely, which is how a single generative recipe can answer endless different questions.

As a system, a probabilistic program has two directions of data flow: forwards, it takes random choices as input and publishes simulated data, and backwards, it takes observed data as input and publishes a probability distribution over the hidden choices that could have produced it.

Researchers have used this framework to model a wide sweep of human inferences, including judgments that draw on seeing, on imagining how physical objects will move, and on reasoning about what other people want and believe.

The appeal is unification: instead of a separate special-purpose theory for each mental task, one flexible language expresses a world model, and the same inference machinery answers many questions about it.

The open worry, which fair-minded advocates acknowledge, is that running such programs exactly is often far too slow to be plausible for a real brain, which pushes the field toward approximate short-cuts, a theme we return to in the chapter on rational process models.


65.2.2 Rational meaning construction and the translation from language

This sub-section connects the probabilistic language of thought to ordinary human language, which is a natural bridge to the large-language-model chapters that follow.

The guiding study is a 2023 paper by Lionel Wong, Gabriel Grand, and colleagues, with Joshua Tenenbaum and Noah Goodman among the authors, titled "From Word Models to World Models".

Its subtitle spells out the plan: "Translating from Natural Language to the Probabilistic Language of Thought".

The proposal is called rational meaning construction, and the everyday version of the idea is this: understanding a sentence means turning its words into a small runnable model of the situation, which you can then think with.

Their design uses a modern large language model, a system trained on huge amounts of text to predict words, but only as a translator.

The large language model reads an English sentence and converts it into code in a probabilistic programming language, and then a separate, trustworthy reasoning engine actually runs that code to draw conclusions.

The word "rational" here signals that the final answers come from principled probability calculations, not from the language model's raw guesswork, which the authors argue makes the reasoning more reliable and more humanlike.

They connect the translator to purpose-built modules, such as a physics simulator for reasoning about how objects move and a planner for reasoning about goals, so that language can tap into these specialised thinking tools.

In systems terms this is a pipeline architecture: the input is a natural-language sentence, the first stage publishes program code, the second stage runs the code and publishes probabilistic conclusions, and the interface between the stages is the probabilistic language of thought itself.

The larger significance is a division of labour that many researchers find attractive: use text-trained networks for their fluency with words, but hand the heavy reasoning to explicit, checkable world models.

This is one of the most active current attempts to marry the strengths of the two traditions, and it is early work, so its promise is real but not yet proven at scale.


65.3 The integrative agenda

This final section steps back from particular systems to the overall research programme they belong to.

An agenda, in plain terms, is a to-do list, and "integrative" means it tries to bring many pieces together into one coherent effort.

The agenda asks a simple, ambitious question: what would it actually take to build a machine that learns and thinks the way a person does.


65.3.1 The core ingredients of humanlike learning and thought

The reference point here is an influential and much-debated 2017 article by Brenden Lake, Tomer Ullman, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Samuel Gershman, titled "Building machines that learn and think like people", published with open commentary in the journal Behavioral and Brain Sciences.

The article argues that human intelligence rests on a few core ingredients that most machine-learning systems of the time lacked, and it lays them out as a checklist.

The first ingredient is developmental start-up software, meaning the knowledge babies seem to bring to the world very early, in particular an intuitive physics for how objects move and an intuitive psychology for reading goals and beliefs in other agents.

Intuitive physics means a rough, fast, built-in sense of how the physical world behaves, such as expecting an unsupported object to fall.

Intuitive psychology means an equally quick sense that other creatures act to reach goals given their beliefs, which is what lets a baby be surprised by a person who takes the long way around when a short path is open.

The second ingredient is learning as rapid model-building rather than slow pattern-matching, the idea that people build a small explanatory model from a handful of examples instead of needing thousands.

The third ingredient is compositionality and learning to learn together, so that new knowledge is assembled from reusable parts and each thing learned makes the next thing faster to learn.

The fourth ingredient concerns thinking fast, the ability to run these rich models quickly using clever approximations rather than exhaustive calculation.

In systems terms the two sides of this debate make different predictions: the ingredients camp predicts that a system without built-in structure will need vastly more data and will fail on novel recombinations, while the learning-first camp predicts that enough data and scale will let the structure emerge inside the network on its own.

The article was pointed in its critique of pure deep-learning systems, and it drew vigorous replies from researchers who felt it underrated how much structure networks can learn on their own, so it should be read as one influential side of a genuine and continuing debate.

That debate has only sharpened since 2017 as large networks have grown far more capable, and reasonable experts still disagree about how many of these ingredients a system must be given versus how many it can learn.


65.3.2 Building machines that learn and think like people, and with people

The heading deliberately echoes the 2017 title but adds two crucial words, "with people", pointing to a newer turn in the programme.

The reference is a 2024 article in Nature Human Behaviour by Katherine Collins, Ilia Sucholutsky, Joshua Tenenbaum, Thomas Griffiths, and many colleagues, titled "Building machines that learn and think with people".

Its central shift is from machines as tools we use to machines as thought partners, systems that collaborate in reasoning rather than just answering.

A thought partner, in their sense, is a system you think alongside, one that is insightful, reliable, and trustworthy enough to genuinely help you reason, plan, and decide.

The proposed way to build such partners keeps the Bayesian spirit of the earlier work: the machine should actively build and reason over a model of the world and a model of the particular human it is helping.

Modelling the human matters because a good partner tracks what you already know, what you are trying to do, and where you are likely to go wrong, so it can offer the right help at the right moment.

In systems terms a thought partner subscribes to two streams, the state of the shared task and the state of the human, and publishes assistance that is conditioned on both, which is a strictly richer interface than a question-in, answer-out tool.

This reframes the goal of the whole frontier: not only to reproduce a single mind in a machine, but to design machines that fit into and strengthen the thinking of the people and groups who use them.

It is an aspiration and a design philosophy as much as a finished result, and the authors present it as a direction of travel rather than a solved problem.

For a project like konnectome, which aims at general and beyond-human machine intelligence, this "with people" framing is important because it treats humanlike cognition not as an end in itself but as the ground for a genuine partnership between human and artificial minds.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Observed examples of a concept, such as images of a character or terms of a number sequence, in whatever raw format the domain provides.

◦ A library of primitive operations and previously learned program parts, supplied by earlier learning.

◦ A prior over programs, usually favouring shorter programs, which encodes the expectation that the world is simply structured.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ The best program found, a compact generative recipe for the concept, consumed by later recognition, generation, and reasoning processes.

◦ A posterior probability, meaning an updated degree of belief, for each candidate program given the data, consumed by decision processes that must weigh alternatives.

◦ New library entries, reusable program fragments distilled from solutions, consumed by future learning episodes.

• STATE.

◦ The current library of concepts and parts, which grows across episodes.

◦ The set of candidate programs under consideration during a search, with their scores.

◦ Learned search guidance, such as a trained recognition network that proposes promising programs first.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ The trade-off weight between fitting the data well and keeping the program short, the heart of the Bayesian scoring rule.

◦ The maximum program length or search depth the learner will consider.

◦ The size of the primitive vocabulary, which fixes the expressive power of the language of thought.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ One-shot concept learning in humans: a single exposure of a few seconds suffices for a new handwritten character, as the Omniglot studies showed.

◦ Machine search time per concept: REFUSED, because it depends entirely on hardware, program space, and implementation, and no canonical value exists in the literature.

◦ Library growth in DreamCoder-style systems: unfolds over many wake-sleep cycles, typically hours to days of computation in published runs, but REFUSED as a general constant because it is implementation bound.

• MODES.

◦ Wake mode, searching for programs that explain current data using the existing library, triggered by the arrival of new tasks.

◦ Sleep abstraction mode, compressing found solutions into new library concepts, triggered by the end of a wake phase.

◦ Sleep dreaming mode, generating practice problems from the learner's own programs to train its search heuristic, alternating with abstraction on a schedule.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Search failure, where the true program exists in the space but is never found because the space is astronomically large.

◦ Mis-specified primitives, where the concept cannot be expressed at all because the language of thought lacks the needed parts.

◦ Overfitting to noise, where an over-long program memorises accidents of the examples instead of the rule, the machine analogue of superstition.

◦ Exact inference being intractably slow, forcing approximations that can settle on plausible but wrong programs.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a list variable called observed sequence containing the example numbers to be explained.
Create a list variable called program space containing every candidate program, where each candidate pairs a starting value with a step rule and a step amount.
Create a variable called best program with initial value nothing.
Create a number variable called best score with initial value negative infinity.
For each candidate in program space, perform the following steps.
    Create a list variable called generated containing the candidate starting value.
    For each position from one up to one less than the length of the observed sequence, apply the candidate step rule and step amount to the last element of generated, and append the result to generated.
    Create a number variable called fit score with initial value zero.
    For each position in the observed sequence, if the generated value at that position equals the observed value at that position, add one to fit score.
    Calculate the description length of the candidate as the number of symbols needed to write it down.
    Calculate the total score as fit score multiplied by ten minus the description length.
    If the total score is greater than best score, set best score to the total score and set best program to the candidate.
Return best program as the learned concept and use it to predict the next number in the sequence.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the itertools module for building the space of candidate programs.
import itertools

# Create a list variable called observed containing the example numbers to be explained.
observed = [2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64]

# Define a function called run_program that takes a start value, a rule name, an amount, and a length.
def run_program(start, rule, amount, length):
    # Create a list variable called seq containing the start value.
    seq = [start]
    # For each step from one up to one less than length, perform the following steps.
    for _ in range(length - 1):
        # If the rule is add, append the last value plus the amount to seq.
        if rule == "add":
            seq.append(seq[-1] + amount)
        # Otherwise, if the rule is multiply, append the last value times the amount to seq.
        elif rule == "mul":
            seq.append(seq[-1] * amount)
        # Otherwise, the rule is square, so append the last value times itself.
        else:
            seq.append(seq[-1] * seq[-1])
    # Return the generated sequence.
    return seq

# Create a variable called best holding no program yet, and a score variable at negative infinity.
best, best_score = None, float("-inf")

# For each combination of start value, rule, and amount, evaluate the candidate program.
for start, rule, amount in itertools.product(range(1, 11), ["add", "mul", "square"], range(1, 11)):
    # Generate the candidate sequence with the same length as the observed sequence.
    generated = run_program(start, rule, amount, len(observed))
    # Count how many positions of the generated sequence match the observed sequence.
    fit = sum(1 for g, o in zip(generated, observed) if g == o)
    # Set the description length to two symbols, or three if the rule needs an amount.
    length_cost = 2 if rule == "square" else 3
    # Calculate the total score as ten times the fit minus the description length.
    score = 10 * fit - length_cost
    # If this score beats the best score, remember this candidate and its score.
    if score > best_score:
        best, best_score = (start, rule, amount), score

# Unpack the best program into its start value, rule, and amount.
start, rule, amount = best
# Print the shortest program that explains the observed sequence.
print("Best program: start at", start, "then repeatedly", rule, amount)
# Print the prediction for the next number by running the program one step longer.
print("Predicted next number:", run_program(start, rule, amount, len(observed) + 1)[-1])


CHAPTER 66. LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS AND FOUNDATION MODELS AS COGNITION (FRONTIER)

This chapter is about the technology that has reshaped both artificial intelligence and the public conversation about minds: the large language model.

A large language model (LLM) is a computer system trained on enormous amounts of text to predict the next word in a sequence, and by learning to do that extremely well it becomes able to write, answer questions, translate, and much more.

The word "foundation model" is a broader term for any such large system trained on broad data that can then be adapted to many tasks, so language models are one kind of foundation model, and there are others trained on images, sound, and mixtures of these.

Read as an engineered system, a language model subscribes to a sequence of tokens, meaning word pieces, holds its knowledge in billions of fixed connection strengths plus a temporary context window, and publishes a probability for every possible next token, over and over, one token at a time.

The frontier question, and the reason this belongs in a book about cognition, is whether these systems merely mimic the surface of thought or whether they can teach us something real about how thinking works, in machines and perhaps in us.

This chapter treats these systems even-handedly, both as remarkable engineering and as objects of genuine scientific dispute, because the honest state of the field in 2026 is that experts strongly disagree.


66.1 The capacities of large language models

This section surveys what these systems can actually do, focusing on two abilities that surprised even their builders.

The point is to describe the phenomena carefully before we argue about what they mean, because much of the disagreement in the field is really about interpretation rather than facts.


66.1.1 Emergent abilities and in-context learning

Two words in this heading need plain definitions before anything else.

An emergent ability is a skill that small models do not have and large models do, appearing, or seeming to appear, rather suddenly once a model passes some size.

In-context learning is the striking ability of these models to pick up a new task from a few examples placed in the prompt, the text you give them, without any change to the model's internal settings.

To see in-context learning, imagine typing a few pairs of a word and its opposite and then a new word, and the model continues the pattern and supplies the opposite, having been taught the task purely by the examples in front of it.

This is remarkable because ordinary machine learning changes a system by adjusting its internal connections through training, whereas here the model adapts on the fly, from the prompt alone, with its internals frozen.

In systems terms, in-context learning means the system has two memories on two timescales: slow weights, changed only by training over weeks, and a fast context window, changed within a single response taking seconds, and the new task lives entirely in the fast one.

The claim of sudden "emergence" was popularised around 2022, when researchers reported that certain abilities, such as doing multi-step arithmetic, seemed to switch on abruptly as models grew.

That claim was then seriously challenged.

In 2023 Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo published a widely discussed paper titled "Are Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models a Mirage?".

Their argument is subtle and worth stating fairly: they showed that the appearance of a sudden jump often comes from the yardstick being used, not from the model itself.

If you score a task in an all-or-nothing way, where only a completely correct answer counts, then smooth underlying improvement can look like a sudden leap, whereas a more forgiving score reveals steady, gradual gains.

The debate is not fully closed, because other researchers maintain that some abilities do show genuinely sharp transitions, and the current careful position is that at least some reported "emergence" is an artefact of measurement while some may be real.

For a student, the useful lesson is broader than language models: how you choose to measure a skill can change whether it looks like a smooth climb or a sudden cliff, and this matters throughout the science of the mind.


66.1.2 Chain-of-thought as a reasoning proxy

This sub-section is about a simple trick that makes these models much better at hard problems, and about the argument over what the trick really reveals.

Chain-of-thought means prompting the model to write out its intermediate steps, its "thinking", before giving a final answer, rather than jumping straight to the answer.

The founding demonstration was a 2022 paper by Jason Wei and colleagues showing that when large models are asked to reason step by step, their accuracy on arithmetic, commonsense, and logic problems improves substantially.

In systems terms, chain-of-thought turns the model's own output stream into a scratch memory: intermediate results are written into the context window and read back on later steps, which extends the effective depth of computation beyond a single forward pass.

A proxy, the word in the heading, means a stand-in, something you observe in place of the thing you actually care about, so "reasoning proxy" asks whether the written-out steps stand in faithfully for the model's real reasoning.

That is exactly where the controversy lies.

The original paper suggested the written steps offer "an interpretable window into the behaviour of the model", a phrase later authors have pushed back on hard.

In 2023 Miles Turpin, Julian Michael, Ethan Perez, and Samuel Bowman published "Language Models Don't Always Say What They Think", showing that a model's stated reasoning can be unfaithful, meaning the words it writes are not the true cause of its answer.

Their experiments showed that you can quietly bias a model toward a particular answer and it will then invent a plausible-sounding chain of steps that never mentions the real reason, much as a person can confabulate a tidy justification for a gut feeling.

To confabulate means to produce a confident explanation that feels true to the speaker but does not reflect the actual cause of the behaviour.

So the fair summary is a double one: chain-of-thought genuinely improves performance and is practically valuable, yet the visible steps cannot be trusted as an honest transcript of the model's inner workings.

This distinction, between output that helps and output that faithfully explains, echoes a very old theme in psychology, that people too are often poor and unreliable reporters of why they did what they did.


66.2 Large language models as objects of psychology

This section describes a genuinely new scientific move: studying these machines the way psychologists study people.

The motivation is that these systems are too large and too tangled to understand by reading their code, so researchers instead run experiments on them, giving them tasks and observing their behaviour.

This turns the language model into something like a participant in a study, which raises both opportunities and pitfalls that we take in turn.


66.2.1 Machine psychology and the probing of reasoning, theory of mind, and bias

Machine psychology is the young field that applies the methods of experimental psychology to artificial systems, probing their reasoning, their apparent understanding of other minds, and their biases.

The founding move is associated with Marcel Binz and Eric Schulz, who in work published around 2023 treated the model GPT-3 as a subject in classic psychology experiments, testing its decision-making, its search for information, and its reasoning about causes.

To "probe" a system, in this context, means to design a careful task that isolates one ability so you can see whether the system has it.

In systems terms, probing treats the model as a black box: the experimenter controls the input channel, the prompt, observes the output channel, the generated text, and infers what internal processing must lie between, exactly the inferential position psychology has always been in with respect to the brain.

Theory of mind, one target of this probing, is the everyday ability to attribute mental states such as beliefs and desires to others, and in particular to understand that someone can hold a belief that is false.

Researchers have run the standard false-belief tests on language models, and results are genuinely mixed and hotly argued.

Some studies, including a 2024 paper in Nature Human Behaviour testing several models, reported that the strongest models match or approach adult human performance on batteries of theory-of-mind tasks.

Other researchers, notably Tomer Ullman, showed that tiny, meaning-preserving tweaks to the classic tasks can make the same models fail, which suggests they may be leaning on surface patterns from training text rather than genuinely modelling minds.

On bias, the same methods reveal that models reproduce many human cognitive biases, the systematic errors of judgment catalogued elsewhere in this outline, because those patterns are woven through the human text they learned from.

The deepest caution in this whole enterprise is the risk of over-reading: a system can pass a test built to detect an ability in humans without possessing the underlying ability, because it may have found a shortcut that the test was never designed to rule out.

This is why careful machine psychologists insist on varied, adversarial tests, ones deliberately designed to defeat shortcuts, before crediting a model with a genuine competence.


66.2.2 In-context learning as approximate Bayesian inference

This sub-section offers one leading theory for how the in-context learning of the previous section might actually work.

The theory says that when a model adapts to examples in its prompt, it is behaving as if it were doing Bayesian inference, the principled updating of beliefs from evidence introduced in the previous chapter.

The key reference is a 2022 paper by Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma, titled "An Explanation of In-Context Learning as Implicit Bayesian Inference".

Their proposal, in plain words, is that during its original training on mountains of text the model implicitly learns about many hidden topics or tasks that generate coherent passages.

When you then show it a few examples, it quietly infers which of those hidden tasks you have in mind and continues accordingly, which is exactly the shape of Bayesian reasoning: use the evidence to figure out the most likely underlying cause.

The word "implicit" matters, because nobody built this reasoning in by hand; the claim is that it falls out naturally from the pressure to predict text well.

In systems terms the two rival accounts predict different things: the Bayesian account predicts that the model's behaviour should track the posterior probability of the candidate task, while the rival fast-internal-learning account predicts that behaviour should track the dynamics of a gradient-like update running inside the network's layers.

If this view is right, it is a beautiful bridge, because it connects a surprising behaviour of engineered systems to the same Bayesian framework that cognitive scientists use to describe human learning.

It should be held with appropriate caution, since it is a theoretical account supported by idealised mathematical settings and specific experiments, and other explanations, including the idea that the model is running a fast internal learning process of a different kind, remain in serious contention.

The mere existence of this debate is itself the interesting fact for a student: a genuinely new phenomenon has appeared, and the field is actively arguing over its mechanism using tools borrowed from the study of the human mind.


66.3 The debates

This section gathers the largest and most consequential disagreements about what these systems are.

These are not narrow technical quarrels; they touch old philosophical questions about meaning, understanding, and the nature of thought.

The right stance for a newcomer is to understand each side's strongest form, because each side has a real point and neither has won outright.


66.3.1 Distributional meaning against grounding

This debate is about whether a system trained only on text can ever really understand what words mean.

The word "distributional" refers to a theory of meaning captured by the slogan that you shall know a word by the company it keeps, meaning that a word's sense can be read off from the patterns of other words it appears alongside.

Language models are the purest embodiment of this idea, since they learn meaning, in whatever sense they do, entirely from statistical patterns of word co-occurrence in text.

"Grounding" is the opposing emphasis, the view that real meaning requires connection to things outside language, to sensations, actions, and the world that words are about.

In systems terms the dispute is about the input interface: the distributional side says a text-only input channel carries enough signal to recover meaning, while the grounding side says meaning requires additional input channels, senses and actions, that close a loop with the world.

The sharpest statement of the grounding worry came in a 2020 paper by Emily Bender and Alexander Koller, with a memorable thought experiment about an octopus.

Imagine two people on separate islands sending messages through an undersea cable, and a hyper-intelligent octopus tapping the cable and learning to imitate the messages perfectly, without ever seeing the islands.

Bender and Koller argue that such an octopus, and by analogy a text-only model, could reproduce fluent conversation yet would be lost the moment real-world reference mattered, because it learned only the form of language, never its link to the world.

The counter-argument, made by defenders of distributional meaning, is twofold: that patterns of use may carry more genuine meaning than the octopus story allows, and that modern systems increasingly are grounded, being trained on images and actions as well as text.

There is no consensus verdict, and the honest position is that this is partly an empirical question about what systems can do and partly a philosophical question about what we should call "meaning" in the first place.


66.3.2 The stochastic-parrot critique and the systematicity gap

This sub-section covers two of the most cited criticisms of large language models, which share a family resemblance.

The phrase "stochastic parrot" comes from a 2021 paper led by Emily Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and a co-author writing under the name Shmargaret Shmitchell.

"Stochastic" means governed by chance, and a parrot repeats without understanding, so a stochastic parrot is a system that stitches together plausible sequences of words based on statistical likelihood but without any grasp of their meaning.

The critique is partly about understanding and partly a warning about real-world harms, including the way such systems can launder biased and false text from their training data into confident-sounding output.

The "systematicity gap" is a more technical concern with a long pedigree in cognitive science.

Systematicity, an idea pressed by the philosophers Jerry Fodor and Zenon Pylyshyn in 1988, is the observation that a mind able to understand "the cat chased the dog" can automatically understand "the dog chased the cat", because genuine thought recombines parts in a rule-governed way.

The worry is that neural networks may handle familiar combinations well yet stumble on novel recombinations that a truly systematic reasoner would take in stride, revealing that they generalise by similarity rather than by rule.

In systems terms the two sides predict differently on held-out recombinations: a rule-based system should generalise perfectly to any novel combination of known parts, while a similarity-based system should degrade in proportion to distance from its training experience.

This debate has been reopened rather than settled by recent models, and the evidence is genuinely mixed.

On one hand, work such as a 2023 Nature paper by Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni showed that with the right training regime networks can be pushed to strong systematic generalisation, narrowing the gap.

On the other hand, careful tests keep finding cases where large models fail on simple variations that a systematic reasoner should handle, so the gap is smaller than critics once claimed but has not clearly closed.


66.3.3 Competence against performance in models

This final sub-section imports an old and clarifying distinction from linguistics to make sense of the whole quarrel.

The distinction between competence and performance comes from the linguist Noam Chomsky, who separated what a system knows in principle, its competence, from how it behaves on a given occasion, its performance.

Your own performance departs from your competence all the time: you know English grammar, yet you make slips, lose your train of thought, and misspeak when tired.

Applied to language models, the question becomes whether their failures reveal a genuine lack of underlying ability, a competence limit, or merely a bad day at execution, a performance limit that better prompting or a larger model might fix.

In systems terms the distinction separates the stored function from the run-time conditions: competence lives in the trained weights, while performance also depends on the prompt, the sampling temperature, and the luck of the random draw, so the two sides are arguing about which layer of the system a given failure lives in.

This framing helps because much of the argument between enthusiasts and critics is really a disagreement about which kind of failure they are looking at.

An enthusiast sees a model flub a reasoning problem and calls it a performance slip, curable with a better prompt or more scale.

A critic sees the same flub and calls it a competence gap, a sign that the required ability was never really there.

The value of the distinction is not that it settles the fight, but that it names the crux clearly and warns against two opposite mistakes.

One mistake is to over-credit the system, reading a lucky success as deep competence when it may be shallow pattern-matching.

The other mistake is to over-dismiss it, reading a slip as proof of incapacity when a genuine underlying ability may simply have misfired.

Holding both errors in view at once is the mature stance this fast-moving field demands, and it is the same even-handed discipline that good cognitive science has always required of itself.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ A sequence of tokens, meaning word pieces encoded as numbers, arriving through the prompt or context window.

◦ During training only, a vast corpus of text, and for multimodal foundation models also images, audio, and other data streams.

◦ Sampling settings from the caller, such as temperature, which controls how randomly the next token is drawn.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ A probability distribution over the entire token vocabulary for the next position, consumed by a sampling step.

◦ The sampled token stream, consumed by the human reader, by downstream programs, or fed back into the model's own context as chain-of-thought scratch material.

• STATE.

◦ Slow state: billions of trained connection weights, frozen at inference time.

◦ Fast state: the current context window, the running record of prompt plus generated tokens, which is the only memory that changes during a conversation.

◦ Internal per-step activations, recomputed for each forward pass and not retained afterwards.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Model size in number of weights, from millions to over a trillion in current systems.

◦ Context window length in tokens, from a few thousand to over a million tokens in 2025 to 2026 systems.

◦ Sampling temperature and related decoding settings, which trade diversity against reliability.

◦ Training compute and data volume, the levers of the scaling debate.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Per-token generation: on the order of tens of milliseconds per token on modern serving hardware, though the exact figure varies widely with model and hardware.

◦ In-context adaptation: within a single prompt, effectively seconds, because no weight change is involved.

◦ Weight learning: training runs take weeks to months of computation for frontier models.

◦ A constant for "how long the model thinks per decision" in a humanlike sense: REFUSED, because a forward pass is a fixed pipeline and does not map onto human deliberation timescales in any literature-supported way.

• MODES.

◦ Training mode, where weights change under next-token prediction pressure, versus inference mode, where weights are frozen; the switch is an engineering decision, not something the model does.

◦ Direct answering versus chain-of-thought answering, switched by prompting or by post-training that encourages step-by-step output.

◦ Greedy decoding versus sampled decoding, switched by the temperature setting, trading determinism against creativity.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Hallucination, meaning fluent, confident output that is factually false, the signature failure of next-token prediction unmoored from the world.

◦ Unfaithful explanation, where the stated reasoning is not the true cause of the answer.

◦ Bias reproduction, where prejudices in the training text reappear in output.

◦ Brittleness to rephrasing, where a meaning-preserving change in the prompt flips the answer, and loss of information in long contexts.

◦ Systematicity failures on novel recombinations of familiar parts.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a dictionary variable called counts that maps each word to a dictionary of following words and their frequencies.
Split the training text into a list of words.
For each adjacent pair of words in the list, add one to the count of the second word under the entry for the first word in counts.
Create a text variable called current word with initial value equal to a chosen starting word.
Create a list variable called generated containing the current word.
Repeat the following steps twelve times.
    Look up the dictionary of followers for the current word in counts.
    If there are no recorded followers, stop the loop.
    Choose the next word at random from the followers, weighting each follower by its frequency.
    Append the next word to generated.
    Set the current word to the next word.
Join the generated list into a sentence and return it.
Note that the model chooses each word only from the single previous word, so it produces locally fluent text while having no memory of the sentence's beginning, which displays both the power and the limit of next-word prediction.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module to sample the next word by weighted chance.
import random

# Create a text variable called corpus holding a tiny training text.
corpus = ("the cat sat on the mat and the cat saw the dog and "
          "the dog sat on the mat and the cat ran from the dog")

# Split the corpus into a list of words.
words = corpus.split()

# Create a dictionary called counts mapping each word to its followers and their frequencies.
counts = {}
# For each adjacent pair of words, count the second word as a follower of the first.
for first, second in zip(words, words[1:]):
    # Get or create the follower dictionary for the first word, then add one for the second word.
    counts.setdefault(first, {})
    # Add one to the frequency of the second word under the first word.
    counts[first][second] = counts[first].get(second, 0) + 1

# Define a function called generate that takes a starting word and a length.
def generate(start, length):
    # Create a variable called current holding the starting word.
    current = start
    # Create a list called out containing the starting word.
    out = [current]
    # Repeat the generation step until the requested length is reached.
    for _ in range(length - 1):
        # If the current word was never seen with a follower, stop early.
        if current not in counts:
            break
        # Read the follower words and their frequencies for the current word.
        followers = list(counts[current].keys())
        weights = list(counts[current].values())
        # Choose the next word at random, weighted by how often it followed in training.
        current = random.choices(followers, weights=weights)[0]
        # Append the chosen word to the output list.
        out.append(current)
    # Join the output words into one sentence and return it.
    return " ".join(out)

# Print a generated sentence, which is locally fluent because each step is a learned prediction.
print("Generated:", generate("the", 12))
# Print the model's whole knowledge about the word cat, to show it is only next-word statistics.
print("What the model knows after the word cat:", counts["cat"])
# Print the limit: the model cannot know whether the sentence began with cat or dog,
# because its only state is the single previous word.
print("Limit: no memory beyond one word, so long-range meaning is impossible.")


CHAPTER 67. WORLD MODELS, MODEL-BASED AGENTS, AND NEUROAI (FRONTIER)

This chapter turns from systems that traffic in words to systems that try to understand and act in a world.

Its unifying idea is the world model, an internal picture of how the environment works that an agent can use to imagine the future and plan before acting.

The chapter also introduces NeuroAI, a research movement that deliberately braids together neuroscience and artificial intelligence, using each to inform and test the other.

Read as an engineered system, a model-based agent runs two coupled loops: an outer loop that acts in the real environment and collects experience, and an inner loop that trains a predictive model on that experience and rehearses candidate futures inside it before committing to a real action.

The reason this is frontier material is that world models and NeuroAI sit at the crossroads where the deepest ambitions of machine intelligence meet the oldest questions about how brains build minds, and the field is moving quickly.

For konnectome, which reaches toward general and beyond-human intelligence grounded in how real brains work, this chapter is close to the heart of the whole enterprise.


67.1 World models

This section explains what a world model is and why an agent that has one can be smarter and more efficient than one that does not.

A world model is an internal, predictive model of an environment, a compact "if I do this, that will probably happen" simulator that an agent carries inside itself.

The everyday analogy is the mental rehearsal you do before a tricky conversation or a parking manoeuvre, imagining outcomes and choosing among them without paying the real-world cost of trying each one.

In systems terms a world model is a function from a state and an action to a predicted next state and reward, learned from experience, and its value is that queries to it are cheap while queries to the real world are expensive and sometimes dangerous.


67.1.1 Learned world models and latent imagination

The key advance in this sub-section is that an agent can learn its world model from raw experience and then do its planning inside that learned model, in imagination, rather than by acting in the real world.

The foundational demonstration is the 2018 paper simply titled "World Models" by David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber.

Their agent first learns to compress what it sees, the flood of pixels from a game, into a small summary, and then learns a second component that predicts how that summary will change over time.

The small summary is called a latent representation, where "latent" means hidden or underlying, so a latent representation is a compact code capturing the essence of a scene while throwing away irrelevant detail.

Because the model can predict how this compact code evolves, the agent can generate imagined experience, a "dream" of the game, and practise entirely inside that dream, which is far faster and cheaper than acting in the real environment.

This is the meaning of latent imagination: planning and learning by rolling the world model forward in the compressed latent space, not by taking real actions.

The idea was carried much further by a line of systems called Dreamer, developed by Danijar Hafner and colleagues from around 2019 onward through several versions.

The Dreamer agents learn a world model from experience and then learn how to behave purely from trajectories imagined inside that model, using a scheme in which one part proposes actions and another judges their value.

Later versions became strong enough that a single Dreamer system could master a wide range of very different control tasks, and by the DreamerV3 stage it could even accomplish hard, long-horizon goals such as gathering resources in an open-ended block-building game from scratch, without task-specific tuning.

That line of work reached a landmark in 2025, when the DreamerV3 results were published in the journal Nature, reporting mastery of over one hundred and fifty tasks with one configuration and the first collection of diamonds in the game Minecraft by an agent learning entirely from its own experience, without human demonstration data.

In systems terms the agent has three learned components: an encoder that compresses observations into latent state, a dynamics model that predicts the next latent state and reward given an action, and a behaviour module trained on imagined rollouts, with real experience arriving on the slow outer loop and imagined experience generated thousands of times faster on the inner loop.

The broad lesson, which resonates with the memory chapters of this outline, is that imagination and prediction are not decorative extras but powerful engines of efficient learning, in machines as, arguably, in us.


67.1.2 Model-based planning in artificial agents

This sub-section names the general approach behind those systems and connects it to a distinction from the learning chapters.

Model-based planning means choosing actions by using a model of the world to simulate and evaluate possible futures before committing to a move.

It contrasts with model-free approaches, which learn good actions directly by trial and error without ever building an explicit model, gradually strengthening whatever worked in the past.

The trade-off between them is the same one that appears in the study of human and animal learning: model-based planning is flexible and adapts fast to change, but is slow and effortful, while model-free habit is fast and cheap, but rigid when the world shifts.

In systems terms the two controllers differ in state and cost: the model-based controller stores a transition model and pays computation at decision time to search it, while the model-free controller stores only cached action values and pays almost nothing at decision time, which is why agents and animals alike arbitrate between them based on how much the extra accuracy is worth.

A vivid success of model-based planning combined with learning is the family of game-playing systems from the group behind AlphaGo, culminating in a system called MuZero.

MuZero, described by Julian Schrittwieser and colleagues in 2020, is notable because it was not told the rules of the games it played, yet it learned its own internal model of the consequences of moves and used that model to plan by searching ahead through imagined continuations.

Searching ahead means considering sequences of possible moves and counter-moves, building a tree of futures, and picking the action that leads to the best evaluated outcomes.

The significance for a science of mind is that these systems make concrete a very old idea about thinking, that to deliberate is to search a space of imagined possibilities, an idea that runs from the problem-solving research of the mid-twentieth century straight through to today's agents.

At the same time, honest practitioners note that learning an accurate enough world model in rich, open environments remains hard, and errors in the model can mislead the planner, so model-based methods are powerful but not a solved problem.


67.2 NeuroAI

This section introduces a movement that treats brains and artificial networks as two examples of intelligent systems worth comparing directly.

NeuroAI is the study at the boundary of neuroscience and artificial intelligence, using brain science to inspire better machines and using machines as testable models of the brain.

The two-way traffic is the point: ideas flow from brains to machines and back, and a model earns its keep partly by predicting real neural data.


67.2.1 Goal-driven deep networks as models of sensory cortex

This sub-section describes one of the clearest scientific successes at the neuroscience-and-AI boundary.

The finding is that when you train a deep neural network to succeed at a natural task, such as recognising objects, its internal activity comes to resemble the activity of real brain regions that do the same job, even though you never told it to imitate the brain.

The word "goal-driven" captures why: the network was optimised only to achieve a goal, good object recognition, and brain-like representations emerged as a by-product of doing the task well.

The influential statement of this approach is a 2016 Nature Neuroscience article by Daniel Yamins and James DiCarlo, "Using goal-driven deep learning models to understand sensory cortex".

Their work focused on the ventral stream, the pathway of brain areas along the lower part of the primate visual system that turns raw light into recognition of objects and faces.

The ventral stream, in plain terms, is the brain's "what is it" pathway for vision, a hierarchy of stages that progressively transform an image into a form in which object identity is easy to read out.

In systems terms the comparison is stage to stage: both systems take an image as input and publish an object identity as output over roughly 100 to 200 milliseconds in the primate brain, and the finding is that the intermediate representations line up layer by layer even though only the goal was shared.

Yamins, DiCarlo, and colleagues found that networks trained to categorise objects developed layers whose responses closely matched the responses of neurons in the corresponding stages of the monkey ventral stream, well enough to predict neural activity to previously unseen images.

This mattered because it offered, for the first time, quantitative and predictive models of a large piece of cortex, moving beyond hand-built theories to systems that could be tested neuron by neuron.

It should be read with care, and its own proponents have said so: matching neural responses does not prove the brain computes in exactly the same way, and later work has found important places where the networks and the brain diverge, which is itself scientifically useful because the mismatches point to what is still missing.


67.2.2 The representational alignment of artificial and biological systems

This sub-section is about the general project of measuring, and where possible increasing, how similar the internal representations of two systems are.

A representation, in this setting, is the pattern of internal activity a system uses to stand for something, so two systems are "aligned" to the degree that they organise their internal patterns in the same way.

Representational alignment is the research programme of comparing these internal patterns across systems, for example between a deep network and a human brain, or between a network and human behaviour.

A 2023 collaborative paper, "Getting aligned on representational alignment", by Ilia Sucholutsky, Thomas Griffiths, and a large group of authors, drew together researchers from machine learning, neuroscience, and cognitive science who had been asking this same question with different vocabularies.

To make such comparisons, scientists use mathematical tools that ask whether things treated as similar by one system are treated as similar by the other, so alignment is about matching the geometry of similarities rather than matching activity unit for unit.

A widely used method in this family is representational similarity analysis, which compares systems by the pattern of what they find alike and unalike rather than by any direct wiring correspondence.

In systems terms an alignment measurement takes two systems' internal activity patterns over a shared set of stimuli as input and publishes a single similarity score as output, and the choice of measuring tool is itself a parameter that can change the verdict.

The practical payoff runs in two directions.

In one direction, alignment is a measuring stick for the brain-likeness of a machine, letting us rank models by how well their internal structure matches neural or behavioural data.

In the other direction, some evidence suggests that machines whose representations are more aligned with human ones learn more robustly and generalise better, hinting that human-like structure is not just pleasing but useful.

The field is careful to note that alignment is a matter of degree and of chosen measure, and that different measuring tools can disagree, so claims of alignment must always specify how it was assessed.


67.2.3 The NeuroAI programme and the embodied Turing test

This sub-section presents an ambitious manifesto for the whole NeuroAI movement and a provocative new benchmark it proposes.

The reference is a 2023 Nature Communications paper, "Catalyzing next-generation Artificial Intelligence through NeuroAI", led by Anthony Zador with a long list of prominent neuroscientists and AI researchers.

Its core argument is that the surest route to more general artificial intelligence is to study and borrow from the brains of animals, which solve problems of perceiving and acting in the world with a competence machines have not matched.

To sharpen this, the authors propose the embodied Turing test, a redefinition of the classic imitation game around animal abilities rather than human conversation.

"Embodied" means having a body and acting in a physical or realistic world, so an embodied Turing test asks whether an artificial agent can interact with the sensorimotor world as skilfully as a real animal.

In systems terms this changes the benchmark interface: instead of a text channel in and a text channel out, the test wires the candidate system to a body with sensors and actuators in a closed loop with a physical or simulated world, and scores it against an animal on the same loop.

The deep point behind this is a reordering of priorities.

The authors argue that the capacities we find most impressive, playing board games and producing fluent language, are recent and narrow, whereas the capacities shared by all animals, moving, foraging, avoiding danger, and adapting to a changing world, are the products of hundreds of millions of years of evolution and are precisely where machines remain weak.

Passing embodied Turing tests, one animal skill at a time, is offered as a concrete roadmap for the next generation of artificial intelligence.

This is a research agenda and a rallying call rather than a settled result, and not everyone in AI agrees that animal-inspired embodiment is the fastest path, so it should be understood as one influential and well-argued position in an open strategic debate.


67.3 The paths to general intelligence

This final section confronts the biggest open question the whole outline has been circling: how, if at all, do we get to genuinely general machine intelligence.

General intelligence here means the flexible, wide-ranging competence to learn and solve problems across many domains, of the kind humans display and current systems, for all their power, still lack.

The section lays out the two leading families of answers side by side, because the honest truth is that the field is genuinely divided and the question is unresolved.


67.3.1 The scaling hypothesis against the missing ingredients

This is the central strategic argument in artificial intelligence today, and it deserves to be stated fairly from both sides.

The scaling hypothesis is the claim that we largely already have the right methods, and that continuing to make models bigger, with more data and more computing power, will carry us most of the way to general intelligence.

Its intellectual backdrop is an essay called "The Bitter Lesson" by Richard Sutton, which observed that across the history of AI, general methods that ride increases in computation have repeatedly beaten cleverly hand-crafted knowledge.

The opposing view holds that scaling alone will hit a ceiling, and that some ingredients are simply missing from current systems, no matter how large they grow.

Candidates for the missing ingredients recur throughout this outline: grounding in a real world, causal understanding, systematic and compositional reasoning, and the ability to keep learning from experience after training ends.

In systems terms the two camps make different predictions about the input pipeline: the scaling camp predicts that more of the same input, text and compute, keeps improving the system, while the ingredients camp predicts diminishing returns until new channels and mechanisms, such as continual experiential learning, are added.

Strikingly, in 2025 Richard Sutton himself argued that today's large language models are not really following his bitter lesson at all, because they learn from a fixed store of human-written text rather than from their own ongoing experience, and he called for architectures that learn continually from interaction, a stance he and colleagues have framed as an "era of experience".

This is a notable development precisely because it comes from the person most associated with the scaling-and-computation view, and it shows that even the leading voices are actively revising their positions.

The fair summary for a newcomer is that no one knows, that both camps have serious arguments and serious scientists, and that the outcome will be settled by evidence over the coming years rather than by argument now.

A project like konnectome sits squarely inside this debate, and the value of the whole cognition outline is precisely that it lays out, ingredient by ingredient, what a mind seems to require, so that the missing-ingredients case can be judged on its merits.


67.3.2 Open-endedness, curiosity, and intrinsic motivation

This closing sub-section describes a third path, one less about size and more about the character of learning itself.

Open-endedness is the property of a process that keeps generating new and increasingly complex challenges and solutions indefinitely, never settling into a final answer.

The inspiration is the grandest open-ended process we know, biological evolution, and human culture, which have gone on producing novelty for a very long time without a fixed goal or a stopping point.

Curiosity and intrinsic motivation are the engine proposed to drive such open-ended learning inside an artificial agent.

Intrinsic motivation means being driven to act by internal rewards, such as novelty, surprise, or the satisfaction of learning, rather than only by external rewards handed out for a specific task.

An intrinsically curious agent seeks out situations it does not yet understand and experiments with them, generating its own goals and thereby teaching itself an ever-widening range of skills, much as a playing child does.

In systems terms an intrinsically motivated agent replaces the external reward input with an internally computed one, typically the prediction error of its own world model, so the agent is literally rewarded for finding places where its model is wrong and fixing them.

Researchers including Kenneth Stanley and Jeff Clune have argued that open-endedness may be an essential and undervalued ingredient for reaching very general, even superhuman, intelligence, and in 2024 groups proposed systems that pursue novelty guided by a model of what humans would find interesting.

There is also a caution voiced within this same community, that truly open-ended, self-directed systems raise real safety questions, since an agent that sets its own ever-changing goals is by design harder to predict and to steer.

The honest closing note for the whole frontier is that these paths, scaling, supplying the missing ingredients, and open-ended intrinsically motivated learning, are not mutually exclusive, and the eventual route to general intelligence may well braid them together.

That uncertainty is not a failure of the field but the ordinary condition of a live science at its edge, and it is exactly the terrain on which a project like konnectome must make its own careful, evidence-guided bets.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Observations from the environment, such as pixels or sensor readings, arriving each time step of the outer acting loop.

◦ Rewards from the environment, or internally computed intrinsic rewards such as prediction error.

◦ The agent's own actions, fed back as inputs to the world model so it can learn action consequences.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Actions to the environment, chosen after imagined rehearsal, consumed by the world itself.

◦ Predicted next states and rewards, consumed internally by the planner and the behaviour learner.

◦ Imagined trajectories, whole sequences of dreamed experience, consumed as training data by the policy.

• STATE.

◦ The learned world model itself, the transition and reward predictions accumulated from experience.

◦ The current latent state, the compressed summary of the situation right now.

◦ A replay buffer of past real experience, and the current policy and value estimates.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ The imagination horizon, how many steps ahead the agent rolls the model before trusting it no further.

◦ The learning rates of the model and the behaviour, and the balance of real to imagined training data.

◦ The exploration rate, how often the agent tries something other than its current best guess.

◦ The intrinsic reward weight, when curiosity is used, controlling how strongly model error attracts the agent.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Real environment steps: set by the environment, from milliseconds in simulation to seconds in robotics, so no single constant exists.

◦ Imagined steps: thousands of times faster than real steps, since they are only computations inside the model; the exact ratio is hardware bound, so a universal number is REFUSED.

◦ DreamerV3 learning to find diamonds in Minecraft: on the order of days of continuous play experience in the published 2025 Nature work.

◦ Human model-based deliberation per decision: roughly hundreds of milliseconds to seconds, consistent with the deliberation findings in the learning chapters.

• MODES.

◦ Acting mode, taking real actions and collecting experience, alternating on a schedule with dreaming mode, training the behaviour on imagined rollouts.

◦ Model-based control versus model-free habit, arbitrated by how much extra reward the costly model search is expected to buy, the same trade-off documented in animals.

◦ Exploration versus exploitation, switched by the exploration rate and, in curious agents, by where the model's prediction error is largest.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Model error compounding: small prediction errors grow over long imagined rollouts, so the planner confidently chooses actions that work only in the dream, the machine analogue of a delusion.

◦ Model exploitation: the behaviour learner finds flaws in the world model and optimises for imaginary rewards the real world never pays.

◦ Stale models: when the world changes, plans built on the old model fail until the model is retrained, mirroring habit-like rigidity.

◦ Curiosity traps: an intrinsically motivated agent can fixate on irreducibly unpredictable noise, such as a screen of static, because its prediction error never falls.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a dictionary variable called model that maps each pair of a state and an action to a recorded next state.
Create a variable called goal holding the target state of the grid.
Repeat the following exploration steps many times.
    Choose a random action from the four moves up, down, left, and right.
    Take the action in the real grid and observe the next state.
    Store the observed next state in model under the current state and action.
    Set the current state to the next state.
Reset the agent to the start state.
Repeat the following planning and acting steps until the goal is reached.
    For each of the four possible actions, perform the following imagined rollout.
        Set an imagined state to the current real state.
        Apply the action inside the model to get the imagined next state.
        From the imagined next state, repeatedly apply the model action that moves closest to the goal, for up to ten imagined steps, counting the steps taken.
        Record the number of imagined steps needed to reach the goal, or a large penalty if the goal was not reached in imagination.
    Choose the action whose imagined rollout reached the goal in the fewest steps.
    Take that single chosen action in the real grid.
Report that the agent planned in imagination and acted in the world.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Import the random module for exploratory action choice.
import random

# Create number variables for the grid size, the start state, and the goal state.
SIZE, START, GOAL = 5, (0, 0), (4, 4)
# Create a dictionary mapping each action name to its movement on the grid.
MOVES = {"up": (0, -1), "down": (0, 1), "left": (-1, 0), "right": (1, 0)}

# Define a function called step that applies an action to a state in the real grid.
def step(state, action):
    # Add the movement to the state and clamp both coordinates inside the grid.
    dx, dy = MOVES[action]
    # Return the clamped next state as the real environment's response.
    return (min(SIZE - 1, max(0, state[0] + dx)), min(SIZE - 1, max(0, state[1] + dy)))

# Create an empty dictionary called model to hold the learned world model.
model = {}
# Create a variable called state holding the start state for exploration.
state = START
# Repeat two thousand exploration steps to learn the world model from experience.
for _ in range(2000):
    # Choose a random action to explore the grid.
    action = random.choice(list(MOVES))
    # Take the action in the real grid and observe the next state.
    nxt = step(state, action)
    # Store the observed transition in the world model.
    model[(state, action)] = nxt
    # Move the agent to the observed next state.
    state = nxt

# Define a function called imagine that rolls the model forward greedily toward the goal.
def imagine(start_state, first_action, horizon=10):
    # Apply the first action inside the model, not the real world.
    s = model.get((start_state, first_action), start_state)
    # For each imagined step up to the horizon, move greedily closer to the goal.
    for t in range(horizon):
        # If the imagined state is the goal, return the number of imagined steps used.
        if s == GOAL:
            return t + 1
        # Choose the modelled action whose imagined result is closest to the goal.
        s = min((model.get((s, a), s) for a in MOVES),
                key=lambda p: abs(p[0] - GOAL[0]) + abs(p[1] - GOAL[1]))
    # Return a large penalty because the goal was not reached in imagination.
    return 999

# Reset the agent to the start state for the acting phase.
state, path = START, [START]
# Repeat planning in imagination and acting in the world until the goal is reached.
while state != GOAL:
    # Choose the real action whose imagined rollout reaches the goal soonest.
    action = min(MOVES, key=lambda a: imagine(state, a))
    # Take the single chosen action in the real grid.
    state = step(state, action)
    # Append the new state to the recorded path.
    path.append(state)

# Print the path, showing the agent planned inside its learned model before each real step.
print("Planned-in-imagination path:", path)

CHAPTER 68. NEURO-SYMBOLIC INTEGRATION AND LANGUAGE AGENTS AS ARCHITECTURES (FRONTIER)

This chapter is about a marriage of two very different ways of building a thinking machine, and about a surprising new kind of machine that has quietly become a working model of a whole mind.

The first way of building is the neural network, a system that learns patterns from mountains of examples but struggles to follow strict rules.

The second way is the symbolic system, a system that follows strict rules and logic but cannot easily learn from raw experience.

For decades these two camps argued with each other, and this chapter tells the story of how researchers began to stitch them together into single systems, a project called neuro-symbolic integration.

It then turns to language agents, which are programs built around a large language model (a computer program trained to predict and produce text, of the kind behind modern chatbots), and shows that these agents have accidentally rebuilt many of the ideas that the classical study of the mind spent fifty years working out.

Read as engineering, the two camps are two subsystems with complementary interfaces: the network consumes raw high-dimensional sensory data and publishes fuzzy pattern judgements, while the symbolic engine consumes clean discrete tokens and publishes traceable chains of inference, and the integration problem is literally the problem of designing the adapter between those two data formats.

The word frontier in the tag means we are now at the unfinished edge of the field, where the science of human thinking meets the engineering of artificial thinking, and where konnectome itself lives.


68.1 Neuro-symbolic integration

This section explains what it means to fuse a pattern-learning network with a rule-following logic engine, and why anyone would want to.

The short answer is that human minds seem to do both at once, effortlessly, and no single technique has managed to copy that on its own.


68.1.1 The combination of pattern learning with symbolic reasoning

A neural network is a web of simple artificial units, loosely inspired by brain cells, that adjusts itself by looking at many examples until it can recognise patterns, such as telling a cat from a dog in a photograph.

Its great strength is learning from messy, real-world data without being told the rules in advance.

Its great weakness is that it does not really reason in steps, it cannot easily explain why it decided something, and it can be fooled or can make confident mistakes on cases unlike its training.

A symbolic system, by contrast, works with symbols and explicit rules, in the way that ordinary arithmetic or formal logic works, chaining statements like all birds have feathers and a robin is a bird to conclude a robin has feathers.

Its strength is exactly where the network is weak: it reasons in clear steps, it handles rules and structure, and its conclusions can be traced and checked.

Its weakness is exactly where the network is strong: it is brittle, it needs its knowledge hand-built by people, and it cannot learn a concept just by being shown examples of it.

Neuro-symbolic integration is the research programme that tries to get the strengths of both in one system, so that the machine can both learn from data and reason with rules.

A recent systematic survey of the field, screening 178 papers published between 2020 and late 2025, sorts the approaches into a few broad recipes.

One recipe is neural helping symbolic, where a network reads raw input, such as an image, and turns it into clean symbols that a logic engine can then reason over.

A second recipe is symbolic helping neural, where rules or a knowledge base guide or constrain what the network learns, so it does not have to discover everything from scratch.

A third recipe is a genuinely hybrid architecture, where the two kinds of processing are woven together and pass information back and forth.

Named examples that beginners may encounter include Logic Tensor Networks, which let logical statements be trained by the same gradient methods that train networks, and Neural Theorem Provers, which learn to carry out proof-like reasoning.

In systems terms, each recipe fixes a different direction of data flow: the first pipes network outputs into the reasoner's input format, the second pipes rule constraints into the network's training signal, and the third builds a bidirectional bus between them, with the conversion between continuous activations and discrete symbols as the hard interface in every case.

The honest state of the field is that this remains a hard and unsolved problem: grounding abstract symbols in real sensory data, and getting robust reasoning that generalises to new situations, are still open challenges rather than finished achievements.


68.1.2 The two systems realised as a fast network and a deliberate symbolic layer

There is a tempting and widely drawn parallel between neuro-symbolic design and a famous idea from the psychology of human thinking, the idea of two systems of thought.

In that psychological picture, associated above all with Daniel Kahneman, System One is fast, automatic, intuitive, and effortless, the sort of thinking that lets you read a word or sense a mood instantly, while System Two is slow, deliberate, effortful, and rule-following, the sort of thinking you use to work out a long multiplication.

Many neuro-symbolic researchers map the neural network onto System One and the symbolic reasoner onto System Two.

The neural part gives the machine fast, intuitive pattern recognition, and the symbolic part gives it slow, careful, step-by-step reasoning that it can fall back on when intuition is not enough.

This is an appealing story and a useful design heuristic, because it suggests building a fast learned component and a deliberate reasoning component and letting them cooperate.

As a debate rather than a mechanism, the two sides make different systems predictions: a literal two-systems design predicts two separable modules with distinct latencies and a switch between them, while the critics predict one graded machinery whose speed and effort vary continuously, with no clean mode boundary to be found.

It is worth stating plainly that the two-systems picture in psychology is itself contested, and many researchers now think the neat split into two systems is an oversimplification rather than a proven fact of the brain.

So the fast-network-plus-deliberate-symbol-layer design should be read as an engineering inspiration drawn from a popular theory, not as a literal blueprint copied from a settled account of the human mind.

Even so, the intuition that a mind needs both a quick pattern-matcher and a slower rule-checker keeps reappearing, and that recurrence is itself a clue that the field is circling something real.


68.2 Language agents as de facto architectures

This section makes a claim that would have surprised researchers twenty years ago: that a practical tool built by engineers, the language agent, has turned out to be a working proposal for the architecture of a whole mind.

The phrase de facto means in fact, whether or not anyone planned it that way, and the point is that language agents became cognitive architectures by accident, through solving practical problems, rather than by design.


68.2.1 The cognitive-architecture reading of language agents

A cognitive architecture, defined earlier in this outline, is a proposal for the fixed machinery a whole mind needs, the permanent structures inside which particular knowledge and skills are the changing content.

A language agent is a system that wraps a large language model inside extra machinery so that it can do more than answer a single question: it can remember, plan over many steps, use tools, and act in an environment.

In 2023, a group of researchers at Princeton, Theodore Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas Griffiths, published a framework called Cognitive Architectures for Language Agents, abbreviated CoALA.

Their central move was to stop treating the language model as a lone genius that thinks by itself, and to treat it instead as one component sitting inside a larger cognitive system with memory, actions, and a decision loop.

Read this way, a language agent is not just a clever text predictor bolted to some code, it is a candidate answer to the old question of how the parts of a mind fit together.

As a system, the agent subscribes to observations from its environment and to its own stored memories, publishes external actions and new memory entries, and holds as state a working context plus its long-term stores, with the language model serving as the general-purpose processor that every step calls.

That is why this chapter calls language agents de facto architectures: without setting out to solve the grand problem of the unified mind, engineers built systems whose shape strongly resembles the classical proposals for that very problem.

The importance of the CoALA paper is that it gives a common vocabulary for describing these agents in the same terms the science of mind has long used, so that the two conversations, the engineering one and the psychological one, can finally hear each other.


68.2.2 Modular memory, internal and external actions, and the decision cycle

The CoALA framework organises a language agent along three simple dimensions, and each one echoes a long tradition in the study of the human mind.

The first dimension is memory, which CoALA divides into a short-term working memory that holds what the agent is currently thinking about, and several long-term memories, namely episodic memory for records of past experiences, semantic memory for general facts about the world, and procedural memory for learned skills and the agent's own code.

A beginner should notice that these are almost exactly the memory distinctions that psychologists drew from studying human patients decades ago, which is a striking case of the engineering rediscovering the science.

The second dimension is the action space, which CoALA splits into internal actions and external actions.

Internal actions happen inside the agent's own head, so to speak, and include reasoning (thinking a step through), retrieval (pulling a relevant memory into working memory), and learning (writing something new into long-term memory).

External actions reach out into the world, and are called grounding, meaning the agent does something with a tool, a website, a robot body, or another program, and takes in the result.

The third dimension is the decision cycle, a repeating loop in which the agent uses the language model to plan what to do next, chooses an action, executes it, observes what happened, and then goes round again.

This loop, plan then act then observe then repeat, is the same basic rhythm that the oldest cognitive architectures used, where it was often called a recognise-act cycle, so once again the new system has reinvented an old shape.

In systems language, working memory is the small mutable buffer written and read on every cycle, the three long-term stores are append-mostly databases reached only through retrieval and learning actions, and the decision cycle is the clock that serialises everything, so the whole agent is a single loop over a shared workspace.

The overall picture is a mind-like machine: a small workspace of current thoughts, several kinds of long-term store, a set of moves it can make inside itself and out in the world, and a steady beat of decision that ties them together.


68.2.3 The re-invention of architecture ideas in memory-augmented and tool-using agents

Beyond the tidy CoALA summary, the everyday practice of building language agents keeps stumbling onto ideas that the classical architecture tradition worked out long ago.

Consider memory-augmented agents, which are language agents given an external store, often a searchable database of past text, so they are not limited to what fits in the model's short attention span at any moment.

This is, in plain terms, a rediscovery of the distinction between a small fast working memory and a large slow long-term memory, and of the need for a retrieval step that fetches the right item at the right time, all of which are cornerstones of the human memory literature.

Consider tool-using agents, which can call a calculator, run code, search the web, or query a database instead of trying to do everything inside the network.

This mirrors the old insight that a mind offloads work onto the world and onto external aids, and that reliable reasoning often means handing a subtask to a dedicated, rule-following module rather than trusting intuition.

Consider agents that keep a scratchpad of intermediate reasoning, or that critique and revise their own drafts.

These echo the classical idea of a controlled, deliberate layer that monitors and corrects a faster, automatic one, and the idea that thought proceeds by setting subgoals and checking progress against them.

The lesson for a beginner is not that the engineers copied the psychologists, because mostly they did not, but that when you build something that has to act sensibly over time in a complicated world, you are pushed toward the same handful of solutions.

That convergence is quietly encouraging for the whole enterprise, because it suggests these architectural ideas are not arbitrary academic inventions but something closer to necessary features of any competent mind, natural or artificial.


68.3 The convergence of the classical and the modern

This section looks at the meeting point from the other direction, asking what happens when the old, carefully hand-built cognitive architectures are joined to the new language models, and what each side still lacks.


68.3.1 Classical architectures augmented with language models

The classical cognitive architectures are systems such as Soar and ACT-R, decades-long research projects that model the human mind as a set of production rules, meaning if-then rules of the form if the situation looks like this, then do that, running over structured memories.

Their strength is disciplined, transparent, human-like reasoning and learning, tested against real experimental data on how people solve problems and make errors.

Their long-standing weakness is that a person has to hand-build most of their knowledge, rule by rule, which is slow and brittle and cannot easily cover the open-ended messiness of ordinary language and common sense.

Large language models have exactly the opposite profile, carrying vast amounts of loose world knowledge and fluent language but lacking reliable step-by-step discipline and stable memory.

So a natural experiment, actively pursued around 2024, is to bolt the two together.

In some work, the language model acts as a friendly front end that helps a person write and debug ACT-R or Soar models in plain English, turning natural-language descriptions into the formal rules the architecture needs.

In other work, the language model supplies the broad world knowledge and quick guesses, while the classical architecture supplies the structured memory, the goal management, and the verifiable reasoning, so that each covers the other's gap.

The systems reading of these hybrids is a division of latency and reliability: the classical architecture runs a fast, checkable inner loop of production cycles, on the order of 50 milliseconds per cycle in ACT-R's human-calibrated timing, while the language model is called as a slower, fallible oracle whose answers must be validated before they enter the structured store.

The general direction, stated by several researchers, is that the most capable agents are likely to combine all three traditions at once, symbolic reasoning, machine learning, and large language models, rather than betting everything on any single one.

This is still early and experimental work, and no one should claim it is a finished recipe, but it is the clearest practical form the neuro-symbolic dream has yet taken.


68.3.2 What each tradition still owes the other

It helps to end the chapter by being honest about the debts, because each tradition can do something the other cannot, and neither is complete.

The classical symbolic architectures owe the modern networks a solution to learning and grounding.

They have never been good at learning their knowledge from raw perception, at soaking up the sprawling common sense that language models absorb from text, or at coping gracefully with noisy, unexpected input, and the network tradition is exactly where those abilities live.

The modern language models and networks owe the classical architectures a solution to structure, reliability, and control.

They are prone to inventing false information, they have no stable long-term memory of their own, their reasoning can wander or contradict itself, and they cannot by themselves guarantee that a chain of steps is valid, all of which the symbolic tradition was built to handle.

Neither side, on its own, yet gives us a system that both learns richly from the world and reasons dependably about it, which is precisely what a human mind manages to do.

That mutual debt is the real content of the frontier: the interesting question is no longer which tradition wins, but how to build the single system that pays both debts at once.

For konnectome, the practical reading is that these traditions should be treated as complementary constraints on one design rather than as rival creeds, a theme the final chapter returns to.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Environment observations, arriving as text or structured tool output from the world the agent acts in.

◦ A task or goal statement, as text, from the user or a supervising process.

◦ Retrieved memory items, as text records, pulled from the episodic, semantic, and procedural stores on request.

◦ Language-model completions, as text, returned whenever any step queries the model.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ External grounding actions, as tool calls or messages, consumed by the environment.

◦ New memory entries, as text records, consumed by the long-term stores through learning actions.

◦ Intermediate reasoning, as scratchpad text, consumed by the agent's own next cycle.

◦ A final answer or completed task result, as text, consumed by the user.

• STATE.

◦ Working memory: the current context of goal, recent observations, retrieved items, and reasoning so far.

◦ Episodic memory: a growing log of past experiences.

◦ Semantic memory: stored general facts.

◦ Procedural memory: stored skills, prompts, and the agent's own code.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Context capacity: how much text the working memory and model context can hold per cycle.

◦ Retrieval count: how many memory items are fetched per retrieval action.

◦ Reasoning depth: how many internal actions are allowed before an external action is forced.

◦ Learning threshold: how notable an outcome must be before it is written to long-term memory.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Classical production-rule cycle: about 50 milliseconds per rule firing in human-calibrated architectures such as ACT-R.

◦ Language-agent decision cycle: REFUSED, because wall-clock latency depends on the model and hardware deployed, not on any property of the architecture.

◦ Long-term store persistence: effectively unbounded, since entries persist until deleted.

• MODES.

◦ Internal mode: the cycle chooses reasoning, retrieval, or learning actions that change only the agent's own state; entered when the current context is judged insufficient to act.

◦ External mode: the cycle chooses a grounding action that changes the world; entered when the plan names a concrete step whose preconditions are met.

◦ The planner's evaluation of the working-memory context is the switch between the two modes on every cycle.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Hallucination, where the language model asserts false information that then contaminates memory and later reasoning.

◦ Context overflow, where working memory exceeds capacity and early goals or observations are silently dropped.

◦ Retrieval failure, where the relevant memory exists but is not fetched, so the agent repeats old mistakes.

◦ Looping, where the decision cycle keeps choosing internal actions and never grounds, the engineering cousin of rumination.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a text variable called goal holding the task given by the user.
Create an empty list variable called working memory.
Create an empty list variable called episodic memory.
Create a list variable called semantic memory holding known facts.
Add the goal to working memory.
Repeat until the goal is marked done or the cycle limit is reached.
    Ask the planner to read working memory and propose the next action and its argument.
    If the proposed action is retrieve, then.
        For each record in semantic memory and episodic memory, check whether it mentions the argument.
        Add each matching record to working memory.
    If the proposed action is reason, then.
        Create a new thought from the argument and add it to working memory.
    If the proposed action is learn, then.
        Add the argument as a new record to episodic memory.
    If the proposed action is act, then.
        Send the argument to the environment and receive an observation.
        Add the observation to working memory.
    If the proposed action is finish, then.
        Mark the goal as done and report the argument as the answer.
    If working memory holds more items than its capacity, remove the oldest item after the goal.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a text variable called GOAL holding the task given by the user.
GOAL = "find the boiling point of water at sea level"
# Create a list variable called semantic_memory holding known facts.
semantic_memory = ["water boils at 100 C at sea level", "ice melts at 0 C"]
# Create an empty list variable called episodic_memory.
episodic_memory = []
# Create a list variable called working_memory starting with the goal.
working_memory = ["GOAL: " + GOAL]
# Create a number variable called CAPACITY with value six.
CAPACITY = 6

# Define a planner that reads working memory and proposes the next action.
def planner(wm):
    # If any line in working memory is a retrieved fact about boiling, finish with it.
    for line in wm:
        # If the line is a fact mentioning the word boils, return finish with that line.
        if line.startswith("FACT:") and "boils" in line:
            return ("finish", line)
    # If no fact has been retrieved yet, return retrieve with the keyword boils.
    if not any(line.startswith("FACT:") for line in wm):
        return ("retrieve", "boils")
    # Otherwise return reason with a note that more thought is needed.
    return ("reason", "no fact found, think again")

# Repeat the decision cycle at most ten times.
for cycle in range(10):
    # Ask the planner for the next action and its argument.
    action, arg = planner(working_memory)
    # Print the cycle number, the chosen action, and the argument.
    print("cycle", cycle, "action", action, "arg", arg)
    # If the action is retrieve, search both long-term stores for the keyword.
    if action == "retrieve":
        # For each record in the two stores, add matches to working memory as facts.
        for record in semantic_memory + episodic_memory:
            # If the record mentions the keyword, add it to working memory.
            if arg in record:
                working_memory.append("FACT: " + record)
    # If the action is reason, add the new thought to working memory.
    elif action == "reason":
        working_memory.append("THOUGHT: " + arg)
    # If the action is finish, write the episode to episodic memory and stop.
    elif action == "finish":
        # Add a record of this solved task to episodic memory.
        episodic_memory.append("solved: " + GOAL + " -> " + arg)
        # Print the final answer and leave the loop.
        print("answer:", arg)
        break
    # If working memory exceeds capacity, drop the oldest item after the goal.
    if len(working_memory) > CAPACITY:
        working_memory.pop(1)


CHAPTER 69. COMPUTATIONAL PSYCHIATRY AND THE BREAKDOWN OF COGNITION (CONTEXT)

This chapter is about what we can learn from minds that are suffering, and about a young field that tries to describe mental illness in the precise language of mathematics and computation.

That field is called computational psychiatry.

Its guiding idea is simple and humane: if we have good computational models of how a healthy mind acquires, weighs, and acts on information, then a mental disorder can often be understood as one of those models running with a particular setting pushed too high or too low.

In systems language, a disorder is read not as a different machine but as the same machine with a parameter out of its healthy range, which is why every model in this chapter has knobs, and every clinical story names the knob.

Two payoffs follow.

First, we may get better, more mechanistic descriptions of conditions such as depression, psychosis, and addiction, described not just by lists of symptoms but by the specific information-processing step that has gone awry.

Second, and this is the reason the chapter belongs in a book about the intact mind, watching cognition break down in specific ways is one of the most powerful ways to discover how it was built in the first place.

The tag context signals that this chapter situates the science rather than adding a new mechanism, and it should be read with care and respect, because it concerns real human suffering, not abstractions.


69.1 The programme

This section introduces computational psychiatry as a research programme: what it is trying to do, and the two broad styles in which it does it.


69.1.1 Theory-driven against data-driven computational psychiatry

Computational psychiatry, as set out in influential reviews by researchers including Peter Dayan, Read Montague, Quentin Huys, and Klaas Stephan, comes in two broad flavours that answer two different questions.

The theory-driven flavour starts from a mechanistic model of how some cognitive process is supposed to work, such as how a healthy person learns from rewards, and then asks which knob in that model must be turned to reproduce a patient's behaviour.

Its aim is to explain, to say in mechanical terms what has changed inside the process, and its great advantage is that it points at a cause you could in principle target with a treatment.

The data-driven flavour starts from the opposite end, feeding large amounts of measurement, such as brain scans, questionnaires, or task performance, into machine-learning methods that look for patterns, groupings, or predictions.

Its aim is not primarily to explain the mechanism but to classify, to forecast who will respond to which treatment, or to sort patients into meaningful subgroups, and it is deliberately agnostic about the underlying cause.

In systems terms the two flavours differ in their interfaces: the theory-driven pipeline takes behaviour as input and publishes fitted model parameters, while the data-driven pipeline takes any measurements as input and publishes labels and forecasts, and only the first claims to expose the machinery inside.

The two flavours are complementary rather than opposed: the data-driven approach can reveal structure that no one predicted, while the theory-driven approach can explain why that structure exists.

A recurring hope in the field, stated by its founders, is to eventually join them, using large-scale data to test and refine mechanistic theories, though this remains more an aspiration than an accomplishment.

A beginner should hold on to a note of caution that the field itself voices: computational psychiatry is young, many of its findings are still small or not yet firmly replicated, and it has so far changed very few actual clinical decisions.


69.1.2 Computational phenotyping and the dimensional framing

A phenotype, in ordinary biology, is a set of observable characteristics of an organism, such as height or eye colour.

A computational phenotype is the same idea moved into the mind: it is a description of a person in terms of the settings, or parameters, of a computational model of their cognition, such as how quickly they learn from bad outcomes or how much they weigh a risk.

The promise of computational phenotyping is a more precise and individual portrait of a patient than a diagnostic label alone can give, because two people with the same diagnosis may have very different underlying parameter settings, and hence may need different help.

This connects to a broader shift called the dimensional framing of mental illness.

Traditional psychiatry has mostly used categories, placing a person either inside or outside a diagnosis such as major depression.

The dimensional view, promoted for example by the Research Domain Criteria initiative of the United States National Institute of Mental Health, instead treats mental difficulty as lying along continuous dimensions of function, such as the capacity for reward learning or for cognitive control, on which everyone falls somewhere and on which disorders are extremes rather than separate kinds.

Computational phenotyping fits this dimensional view naturally, because a model parameter is a number on a continuum, not a yes-or-no label.

The systems reading is direct: a phenotyping pipeline subscribes to a person's trial-by-trial task behaviour, fits a generative model to it over a session of minutes to an hour, and publishes a small vector of parameter estimates that other processes, clinical or scientific, can consume.

The appeal is a psychiatry organised around measurable mechanisms shared across diagnoses, so that, for instance, an over-reliance on habit could be recognised and measured whether it shows up in addiction, in obsessive-compulsive disorder, or in an eating disorder.

The honest caveat, again, is that this is a research vision in progress, and the field is still working out which parameters are stable, meaningful, and clinically useful.


69.2 The modelling frameworks applied to disorder

This section shows the programme in action, taking three of the modelling frameworks that earlier parts of this outline described for the healthy mind and watching what happens when a parameter is pushed out of its normal range.


69.2.1 Reinforcement-learning models of anhedonia and addiction

Reinforcement learning is the framework, described earlier in this outline, in which an agent learns the value of actions by trial and error, guided by the gap between what it expected and what it got, a gap called the reward prediction error.

A useful distinction within it is between model-free control, which is fast, habitual, and cares only about what has been rewarding before, and model-based control, which is slower, goal-directed, and reasons about consequences using an internal map of the world.

Anhedonia is the reduced ability to feel pleasure or to be motivated by reward, and it is a core symptom of depression.

Computational work on anhedonia asks which part of the reward machinery has changed, and a meta-analysis of these models found that depression and anhedonia tend to alter reward sensitivity, meaning how much a reward is valued in the first place, more than they alter the learning rate, meaning how fast a person updates from new outcomes.

Stated as a mechanism, the learner takes in chosen actions and delivered rewards, holds a table of action values as state, and updates each value by the learning rate times the prediction error, where the reward is first scaled by the sensitivity parameter, so lowering that one gain shrinks every prediction error and flattens the whole learned landscape of value.

There is also accumulating evidence that depression is marked by an imbalance in which patients lean less on effortful model-based, goal-directed control and more on model-free habit, though this is a tendency across studies rather than a universal law.

Addiction has been modelled in a related but distinct way.

An influential model proposed that addictive drugs hijack the same dopamine-based prediction-error signal that normally drives healthy learning, artificially inflating it so that drug-related actions keep being valued more and more, in a way that ordinary rewards cannot correct.

More broadly, an over-reliance on model-free, habitual control has been suggested as a common thread running through addiction and several other disorders of self-control, which is exactly the kind of shared, dimensional mechanism the previous section described.

These models are valuable precisely because they are specific: they do not just say a patient is less motivated, they point at a candidate step, such as reward sensitivity or the balance of habit against planning, that could be measured and perhaps treated.


69.2.2 Predictive-coding models of psychosis and of autistic perception

Predictive coding, described earlier in this outline, is the theory that the brain is constantly predicting its own incoming sensations and passing forward only the prediction error, the part it got wrong.

A crucial quantity in this theory is precision, which means the confidence, or reliability weight, the brain assigns to a signal, deciding how much to trust incoming sensory evidence against its own prior expectations.

In systems terms, precision is a gain parameter on the error channel: the perceptual update takes in a prior expectation and a sensory sample, and moves belief toward the sample in proportion to the relative precision of sense against prior, so one ratio decides who wins every disagreement between expectation and evidence.

Psychosis, the family of experiences that includes hallucinations, perceiving things that are not there, and delusions, holding fixed false beliefs, has been modelled as a disturbance of this precision balance.

In one influential formulation, people with schizophrenia hold priors and higher-level beliefs too rigidly, or fail to properly dampen down sensory signals, so that prediction errors are treated as more meaningful than they should be, and the mind builds unusual explanations, that is delusions, to account for them.

Autism, a developmental condition involving differences in social interaction and often an unusual sensitivity to sensory detail, has been given a related but distinct account called the aberrant precision account, associated with work by Rebecca Lawson, Karl Friston, and colleagues, and by Sander Van de Cruys and colleagues.

On this view, the autistic brain assigns unusually high precision to incoming sensory signals, so that small, ordinarily ignorable details are treated as highly informative, which could help explain both an acute eye for detail and the discomfort of a world that keeps generating surprising errors.

A beginner should notice the shared shape: in both psychosis and autism the story is about the same knob, the relative trust placed in sensory evidence against prior expectation, being set differently, which is a beautiful illustration of how one healthy mechanism can, mis-set in different directions, produce very different conditions.

It should be said plainly that these are theories under active debate, supported by suggestive evidence rather than proven beyond dispute, and that real conditions are far more complex than any single knob.


69.2.3 Evidence-accumulation models of decision abnormality

Evidence-accumulation models, described earlier in this outline under names such as the drift-diffusion model, picture a simple decision as the gradual piling up of noisy evidence toward one of two thresholds, with a choice made when the pile crosses a threshold.

Such a model has a few interpretable parts: the drift rate, meaning how fast and cleanly evidence accumulates, which reflects the quality of processing, and the threshold or boundary, meaning how much evidence is demanded before committing, which reflects caution against haste.

As a system, the accumulator subscribes to a noisy momentary evidence stream, holds a single running total as state, and publishes a choice and a response time when the total crosses either boundary, with simple perceptual decisions of this kind typically resolving within a few hundred milliseconds to about a second or two.

The power of these models in psychiatry is that they can separate a slow or error-prone decision into its causes: is the person gathering evidence poorly, a low drift rate, or are they being unusually cautious or unusually hasty, a shifted threshold, or are they simply slow to start and finish for reasons outside the decision itself.

Applied to disorder, this lets researchers ask precise questions, such as whether people in certain states gather less evidence before deciding, sometimes described as jumping to conclusions, a pattern that has been studied in relation to delusional thinking.

The same tools can be pointed at conditions where decisions are slowed, testing whether the slowing comes from more cautious thresholds or from degraded evidence, which matters because the two imply different underlying problems and different remedies.

The general contribution of evidence-accumulation models is that they turn a vague clinical observation, that someone decides oddly, into a set of separable, measurable quantities, each of which is a candidate for the actual site of the difficulty.

As with the other frameworks, these are research tools whose clinical use is still being established, not settled diagnostic instruments.


69.3 What breakdown teaches about the intact mind

This section steps back to draw the lesson that justifies placing a chapter on illness inside a book about the healthy mind: broken cognition is a window onto working cognition.


69.3.1 Failure as a probe of mechanism

There is a long tradition in the science of mind of learning how a system works by studying what happens when a part of it fails, because a failure isolates a component in a way that smooth normal function never reveals.

The classic version of this is neuropsychology, where studying patients who lost one specific ability after brain damage, while keeping others intact, helped prove that memory, language, and perception rely on separable machinery.

Computational psychiatry extends the same logic from damaged brains to mis-tuned processes, and its distinctive move is that it can name the broken part in the vocabulary of a model.

When a reinforcement-learning model shows that reward sensitivity is what changes in anhedonia, it is not only describing a symptom, it is also confirming that reward sensitivity is a real, separable component of the healthy learning system, one that can vary on its own.

When a precision-weighting model captures both psychosis and autism by moving a single trust parameter in opposite directions, it lends weight to the idea that precision weighting is a genuine, adjustable dial in the normal brain, and not just a theorist's convenience.

In this way each disorder, understood mechanistically, doubles as a natural experiment on the intact mind, telling us which parts can come apart from which, and therefore which parts were truly separate to begin with.

This is the deep reason the chapter sits where it does: the catalogue of the healthy mind, built up across this whole outline, gains extra confidence every time a specific breakdown lands exactly on one of its proposed parts.


69.3.2 The translation to biomarker and treatment

The final hope of computational psychiatry is practical: to turn these models into things that help patients, which the field summarises as the path from computation to clinic.

One target is the biomarker, meaning a measurable signal that reliably tracks a condition, its severity, or its likely course.

A computational parameter, such as a person's fitted reward sensitivity or evidence threshold, is a candidate mechanistic biomarker, one that would report not merely that something is wrong but which mechanism is wrong, which is far more useful for choosing treatment.

A second target is treatment selection and personalisation, the idea that knowing a patient's computational phenotype could help predict which therapy or medication will suit them, sparing the current slow process of trial and error.

A third, more distant target is the design of new treatments aimed squarely at a specific inferential or learning abnormality identified by a model, rather than at symptoms in general.

Beginners deserve a clear-eyed summary of where this stands: the promise is real and the logic is sound, but as the field's own leaders stress, very few computational measures have yet crossed into routine clinical use, and much careful validation remains to be done.

The right attitude is therefore hopeful patience: computational psychiatry has already sharpened how we describe mental illness and has repeatedly confirmed the parts of the healthy mind, and its clinical harvest, if it comes, will come gradually and only after rigorous testing.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ Trial-by-trial behaviour, as sequences of choices, response times, and outcomes, from experimental tasks.

◦ Delivered rewards and sensory stimuli, as the environment's feedback stream to the modelled learner.

◦ Optional physiological and imaging measurements, as numeric arrays, for the data-driven flavour.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Fitted parameter estimates, as a small numeric vector per person, consumed by researchers and, one day, clinicians.

◦ Simulated behaviour from the fitted model, as choice and timing sequences, consumed by model-checking procedures.

◦ Candidate biomarkers and predicted treatment responses, as scores, consumed by clinical decision processes.

• STATE.

◦ The modelled learner's internal state: learned action values, current beliefs and their precisions, or a running evidence total, depending on the framework.

◦ The fitting procedure's state: the current best parameter estimates and their uncertainty.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Reward sensitivity: the gain applied to a received reward before learning, lowered in models of anhedonia.

◦ Learning rate: the fraction of each prediction error applied to the stored value.

◦ Precision ratio: the trust placed in sensory evidence relative to prior expectation, mis-set in models of psychosis and of autistic perception.

◦ Drift rate and decision threshold: the quality of evidence and the caution demanded, in evidence-accumulation models.

◦ The balance weight between model-based and model-free control.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Phasic dopamine prediction-error signals: onset within roughly 100 milliseconds of an unexpected outcome, as recorded in animal studies.

◦ Simple two-choice decisions modelled by drift diffusion: typically a few hundred milliseconds to about one or two seconds.

◦ Value learning across a task: tens to hundreds of trials, spanning minutes to an hour of testing.

◦ Clinical course of the disorders themselves: REFUSED, because onset and remission vary from weeks to decades across people and conditions, and no single honest constant exists.

• MODES.

◦ Theory-driven mode: fit a mechanistic model and publish parameters; chosen when the question is what has changed inside the process.

◦ Data-driven mode: mine measurements for patterns and publish predictions; chosen when the question is who belongs together or who will respond to what.

◦ Within the modelled learner, model-based against model-free control, switched by the estimated reliability and the cost of planning.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In the modelled processes: lowered reward sensitivity as anhedonia, inflated prediction error as addiction, mis-weighted precision as psychosis or autistic perceptual difference, and shifted thresholds as jumping to conclusions.

◦ In the programme itself: unidentifiable models where different parameter settings fit equally well, small unreplicated samples, and parameters that fail to stay stable across sessions.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a number variable called learning rate with value zero point three.
Create a list variable called true rewards holding the average payoff of each of two actions.
Define a procedure called run agent that takes a number called reward sensitivity.
    Create a list variable called values holding one zero for each action.
    Repeat for two hundred trials.
        Calculate the probability of the first action from the difference of the two values using a soft choice rule.
        Choose the first action with that probability, otherwise choose the second.
        Draw the reward for the chosen action from its true payoff plus noise.
        Calculate the felt reward as the product of the reward and the reward sensitivity.
        Calculate the prediction error as the felt reward minus the value of the chosen action.
        Add the product of the learning rate and the prediction error to the value of the chosen action.
        Count the trial if the chosen action was the better one.
    Report the final values and the fraction of trials on which the better action was chosen.
Run the agent with reward sensitivity one to model a healthy learner.
Run the agent with reward sensitivity zero point two to model an anhedonic learner.
Compare the two reports: the anhedonic learner shows a flattened value landscape and weaker pursuit of the better option.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Load the math module for the soft choice rule and the random module for noise.
import math
import random
# Create a number variable called LEARNING_RATE with value zero point three.
LEARNING_RATE = 0.3
# Create a list variable called TRUE_REWARDS holding the average payoff of each action.
TRUE_REWARDS = [1.0, 0.2]

# Define a procedure called run_agent that takes a number called reward_sensitivity.
def run_agent(reward_sensitivity, trials=200):
    # Create a list variable called values holding one zero for each action.
    values = [0.0, 0.0]
    # Create a number variable called good_choices with initial value zero.
    good_choices = 0
    # Repeat for the requested number of trials.
    for t in range(trials):
        # Calculate the probability of the first action from the value difference.
        p_first = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-3.0 * (values[0] - values[1])))
        # Choose the first action with that probability, otherwise the second.
        action = 0 if random.random() < p_first else 1
        # Draw the reward as the true payoff plus a little noise.
        reward = TRUE_REWARDS[action] + random.gauss(0, 0.1)
        # Calculate the felt reward as the product of reward and reward sensitivity.
        felt = reward * reward_sensitivity
        # Calculate the prediction error as the felt reward minus the stored value.
        error = felt - values[action]
        # Add the product of the learning rate and the error to the stored value.
        values[action] = values[action] + LEARNING_RATE * error
        # Count the trial if the better action was chosen.
        if action == 0:
            good_choices = good_choices + 1
    # Report the final values and the fraction of better choices.
    return values, good_choices / trials

# Seed the random generator so the demonstration is repeatable.
random.seed(1)
# Run the agent with sensitivity one to model a healthy learner.
healthy_values, healthy_rate = run_agent(1.0)
# Run the agent with sensitivity zero point two to model an anhedonic learner.
anhedonic_values, anhedonic_rate = run_agent(0.2)
# Print the healthy learner's values and choice rate.
print("healthy   values", [round(v, 2) for v in healthy_values], "good choice rate", round(healthy_rate, 2))
# Print the anhedonic learner's values and choice rate.
print("anhedonic values", [round(v, 2) for v in anhedonic_values], "good choice rate", round(anhedonic_rate, 2))


CHAPTER 70. THE INTEGRATION PROBLEM: TOWARD A WHOLE-MIND ACCOUNT FOR KONNECTOME (CONTEXT)

This is the closing chapter, and its job is different from all the others.

Every chapter before this one took a single faculty or framework and laid it out on its own, as if it could be studied in isolation: perception here, memory there, attention, language, reasoning, emotion, each in its own room.

But a real mind is not a set of separate rooms.

It is one thing, doing everything at once, so that a single ordinary moment, catching a friend's eye across a noisy room and knowing at a glance that something is wrong, weaves together perception, attention, memory, emotion, social understanding, and the readiness to act, all in the same breath.

The problem of explaining how the separate pieces become one working mind is called the integration problem, and it is the deepest unsolved problem in the whole science.

In the systems vocabulary this book has built, every chapter so far specified a module: its inputs, its outputs, its state, its parameters, its characteristic times, and its ways of failing.

The integration problem is the question of the missing top-level program, the one that wires those interfaces together, schedules the modules against one another, and makes a single coherent agent out of the catalogue.

This chapter does three things: it shows how the faculties are known to hand off to one another, it lays out the great integrative problems that no one has yet solved, and it reads the whole field back for konnectome, saying plainly what is safe to build on and what must be left to the judgement of whoever does the building.

It is written as a synthesis, a drawing-together, and it aims to leave a beginner not with a tidy finished picture but with an honest map of what is settled, what is contested, and what is still open.


70.1 The composition of the faculties

This section is about composition, meaning how the separate capacities combine and pass work to one another, and about two ideas that have been proposed as the glue that might hold the whole thing together.


70.1.1 How attention gates encoding, how working memory buffers thought, how control coordinates goals

The first thing to see is that the faculties in this outline are not independent, they are wired into one another in a rough division of labour, and a few examples make the pattern vivid.

Attention gates encoding, meaning that what you pay attention to is largely what gets written into memory, and what you ignore mostly does not, so attention acts as a doorway deciding which experiences even get the chance to be remembered.

In interface terms, attention subscribes to the full perceptual stream and publishes a selected subset, and memory encoding subscribes to that subset, so the memory store never sees what the gate discarded.

This is why the failures of attention described earlier, such as not noticing an obvious event because you were focused elsewhere, lead directly to failures of memory: you cannot later recall what never got through the door.

Working memory buffers thought, meaning that the small, temporary workspace of the mind holds the handful of items you are currently juggling, and provides the stage on which reasoning, language understanding, and planning actually happen.

Its systems role is a shared buffer of about four chunks that every deliberate process reads from and writes to, which is why its capacity limit propagates outward as a limit on everything built above it.

Without that buffer there would be nowhere for the intermediate steps of a thought to sit while the next step is computed, which is why limits on working memory ripple out into limits on reasoning and comprehension.

Cognitive control coordinates goals, meaning that a supervisory set of processes keeps the mind pointed at what it is trying to achieve, holds off distractions and habits, switches between tasks, and settles conflicts when two responses compete.

Control is what lets a goal formed now, such as an intention to keep quiet about a surprise, actually govern behaviour minutes later against the pull of habit.

Read as a system, control subscribes to the current goal and to conflict signals from the rest of the machinery, and publishes bias signals that raise or lower the gain on competing processes, operating over seconds to minutes as goals are held and pursued.

Put together, a simple portrait emerges: attention selects, working memory holds, control steers, memory stores and supplies, and perception feeds the whole with a model of the world, each faculty handing its product to the next.

The integration problem is that describing these hand-offs in words, as just done, is not the same as explaining how the machinery actually accomplishes them, and it is that mechanical how that remains open.


70.1.2 Prediction and recurrence as candidate unifiers

Faced with a mind full of separate faculties, theorists have long hoped for a single principle underneath them all, a common currency in which every faculty trades, and two candidates recur across this outline.

The first candidate is prediction.

A large family of theories, running through Bayesian perception, predictive coding, reinforcement learning, and active inference, proposes that the mind is fundamentally a prediction machine, always generating expectations and learning from the errors in them.

The attraction of prediction as a unifier is that it seems to appear everywhere: perception can be cast as predicting sensory input, action as fulfilling predictions about the body, learning as reducing prediction error, and even emotion as prediction about the internal state of the body.

If all the faculties are really running the same predictive loop over different content, then their integration would be less mysterious, because they would already be speaking one language.

In systems terms, prediction proposes a universal message format: every module publishes expectations and subscribes to errors, so integration reduces to routing one type of signal.

The second candidate is recurrence, meaning the pervasive looping of information, where the output of a process is fed back as input, around and around, rather than passing through once in a straight line.

The brain is massively recurrent, full of connections that run backward and sideways as well as forward, and many theorists suspect that this looping is how separate regions come to constrain one another and settle into a single coherent interpretation.

Recurrence offers a mechanism by which distant, specialised parts can talk until they agree, which is exactly what integration requires.

Where prediction proposes a shared format, recurrence proposes a shared dynamics: modules iterate against one another until they relax into a mutually consistent state, so integration is the settling itself.

These two ideas, prediction and recurrence, are the most promising candidate unifiers the field has, and they may well be two sides of one coin, since a predictive brain needs loops to compare predictions with reality.

Honesty requires the caveat that neither is a proven grand unifier, that each has vocal critics, and that showing a principle can be stretched to cover every faculty is not the same as showing it is the true engine of any of them.


70.2 The unsolved integrative problems

This section names the specific hard problems that stand between the field and a real whole-mind account.

These are not gaps that a little more data will fill, they are conceptual knots that have resisted decades of effort, and a beginner should meet them not as failures but as the honest frontier.


70.2.1 The binding problem across perception and symbol

The binding problem is the puzzle of how a mind combines separately processed features into a single unified thing.

In perception, the brain processes an object's colour, shape, motion, and location in different places, yet you experience one red ball moving left, not four loose facts, and no one fully understands how the brain stitches those features to the same object, which is the classic binding problem.

There is a second, deeper version of the problem that reaches into thought itself, the binding of symbols, sometimes called the variable-binding problem.

To think that John loves Mary, and to keep it distinct from the thought that Mary loves John, a mind must bind the role of lover to John and the role of loved to Mary, and hold those bindings together without confusing which filler goes in which slot.

Symbolic systems handle this easily, because keeping track of what fills which role is exactly what symbols are for, but they struggle to learn and to ground those symbols.

Neural networks learn and ground beautifully but have long struggled to keep such bindings crisp and to combine known parts in new arrangements without muddling them, a difficulty at the heart of the old symbolic-versus-connectionist debate.

In systems terms the two sides predict differently: a symbolic account predicts errorless role bookkeeping but hand-built content, while a purely connectionist account predicts graceful learning with occasional binding slips, and human performance shows both signatures, which is why neither account closes the case.

The binding problem therefore sits right on the seam this whole outline keeps returning to, the seam between pattern and structure, and solving integration means solving binding at both the perceptual and the symbolic level at once.


70.2.2 The frame and relevance problem

The frame problem, which began as a technical headache in artificial intelligence and grew into a deep puzzle about the mind, is the problem of relevance: how does a mind know, out of everything it knows, which few things actually matter right now.

When something changes in the world, almost everything else stays the same, and a mind must update the handful of beliefs that the change affects without laboriously checking every belief it holds, yet how it homes in on just the relevant ones, quickly and without exhaustive search, is deeply unclear.

Stated as the relevance problem, it is the challenge of explaining how a process that could in principle draw on knowledge from any domain manages to bring the right knowledge to bear without first sifting through all of it.

This is easy for people and startlingly hard to formalise, and it has been called one of the reasons that building broadly intelligent machines is so difficult.

One intriguing proposal, associated with Murray Shanahan and Bernard Baars, connects the relevance problem to consciousness by way of global workspace theory, the idea that the mind has a limited central workspace onto which one interpretation at a time is broadcast to all the specialised processes at once.

On this view, a workspace that lets many parallel processes compete to contribute, while broadcasting the current winner to everything, might be nature's way of managing relevance without an impossible exhaustive search.

As a system design, this replaces exhaustive search with parallel competition plus broadcast: every module bids on the workspace at once, the winner is published to all, and relevance emerges from the bidding rather than from any central index of what matters.

Whether or not that particular proposal is right, the frame and relevance problem remains a genuine open obstacle, and any whole-mind account has to say how the mind finds the needle without searching the whole haystack.


70.2.3 Central against distributed control and the homunculus regress

A mind that pursues goals, resists distraction, and switches tasks seems to need something that is in charge, and that raises one of the oldest traps in the science of mind.

The trap is the homunculus, Latin for little person, the temptation to explain the mind's control by positing an inner controller that watches the mental screen and pulls the levers.

The trouble is that this explains nothing, because the inner controller would itself need an inner controller to run it, and so on forever, a bottomless regress that just relocates the mystery rather than solving it.

So the field faces a genuine dilemma about the nature of control.

One option is central control, a dedicated executive system, often associated with the front of the brain, that really does coordinate the rest, and the risk here is smuggling the homunculus back in unless the executive is itself explained in mechanical, non-intelligent terms.

The other option is distributed control, the idea that there is no single boss at all, and that orderly goal-directed behaviour emerges from many simple parts interacting and competing, the way a flock of birds wheels as one with no lead bird in command.

Distributed control avoids the regress but owes an account of how genuinely coordinated, flexible, unified behaviour arises from the scramble, which is not easy to give.

In systems terms the two designs predict differently: a central executive predicts a bottleneck whose damage or overload degrades every controlled task at once, while pure distribution predicts no single point of failure but also makes globally consistent, novel plans harder to explain.

The honest position is that this is unresolved, that the truth is probably some disciplined mixture in which control is real but implemented by mindless mechanisms, and that avoiding the homunculus while still explaining coordination is one of the central demands on any whole-mind architecture.


70.2.4 Access, report, and the place of consciousness in a control architecture

The last of the great problems is where consciousness fits into an account of the mind as an information-processing control system.

It helps to separate two senses of the word, following a distinction drawn by the philosopher Ned Block.

Access consciousness refers to information being available to the rest of the mind, poised for use in reasoning, decision, and above all report, meaning your ability to say what you are experiencing.

Phenomenal consciousness refers to there being something it is like to have the experience, the felt redness of red, the ache of an ache, the inner feel of it from the inside.

The science has made real progress on access consciousness, because it can be probed by asking what information a person can report and act on, and theories such as global workspace theory give a plausible mechanical story: information becomes access-conscious when it is broadcast widely across the mind's workspace.

In systems terms, access consciousness names a routing property, that a signal has been published on the global bus and is readable by every module, and studies of the brain's ignition response suggest this broadcast is established around 300 milliseconds after a stimulus, the timescale of the well-studied P3b brain wave.

In a control architecture this has a natural role, because the globally shared, reportable information is exactly what flexible, deliberate control needs to work with, so access consciousness looks like it could be a genuine functional part of the machine.

Phenomenal consciousness is another matter, and it is the site of what David Chalmers named the hard problem, the question of why any physical processing should be accompanied by felt experience at all, rather than going on in the dark.

This remains genuinely unsolved and genuinely contested, with serious thinkers disagreeing about whether it is a problem awaiting a scientific answer, a confusion that will dissolve, or something outside the reach of the current approach entirely.

For a builder of minds the practical stance is to take on the functional, reportable, access side of consciousness as an engineering target, since that part connects to control and behaviour, while treating the hard problem of felt experience with humility as a question the field has not resolved and may not resolve soon.


70.3 The reading of the field for konnectome

This final section turns the whole outline into guidance.

It does not crown a winner, because, as the very first pages warned, the honest state of the science is that several frameworks each explain part of the mind and none explains all of it.

Instead it reads each framework as a constraint on any adequate design, points to where the frameworks agree, and hands forward the questions that belong to the architect and not to a survey.


70.3.1 What each framework contributes as a constraint rather than a creed

The organising choice of this outline, and of konnectome, is to treat the great frameworks not as rival religions to pledge allegiance to, but as constraints, meaning conditions that any true account of the mind will have to satisfy.

A creed asks you to believe one framework and reject the others; a constraint simply records something the mind demonstrably does, which your design had better be able to do too.

Read this way, the symbolic tradition contributes the constraint that a mind can handle structure, rules, and composition, combining known parts into endlessly new arrangements, and that any architecture lacking this will fail at language and reasoning.

The connectionist tradition contributes the constraint that a mind learns rich knowledge from raw, noisy experience and degrades gracefully rather than shattering, and that any architecture lacking this will be brittle and hand-fed.

The Bayesian and probabilistic tradition contributes the constraint that a mind copes with uncertainty by weighing evidence against prior expectation in a broadly sensible, sometimes near-optimal way, and that any architecture ignoring uncertainty will misjudge a probabilistic world.

The reinforcement-learning tradition contributes the constraint that a mind learns what to do from the consequences of acting, guided by prediction errors, and balances habit against goal-directed planning.

The dynamical and embodied tradition contributes the constraint that a mind is a body acting in and coupled to an environment over continuous time, not a disembodied calculator, and that much of intelligence lives in that coupling.

The predictive-processing tradition contributes the constraint that a mind is forever anticipating its own input and learning from the misses, tying perception, action, and learning into one loop.

For an engineer, each constraint is a requirement in a specification: a capability the finished system must expose at its interfaces, testable in principle, regardless of which internal mechanism supplies it.

Held together, these are not a contradiction to be resolved by picking one, they are a specification to be met by a design broad enough to honour all of them, and that is exactly how konnectome is meant to read them.


70.3.2 Where the frameworks agree, and why the agreement is the safest ground to build on

When frameworks that start from utterly different assumptions nonetheless arrive at the same conclusion, that convergence is the strongest evidence the field has, because it is unlikely to be an artefact of any one framework's biases.

So the safest ground to build on is the set of points where the traditions agree despite themselves, and several such points recur across this whole outline.

They agree that the mind runs internal models of the world, representations it uses to perceive, predict, remember, and plan, even though they describe those models in different vocabularies.

They agree that prediction is central, that a mind is forever comparing what it expected with what it got and learning from the difference, a theme shared by Bayesian perception, predictive coding, and reinforcement learning alike.

They agree that the mind has to manage limited resources, that attention, working memory, and control exist precisely because a mind cannot do everything at once and must choose what to process and hold and pursue.

They agree that there are two broad modes of operation, one fast, automatic, and pattern-based, the other slow, effortful, and structured, however much they quarrel over the exact nature of the split.

They agree that learning operates at many timescales at once, from a moment's adjustment to a lifetime's expertise, and that memory is reconstructive and predictive rather than a passive recording.

These agreements are not glamorous and they are not complete, but they are load-bearing, and a design that respects internal models, prediction, resource limits, dual modes of processing, and multi-timescale reconstructive learning is standing on the firmest ground the science currently offers.

For konnectome the counsel is to build first and most confidently on this shared core, and to treat the places where frameworks still disagree as areas for cautious, revisable choices rather than firm foundations.


70.3.3 The open questions this outline hands forward, and the decisions that belong to the architect rather than to the survey

An outline like this one can survey the field, mark what is settled, and fence off what is contested, but it cannot make the final choices, because those choices depend on what a particular mind is being built to do, and they belong to the architect.

It is worth being explicit about the difference.

A survey reports what is known; an architect must decide, often before the science has finished, and must own the risk of deciding under uncertainty, which is a responsibility no survey can discharge on the architect's behalf.

Several open questions are hereby handed forward, unresolved on purpose.

There is the binding question, of how to get crisp, composable structure and rich learned grounding in the same system, which is the practical form of the symbolic-versus-connectionist seam.

There is the relevance question, of how a system decides what matters now without searching everything it knows, the frame problem in working clothes.

There is the control question, of how to make a system genuinely goal-directed and coordinated without smuggling in a little person who does the deciding.

There is the integration question itself, of what actually binds the faculties into one mind, and whether prediction, recurrence, a global workspace, or something not yet imagined is the real glue.

And there is the question of consciousness, of how much of the access, reportable, functional side to build in deliberately, and how to remain honest about the felt side that the science has not cracked.

The decisions these questions demand, which framework to lean on where the field is split, how much structure to hand-build against how much to let the system learn, where to place the boundary between fixed architecture and changeable content, are architectural decisions, and this outline deliberately does not pretend to settle them.

What it offers instead is the map: a catalogue of the processes a mind must reproduce, a set of frameworks read as constraints, a shared core that is safe to build on, and a clearly marked list of the deep problems still open.

The right way to close is the way the outline opened, with candour, saying plainly that no one yet possesses a complete, agreed account of how a whole human mind works, that this is the honest and even exciting state of the science, and that building konnectome well means treating that unfinished map not as a defeat but as the working charter for the next stretch of the journey.


SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• SUBSCRIBES (INPUTS).

◦ The sensory stream, as raw stimulus events from the environment, feeding perception.

◦ The current goal, as a maintained intention, feeding attention and control.

◦ Bodily and affective signals, as internal state readings, biasing every stage.

◦ Long-term memory contents, as stored records, available to retrieval on every cycle.

• PUBLISHES (OUTPUTS).

◦ Overt actions, as motor commands, consumed by the environment.

◦ New memory traces, as encoded records of attended experience, consumed by the long-term stores.

◦ Updated goals and predictions, as internal signals, consumed by the next cognitive cycle.

◦ Reportable contents, as globally broadcast information, consumed by language and deliberate control.

• STATE.

◦ The perceptual interpretation currently settled on.

◦ The contents of working memory, about four chunks of currently active items.

◦ The active goal stack and control settings.

◦ The entire long-term memory, as the slowly changing background state of the whole system.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Attentional selectivity: how narrowly the gate filters the sensory stream.

◦ Working-memory capacity: about four chunks in the healthy adult.

◦ Control gain: how strongly goals bias competing processes against habit.

◦ Broadcast threshold: how much support an interpretation needs to win the workspace.

◦ Learning rates at each store, from fast episodic capture to slow skill tuning.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Iconic memory decay: under one second, bounding how long unattended sensory detail survives.

◦ Attentional blink: about 200 to 500 milliseconds, bounding how quickly attention can re-engage.

◦ Global broadcast and ignition: around 300 milliseconds after a stimulus, on the timescale of the P3b brain wave.

◦ A full perceive-decide-act cycle for a simple task: on the order of a few hundred milliseconds to about one second.

◦ The settling time of the whole-mind integration itself: REFUSED, because no accepted measurement of a unified integration time exists in the literature.

• MODES.

◦ Automatic mode: perception, habit, and well-learned skill run the cycle with little control; the default when predictions are being met.

◦ Deliberate mode: the workspace, working memory, and control dominate; triggered by novelty, conflict, error, or explicit intention.

◦ The detection of conflict or surprise is the switch from automatic to deliberate, and fluency restored is the switch back.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Selection failures: inattentional blindness, where the unattended never reaches memory.

◦ Capacity failures: overload of working memory collapsing reasoning and comprehension.

◦ Control failures: habit capture, distraction, and goal neglect.

◦ Binding failures: features or roles assigned to the wrong object or filler.

◦ Whole-system failures: the disorders of the previous chapter, read as parameters pushed outside their healthy range.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

Create a text variable called stimulus holding the current event in the world.
Create a text variable called goal holding what the agent is trying to notice.
Create a list variable called long term memory holding records that pair a cue with a suggested action.
Create an empty list variable called working memory with a capacity of four items.
Create an empty list variable called trace to record the journey of the thought.
Perceive: turn the stimulus into a set of features and add a note to the trace.
Attend: keep only the features that relate to the goal, and add a note to the trace.
Encode: add the attended features to working memory, dropping the oldest item if capacity is exceeded.
Retrieve: for each record in long term memory, if its cue matches an item in working memory, add its suggested action to a candidate list.
Add a note about the retrieval to the trace.
Decide: for each candidate action, calculate a score from its match strength, and choose the action with the highest score.
Add a note about the decision to the trace.
Act: publish the chosen action to the world, and add a final note to the trace.
Learn: add a new record pairing the attended cue with the chosen action to long term memory.
Print every note in the trace in order, showing one thought passing through the whole mind.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Create a text variable called stimulus holding the current event in the world.
stimulus = "a friend's worried face across a noisy room"
# Create a text variable called goal holding what the agent is trying to notice.
goal = "friend"
# Create a list variable called long_term_memory pairing cues with suggested actions.
long_term_memory = [("worried", "walk over and ask what is wrong"),
                    ("noisy", "ignore the background chatter"),
                    ("face", "make eye contact")]
# Create an empty list variable called working_memory with a capacity of four items.
working_memory = []
# Create a number variable called CAPACITY with value four.
CAPACITY = 4
# Create an empty list variable called trace to record the journey of the thought.
trace = []

# Perceive: turn the stimulus into a list of word features.
features = stimulus.replace("'s", "").split()
# Add a perception note to the trace.
trace.append("PERCEPTION: features " + str(features))
# Attend: keep the goal word and its two neighbours as the selected subset.
attended = [w for w in features if w in ("friend", "worried", "face")]
# Add an attention note to the trace.
trace.append("ATTENTION: selected " + str(attended))
# Encode: add each attended feature to working memory, honouring the capacity.
for item in attended:
    # Add the item to working memory.
    working_memory.append(item)
    # If working memory exceeds capacity, drop the oldest item.
    if len(working_memory) > CAPACITY:
        working_memory.pop(0)
# Add a memory note to the trace.
trace.append("WORKING MEMORY: holding " + str(working_memory))
# Retrieve: collect every stored action whose cue matches working memory.
candidates = [(cue, act) for cue, act in long_term_memory if cue in working_memory]
# Add a retrieval note to the trace.
trace.append("RETRIEVAL: candidates " + str([a for c, a in candidates]))
# Decide: score each candidate by how early its cue sits in working memory.
scored = [(CAPACITY - working_memory.index(cue), act) for cue, act in candidates]
# Choose the action with the highest score.
choice = max(scored)[1]
# Add a decision note to the trace.
trace.append("DECISION: chose " + choice)
# Act: publish the chosen action to the world.
trace.append("ACTION: " + choice)
# Learn: store the pairing of the situation with the chosen action.
long_term_memory.append(("worried friend", choice))
# Add a learning note to the trace.
trace.append("LEARNING: stored the episode for next time")
# Print every note in the trace, showing one thought crossing the whole mind.
for note in trace:
    # Print the note.
    print(note)

================================================================================

END OF COGNITION: A SYSTEMS APPROACH.
