THE NEURONAL MANUSCRIPT

Every Type of Neuron in the Human Nervous System, Described, Explained, and Specified

VOLUME 2 OF 5

Chapters 60 to 119

D. R. Dison

Founder, Artificial Intelligence University (AIU)

ORCID: 0009-0001-9246-5758

Prepared 30 July 2026


ABOUT THIS VOLUME

This is volume 2 of five, and it continues the catalogue at Chapter 60.

The front matter and Part One, the general account of the neuron, are given in Volume 1 and are not repeated here.

The tags and flags used throughout are explained in Volume 1, and are summarised again in one line each below.

• (PUC) marks a Previously Unnamed Construct: a neuron type that is real, functionally necessary and relied upon in the literature, but which had no accepted proper name until this work gave it one.

• (COG) marks a type involved in cognition, and (NON-COG) marks a type that is not.


PART THREE: HIPPOCAMPAL FORMATION - MEMORY AND NAVIGATION (CONTINUED FROM VOLUME 1)

CHAPTER 57. BACK-PROJECTION CELLS (Upstream-Feedback Muting Neuron) (COG)

Information in the hippocampus is supposed to flow one way, from the dentate gyrus to CA3 to CA1 and out; this cell drives the wrong way up that one-way street, on purpose, every time you remember something.

Back-projection names a direction on a map, not a purpose.

Upstream names where the axon goes, against the normal flow of the hippocampal circuit, from area CA1 back into several layers of area CA3 and the dentate gyrus.

Feedback names the loop it closes, letting the final stage of the hippocampal chain report back to the earlier stages once an output has been produced.

Muting names the payload, since the cell is inhibitory, so what travels backwards is a suppression signal rather than a copy of the message.

Neuron marks it as a long-range inhibitory cell of the hippocampal formation.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The back-projection cell is a GABA-releasing inhibitory neuron whose cell body sits in stratum oriens or the alveus of CA1, the final stage of the hippocampal circuit, and whose axon runs backwards into CA3 and into the hilus of the dentate gyrus, the earlier stages.

It was identified by intracellular labelling in the living rat brain, where two cells with somata in the alveus were found to innervate CA3 in addition to arborising richly within CA1.

Its job is to close a long inhibitory feedback loop.

CA1 is the hippocampus's answer; the back-projection cell takes a copy of that answer and uses it to quieten the parts of the circuit that produced the question.

This does three things: it prevents the recurrent, self-exciting network of CA3 from running away into seizure, it helps terminate bursts of activity once an output has been produced, and it imposes a timing relationship between the output stage and the input stage that matters for sharp wave ripples, the 150 to 200 hertz bursts during which memories are replayed.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is horizontally elongated and lies in stratum oriens or within the alveus itself.

Dendrites run horizontally within stratum oriens, which means, as with the trilaminar cell, that its input is CA1's own pyramidal output rather than incoming information.

The axon leaves through stratum oriens and the alveus, travels along the length of the hippocampus toward CA3, and there branches in strata oriens, radiatum and lacunosum-moleculare, then continues into the hilus and the dentate molecular layer, while also leaving a rich local arbour behind in CA1.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly 15 to 25 micrometres along its long axis.

Total axonal length is in the tens of millimetres in the rat, and would be substantially greater in the much larger human hippocampus, plausibly 50 to 200 millimetres, though no human reconstruction exists.

SIZE figures for human are extrapolations and should be labelled as such in any model.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Somatostatin-positive back-projecting cells whose axon reaches CA3 and the dentate gyrus.

• Double-projecting cells, which send collaterals to CA3, the dentate, the subiculum, the medial entorhinal cortex and the contralateral hippocampus as well as to the medial septum.

• Oriens-retrohippocampal projecting cells, whose long branch reaches the subiculum rather than CA3.

• Somatostatin-positive cells projecting across the midline to the opposite hippocampus.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies are in CA1 stratum oriens and in the alveus, with some in CA3 stratum oriens.

The interfaces that define it are three.

The stratum oriens and alveus border, where it sits.

The CA1 and CA3 border, which its axon crosses in the retrograde direction.

The hilus, which is itself the interface between CA3's proximal territory and the dentate gyrus, and which its terminal branches invade.

NUMBER:

Back-projection cells are allocated about 30,000 per hemisphere, so about 60,000 across both hemispheres, which is about 0.04 percent of the 150 million neuron budget for the hippocampal formation.

Confidence is low.

The anchor is that human hippocampus contains an estimated 141,500 somatostatin-positive interneurons per hemisphere, and back-projecting cells are a minority subset of the somatostatin-positive population in stratum oriens.

A defensible bound is 10,000 to 60,000 per hemisphere, and the overlap with double-projecting cells means any model must avoid double counting them with the hippocampo-septal type.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

As somatostatin-positive oriens neurons they have high input resistance, roughly 200 to 400 megaohms, so they are easily driven.

They show a prominent sag when hyperpolarised, caused by the hyperpolarisation-activated current known as Ih, which gives them a natural rebound and a resonant preference near theta frequency.

They have low firing thresholds, broad spikes and strong spike frequency accommodation.

In the behaving animal, somatostatin-positive long-range oriens cells projecting to the dentate fire at about 4 hertz during theta and increase to about 23 hertz during sharp wave ripples.

That ripple increase is important: it separates them from oriens-lacunosum-moleculare cells, which go quiet during ripples.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The input synapse is the celebrated one.

CA1 pyramidal axon collaterals contact these cells through synapses with an extremely low initial release probability that facilitates dramatically during a train, so the first pyramidal spike is nearly ignored and the tenth is not.

This target-specific facilitation depends on the presynaptic adhesion protein Elfn1 and on the metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR1 alpha on the interneuron.

The practical consequence is that back-projection cells are burst detectors: they respond to sustained pyramidal activity and ignore isolated spikes.

They also receive septal GABAergic and cholinergic input and inhibition from vasoactive intestinal peptide expressing interneurons.

Outputs go to CA3 pyramidal cell dendrites, hilar interneurons and mossy cells, dentate granule cell dendrites, and locally within CA1.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Long-range GABAergic axons are among the few inhibitory axons in the brain that acquire myelin, and this axon is patchily myelinated along its inter-regional stretch in stratum oriens and the alveus, then unmyelinated at its terminal arbours.

Conduction is therefore heterogeneous, perhaps 0.5 to 2 metres per second along the myelinated stretch and a few tenths of a metre per second at the terminals.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA, released fast and synaptically.

Somatostatin, a peptide released more slowly and requiring bursts, acting on somatostatin receptors that suppress calcium channels and dampen transmitter release over hundreds of milliseconds.

Many also carry neuropeptide Y, and some carry calbindin, a calcium buffering protein.

Metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR1 alpha is a reliable marker on the dendrites.

MYELINATION:

Patchy and partial, present along the long-range stretch and absent at terminals.

This matters for simulation, because the conduction delay from CA1 to the hilus is not a single number.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, driven by axon length rather than firing rate.

Maintaining ionic gradients along tens to hundreds of millimetres of thin axon is the dominant cost, and these cells depend heavily on lactate shuttled from astrocytes during sustained activity.

PLASTICITY:

The pyramidal-to-somatostatin-interneuron synapse undergoes long-term potentiation that depends on mGluR1 alpha, and blocking that plasticity impairs hippocampal memory in rodents.

Oriens somatostatin cells also express the enzymes that manufacture endocannabinoids and show CB1-dependent long-term potentiation, which is unusual for an interneuron.

So this is not a fixed piece of wiring; the strength of the back-projection is itself learned.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Oligodendrocytes in stratum oriens and the alveus myelinate a GABAergic axon, which is a specialised job most oligodendrocytes never do, and the myelination pattern is activity-dependent, so this cell instructs its own conduction delay.

Microglia cluster around these neurons early in experimental epilepsy, and somatostatin-positive hilar and oriens cells are among the first to die in that disease, which makes their glial environment a site of unusually active inflammatory signalling.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the back-projection cell and CA3 loses its report card.

CA3 is an auto-associative network, a web of neurons wired back onto themselves so that a fragment of a memory can complete the whole pattern, and such a network is intrinsically explosive.

Without a downstream inhibitory signal telling CA3 that CA1 has already produced an answer, pattern completion would not know when to stop.

The dentate hilus would also lose a top-down brake, and the whole loop would drift toward the runaway synchrony that underlies temporal lobe epilepsy.

The flavour lost is closure: the sense that a recollection has finished.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Target-specific presynaptic facilitation makes this cell a temporal integrator implemented in the synapse rather than the membrane, and any simulation that omits it will get the cell qualitatively wrong.

Somatostatin peptide release requires burst firing and then acts by volume transmission over tens of micrometres for hundreds of milliseconds, a chemical shadow rather than a synapse.

Neuropeptide Y release from the same terminals is anticonvulsant and suppresses glutamate release presynaptically.

Endocannabinoids released from pyramidal dendrites act back onto these cells, and the cells themselves make endocannabinoids.

Back-propagating action potentials invade their dendrites and trigger local calcium signalling that gates the mGluR1-dependent plasticity.

Their myelination is instructed by their own activity, and their long axons make them unusually dependent on axonal transport and on astrocytic metabolic support.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ CA1 pyramidal collateral glutamate with facilitating release probability rising from about 0.03 to about 0.6 over a train.

◦ Medial septal GABA and acetylcholine, 0 to 1 scalar tone.

◦ Vasoactive intestinal peptide interneuron GABA input, 0 to 3 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA-A conductance onto CA3 pyramidal dendrites, hilar neurons and dentate granule cell dendrites, 0.3 to 1.5 nanosiemens per spike.

◦ Local GABA-A conductance within CA1.

◦ Somatostatin and neuropeptide Y as diffusible fields, released only above a burst threshold.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, facilitation variable, Ih activation, recent spike list for burst detection, peptide store fraction, per-target axonal delay.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Initial release probability 0.03, maximum 0.6, input resistance 200 to 400 megaohms, threshold about minus 50 millivolts, theta rate 4 hertz, ripple rate 23 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Facilitation decay about 200 milliseconds, membrane about 25 milliseconds, Ih 50 to 300 milliseconds, peptide action 200 to 1000 milliseconds, CA1 to CA3 conduction delay 2 to 10 milliseconds in rodent.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In temporal lobe epilepsy these somatostatin-positive cells are selectively lost, dentate and CA3 inhibition falls, and the loop that limits recurrent excitation fails, which is one of the best supported cellular accounts of how the disease becomes self-sustaining.

◦ Silencing hippocampal somatostatin interneurons in healthy mice is by itself sufficient to induce recurrent spontaneous limbic seizures.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the burst-detecting feedback output of a back-projection cell whose input synapse facilitates.
Create a number variable called release_probability with initial value 0.03.
Create a number variable called maximum_probability with initial value 0.6.
Create a number variable called facilitation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value -62.
Create a number variable called output_spikes with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called peptide_store with initial value 1.
Create a list variable called recent_spikes with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called step_count with initial value 0.
While step_count is less than 400, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the remainder of step_count divided by 20.
    Check if that remainder is equal to 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of maximum_probability and 0.03.
        Calculate the product of that difference and facilitation.
        Calculate the sum of 0.03 and that product.
        Set current_probability to that result.
        Calculate the product of current_probability and 12.
        Calculate the sum of membrane_voltage and that product.
        Set membrane_voltage to that result.
        Calculate the difference of 1 and facilitation.
        Calculate the product of that difference and 0.25.
        Calculate the sum of facilitation and that product.
        Set facilitation to that result.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if membrane_voltage is greater than or equal to -50.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane_voltage to -62.
        Calculate the sum of output_spikes and 1.
        Set output_spikes to that result.
        Add step_count to the end of recent_spikes.
        Get the total number of items in recent_spikes.
        Check if that total is greater than or equal to 4.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Calculate the product of peptide_store and 0.05.
            Calculate the difference of peptide_store and that product.
            Set peptide_store to that result.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of step_count and 1.
    Set step_count to that result.
End the loop.
Display output_spikes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: short-term facilitation plus a peptide pool is a handful of exponentials,
# and readability beats raw speed for a single cell.
DT = 0.5   # milliseconds per step
class BackProjectionCell:
    """CA1 pyramidal collateral -> back-projection cell -> CA3 and hilus."""
    def __init__(self):
        self.p0 = 0.03        # release probability at the first spike: almost silent
        self.p_max = 0.60     # ceiling after Elfn1-dependent facilitation
        self.fac = 0.0        # facilitation state, 0 to 1
        self.tau_fac = 200.0  # milliseconds
        self.v = -62.0        # millivolts
        self.tau_m = 25.0     # milliseconds, high input resistance means a slow membrane
        self.thresh = -50.0
        self.gain = 12.0      # millivolts of depolarisation at release probability 1
        self.recent = []      # spike times, for burst detection
        self.sst_pool = 1.0   # somatostatin peptide store, fraction remaining
        self.sst_released = 0.0
        self.out_spikes = 0
    def pyramidal_spike(self):
        p = self.p0 + (self.p_max - self.p0) * self.fac   # this spike uses the old state
        self.v += self.gain * p
        self.fac += 0.25 * (1.0 - self.fac)               # then the terminal facilitates
        return p
    def step(self, t):
        self.fac -= self.fac / self.tau_fac * DT
        self.v += (-62.0 - self.v) / self.tau_m * DT
        if self.v >= self.thresh:
            self.v = -62.0
            self.out_spikes += 1
            self.recent = [s for s in self.recent if t - s < 100.0] + [t]
            # Peptide release needs a burst, not a single spike.
            if len(self.recent) >= 4 and self.sst_pool > 0.0:
                give = 0.05 * self.sst_pool
                self.sst_pool -= give
                self.sst_released += give
cell = BackProjectionCell()
probs = []
for k in range(400):                       # 200 milliseconds
    t = k * DT
    if t % 10.0 == 0.0 and t < 200.0:      # 100 Hz feedback train from CA1 pyramids
        probs.append(cell.pyramidal_spike())
    cell.step(t)
print("release probability, spike 1 -> spike 20: %.3f -> %.3f" % (probs[0], probs[-1]))
print("back-projection spikes sent to CA3 and hilus:", cell.out_spikes)
print("somatostatin released: %.3f of the store" % cell.sst_released)
# Output: 0.030 -> 0.502, 5 output spikes, 0.050 of the peptide store released.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

An inhibitory axon travelling upstream, from the hippocampus's output stage into its input stages, reaching CA3 and the hilus.

Nothing else in the hippocampus points that way.

CHAPTER 58. HIPPOCAMPO-SEPTAL PROJECTING INHIBITORY CELLS (Exploration-Curbing Long-Range Neuron) (COG)

The hippocampus keeps time to a clock that sits two centimetres away in the middle of the brain, and this single cell type is the wire that lets the hippocampus argue with its own clock.

The old label is a route joined to a chemistry note, naming where the axon runs and what it releases without saying what either achieves.

Exploration-Curbing names the measured behavioural consequence, because switching these cells on, or switching on their terminals in the medial septum, reduces locomotion and exploratory behaviour in freely moving animals.

Long-Range names the anatomy that makes this unusual, since inhibitory cells almost always speak only to their immediate neighbourhood, whereas this one sends an axon right out of the hippocampus into the septum and preferentially contacts inhibitory cells there.

Neuron marks it as the hippocampus reaching forward to slow the animal down and to bind the septal rhythm generator to its own timing.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a GABA-releasing inhibitory neuron of the hippocampus whose axon leaves the hippocampus entirely, travels in the fimbria and fornix, the great arching output cable, and ends in the medial septum and the diagonal band of Broca in the basal forebrain.

That is remarkable in itself, because inhibition is normally a local business.

What makes it more remarkable is what it lands on.

Its targets in the septum are mostly the septal GABAergic neurons that themselves project back into the hippocampus and drive hippocampal interneurons.

Inhibiting an inhibitor of an inhibitor produces a precisely timed release, so this cell does not simply quieten the septum; it sculpts the septum's rhythmic output.

The septo-hippocampal circuit is therefore a genuine closed loop with a measurable delay, and closed loops with delays are how brains build oscillations.

The practical result is the theta rhythm, the roughly 8 hertz sweep that organises hippocampal activity during exploration and rapid eye movement sleep, and the suppression of that rhythm during sharp wave ripples.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is fusiform and horizontally oriented, lying in stratum oriens of CA1 and CA3 or in the hilus of the dentate gyrus.

Dendrites run horizontally through stratum oriens or spread through the hilus, so once again the cell samples local principal cell output rather than incoming cortical information.

There are two axonal domains: a local arbour that preferentially contacts the dendrites of other interneurons, and a long main axon that gathers into the fimbria and heads for the septum.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly 15 to 25 micrometres by 10 to 15 micrometres.

The projecting axon is a few millimetres long in a mouse, perhaps 5 to 10 millimetres in a rat, and in the human brain the fornix route from hippocampus to septum is on the order of 3 to 6 centimetres, making this one of the longest inhibitory axons in the human nervous system.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• CA1 stratum oriens hippocampo-septal cells, of which about 94 percent are somatostatin positive and about 68 percent carry mGluR1 alpha.

• CA3 hippocampo-septal cells, about 93 percent somatostatin positive and about 84 percent mGluR1 alpha positive.

• Hilar hippocampo-septal cells, of which essentially 100 percent are somatostatin positive and about 92 percent carry neuropeptide Y.

• Double-projecting cells that innervate the septum and also the subiculum, entorhinal cortex or contralateral hippocampus.

• Theta-off, ripple-on cells, sometimes abbreviated TORO cells, which are nearly silent during theta and fire vigorously during ripples.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in CA1 stratum oriens, across the layers of CA3, and in the hilus, also called the polymorph layer, of the dentate gyrus.

The interfaces are explicit and sequential.

First the alveus and fimbria junction, where the axon leaves the hippocampus.

Then the fimbria and fornix white matter tract.

Then the medial septum and the vertical limb of the diagonal band of Broca, where the axon terminates in a structure outside the hippocampal formation altogether.

NUMBER:

Hippocampo-septal cells are allocated about 50,000 per hemisphere, so about 100,000 across both hemispheres, about 0.067 percent of the 150 million neuron budget for the hippocampal formation.

Confidence is moderate for the anchor and low for the fraction.

The anchor is a human stereological estimate of about 141,500 somatostatin-positive interneurons per hippocampal hemisphere.

The fraction comes from mouse retrograde labelling, in which at least 40.6 percent of hippocampal somatostatin neurons were labelled from the medial septum and 38 percent of hippocampo-septal cells were calbindin positive.

Applying that fraction gives about 57,000 per hemisphere, so a defensible bound is 30,000 to 60,000 per hemisphere.

Any model must subtract the double-projecting cells shared with the back-projection type to avoid counting them twice.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Most are low-threshold spiking cells with high input resistance and a strong Ih sag, giving them a natural rebound at theta intervals.

Behaviour splits the population sharply.

Theta-on cells fire in phase-locked fashion during exploration.

Double-projecting cells with septal targets fire at only 0.7 plus or minus 0.6 hertz during theta and then jump to 40.2 plus or minus 20.5 hertz during sharp wave ripples, measured in six identified cells.

The theta-off, ripple-on subset is virtually silent during locomotion and rapid eye movement sleep and begins firing before the ripple even starts, peaking before the ripple peak.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are local pyramidal cell collaterals through strongly facilitating synapses, CA3 glutamatergic input, and both GABAergic and cholinergic input from the septum itself, closing the loop from the other side.

Outputs in the septum land preferentially on parvalbumin-expressing septal GABAergic pacemaker neurons, with a smaller share onto cholinergic neurons.

Local outputs within the hippocampus contact interneuron dendrites, including parvalbumin and cholecystokinin basket cells, rather than pyramidal cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The projecting axon is myelinated within the fimbria and fornix and conducts at roughly 1 to 4 metres per second.

In the rat this gives a hippocampus-to-septum delay of a few milliseconds; scaling the human fornix length suggests something on the order of 10 to 20 milliseconds, which is a substantial fraction of a theta cycle and therefore a functionally important number for any simulation.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA as the fast transmitter.

Somatostatin as the near-universal co-transmitter.

Neuropeptide Y in the hilar members, and calbindin as a calcium buffer in about 38 percent.

Most, about 75 percent, lack the M2 muscarinic receptor, which distinguishes them chemically from trilaminar cells.

MYELINATION:

Yes, and this is one of the defining features.

A myelinated GABAergic axon is rare, and it exists here because the loop delay must be short and reliable enough to sustain an oscillation.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high for an interneuron.

A centimetres-long myelinated axon plus 40 hertz burst firing during every ripple, thousands of times a night, is a large sustained energy commitment, and these cells depend on oligodendrocyte-supplied lactate delivered through the myelin sheath.

PLASTICITY:

The facilitating pyramidal input is potentiated through mGluR1 alpha, so the strength of the hippocampal voice in the septum is itself learned.

Cholinergic and GABAergic septal feedback modulates the cell moment to moment.

These cells are among the most vulnerable in epilepsy, and their loss is not compensated.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The oligodendrocytes of the fimbria and fornix are doing something unusual: myelinating an inhibitory axon and thereby setting the delay of a brain-wide oscillator.

Their myelin thickness and internode length on these axons are functionally load-bearing, not incidental.

Within the hippocampus, astrocytic support is broadly typical, but in the septum the terminal fields sit among cholinergic neurons with distinctive astrocytic and microglial populations that are themselves early casualties in Alzheimer's disease.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the septo-hippocampal circuit becomes an open loop.

The septum would still send its rhythmic drive into the hippocampus, but the hippocampus could no longer answer, so theta would become a metronome imposed from outside rather than a negotiated rhythm that can be reset by what the hippocampus is actually processing.

Sharp wave ripples would lose their ability to suppress septal theta drive, so the two great hippocampal states, exploration and replay, would stop being cleanly exclusive.

The flavour lost is conversation: the hippocampus would be spoken to and would no longer speak back.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The most important non-classical property here is that the cell is a delay line, and the delay is a computational parameter of the whole brain, not a nuisance.

Somatostatin and neuropeptide Y are co-released into the septum by volume transmission, producing slow modulation lasting hundreds of milliseconds on top of the fast GABA signal.

The input synapse facilitates, so the cell is a burst detector like the back-projection cell.

Its myelination is activity-dependent, so the cell tunes its own loop delay over days, which is a genuinely astonishing idea: the oscillator adjusts its own period by rebuilding its wiring.

Back-propagating action potentials and mGluR1-dependent dendritic calcium signalling gate its plasticity, and its long axon makes it exceptionally dependent on mitochondrial transport.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Local pyramidal collateral glutamate, facilitating, release probability 0.03 rising toward 0.6.

◦ CA3 Schaffer and associational glutamate, 0 to 20 nanosiemens.

◦ Septal GABA and acetylcholine returning through the fornix, 0 to 1 scalar tone each.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA-A conductance onto medial septal parvalbumin pacemaker neurons, delivered after an axonal delay.

◦ GABA-A conductance onto local hippocampal parvalbumin and cholecystokinin basket cell dendrites.

◦ Somatostatin and neuropeptide Y volume signals in the septum, burst-gated.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, facilitation variable, Ih activation, brain state flag for theta or ripple, axonal delay ring buffer, peptide store.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Theta firing 0.7 plus or minus 0.6 hertz, ripple firing 40.2 plus or minus 20.5 hertz, conduction velocity 1 to 4 metres per second, human axon length 30 to 60 millimetres, somatostatin positive fraction above 0.9.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Axonal delay about 12 milliseconds in human, theta period 125 milliseconds, ripple episode 40 to 100 milliseconds, facilitation decay 200 milliseconds, peptide action 200 to 1000 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Selective loss of somatostatin hippocampo-septal cells in temporal lobe epilepsy breaks the feedback limb of the theta generator, which is a plausible cellular basis for the disrupted theta and impaired memory that accompany the disease.

◦ Fornix damage, whether surgical, vascular or from head injury, severs this axon and produces a dense anterograde amnesia out of proportion to the tissue lost.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the delayed inhibition that a hippocampo-septal cell delivers to the septal pacemaker across the fornix.
Create a list variable called axon_buffer with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called buffer_slots with initial value 25.
Create a number variable called fill_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called write_index with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called septal_rate_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step_count with initial value 0.
While fill_count is less than buffer_slots, repeat the following steps.
    Add 0 to the end of axon_buffer.
    Calculate the sum of fill_count and 1.
    Set fill_count to that result.
End the loop.
While step_count is less than 20000, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the remainder of step_count divided by 600.
    Check if that remainder is less than 120.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set hippocampo_septal_rate to 40.2.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set hippocampo_septal_rate to 0.7.
    End the conditional block.
    Remove the item at position write_index from axon_buffer.
    Add hippocampo_septal_rate to the end of axon_buffer.
    Access the item at position 0 in axon_buffer.
    Set arriving_rate to that item.
    Calculate the product of arriving_rate and 0.65.
    Calculate the difference of 35 and that product.
    Set septal_rate to that result.
    Check if septal_rate is less than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set septal_rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of septal_rate_total and septal_rate.
    Set septal_rate_total to that result.
    Calculate the sum of step_count and 1.
    Set step_count to that result.
End the loop.
Calculate the quotient of septal_rate_total divided by 20000.
Display that quotient to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C: an axonal conduction delay is exactly a ring buffer, and C makes the
   fixed-size buffer and the per-step indexing explicit and fast enough to
   scale to the whole septo-hippocampal loop. */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
#define DT_MS     0.5                       /* step size, milliseconds        */
#define STEPS     20000                     /* 10 seconds of simulated time   */
#define DELAY_MS  12.0                      /* hippocampus -> septum, human   */
#define NBUF      ((int)(DELAY_MS / DT_MS) + 1)
int main(void) {
    double axon[NBUF];                      /* the fornix, as a delay line    */
    int head = 0, i;
    double hs, septal, sum_septal = 0.0, sum_ripple_septal = 0.0;
    int ripple_steps = 0;
    memset(axon, 0, sizeof axon);
    for (i = 0; i < STEPS; i++) {
        double t_ms = i * DT_MS;
        /* Sharp wave ripple packets: 60 ms of ripple every 300 ms at rest. */
        int in_ripple = (((int)t_ms) % 300) < 60;
        /* Hippocampo-septal cell: near silent in theta, vigorous in ripples. */
        hs = in_ripple ? 40.2 : 0.7;        /* spikes per second, measured    */
        /* Push today's output into the axon, read out what left 12 ms ago.   */
        axon[head] = hs;
        head = (head + 1) % NBUF;
        {
            double arriving = axon[head];   /* head now points at the oldest  */
            /* Septal parvalbumin cell: 35 Hz baseline, inhibited by arrivals.*/
            septal = 35.0 - 0.65 * arriving;
            if (septal < 0.0) septal = 0.0;
        }
        sum_septal += septal;
        if (in_ripple) { sum_ripple_septal += septal; ripple_steps++; }
    }
    printf("mean septal pacemaker rate            : %5.2f Hz\n", sum_septal / STEPS);
    printf("mean septal rate during ripple packets: %5.2f Hz\n", sum_ripple_septal / ripple_steps);
    printf("loop delay carried by the fornix      : %5.1f ms (%d slots)\n", DELAY_MS, NBUF);
    return 0;
}
/* Output: 29.31 Hz mean, 14.01 Hz during ripples, 12.0 ms delay over 25 slots. */

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A GABA cell whose axon leaves the hippocampus through the fornix and ends in the medial septum, carrying somatostatin, wrapped in myelin, and targeting the pacemaker neurons that drive the hippocampus in return.

CHAPTER 59. RADIATUM-RETROHIPPOCAMPAL CELLS (Early-Arriving Calming Neuron) (COG)

Most inhibitory cells whisper to the neighbours; this one shouts across the brain to the patch of cortex that keeps track of where you are.

The old label is an address joined to a destination list, since stratum radiatum is where the cell body sits and retrohippocampal merely names where the axon ends.

Early-Arriving names the cell's timing advantage, because its axon is thicker and more heavily myelinated than a CA1 pyramidal cell axon, so its signal reaches the subiculum, presubiculum, retrosplenial cortex and indusium griseum before the excitatory volley from pyramidal cells arrives.

Calming names the work, since the cell releases gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main inhibitory messenger, landing preferentially on the dendrites of interneurons and on the layer one apical tufts of retrosplenial pyramidal cells.

Neuron marks it as a long-range inhibitory cell that sets the receiving cortex up rather than reacting to it, firing hard on the descending phase of the theta rhythm yet staying out of sharp-wave ripples.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The radiatum-retrohippocampal cell is a GABA-releasing long-range projection neuron of hippocampal area CA1, named for where its cell body sits and where its axon goes.

Its body sits at the border between stratum radiatum and stratum lacunosum-moleculare, and its axon leaves the hippocampus for the retrohippocampal region and beyond: the molecular layer of the subiculum, the presubiculum, the retrosplenial cortex, and the indusium griseum, a vestigial ribbon of hippocampal tissue lying on top of the corpus callosum.

Critically, it does not innervate the medial septum, which is what separates it from the hippocampo-septal cells.

Its function is a piece of long-distance veto.

In the retrosplenial cortex, a region essential for spatial orientation and for translating between the view from your eyes and a map of the world, its axon terminates in layer one and inhibits the apical tuft dendrites of layer five pyramidal neurons.

Layer one is also where the anterior thalamic nuclei deliver their excitation.

So this cell intercepts a thalamic input at the exact dendritic branch where it lands, and by doing so it decides whether that input will trigger a dendritic plateau potential, the long regenerative depolarisation that turns a cortical neuron from a spike emitter into a bursting, plasticity-inducing unit.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is at the radiatum and lacunosum-moleculare border, a boundary that is also an information boundary.

Below it, stratum radiatum receives Schaffer collaterals from CA3, the hippocampus's own internal memory store.

Above it, stratum lacunosum-moleculare receives the temporoammonic path directly from entorhinal cortex layer three, and input from nucleus reuniens of the thalamus.

Its dendrites span both, so this cell reads the internal recollection and the external report at the same time.

Its axon gathers, leaves the hippocampus, and travels long distances, in part through the cingulum bundle to reach the retrosplenial cortex.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly 12 to 20 micrometres across.

The projecting axon in a rodent runs several millimetres; in a human brain the route from CA1 to the retrosplenial cortex through the cingulum is several centimetres, so 30 to 70 millimetres is a reasonable modelling range, and it should be flagged as extrapolated.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Subiculum-projecting cells, terminating in the subicular molecular layer.

• Retrosplenial-projecting cells, terminating in layer one of granular retrosplenial cortex; these are the ones likely to express netrin-G1, the gene Ntng1.

• Presubiculum-projecting and indusium griseum-projecting cells.

• Partly overlapping long-range inhibitory nNOS-expressing cells, or LINCs, which are somatostatin-negative, about 47 percent neuropeptide Y positive, and project widely.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Hippocampus CA1, at the stratum radiatum and stratum lacunosum-moleculare border.

That lamina boundary is the interface that defines the cell, because it is the anatomical seam between CA3-derived and entorhinal-derived information.

Its terminal fields are outside the hippocampus proper: subiculum molecular layer, presubiculum, granular retrosplenial cortex layer one, and indusium griseum.

Its axon passes through the alveus and the cingulum bundle, another named interface between grey and white matter.

NUMBER:

Radiatum-retrohippocampal cells are allocated about 15,000 per hemisphere, so about 30,000 across both hemispheres, about 0.02 percent of the 150 million neuron budget for the hippocampal formation.

This is the least certain figure in the batch.

In the study that named the type, only two such cells were physiologically identified and recovered in a large in vivo survey, so the estimate rests on rarity of encounter rather than on any count.

A defensible bound is 5,000 to 40,000 per hemisphere, and it should be widened if the overlapping nNOS long-range population is counted here rather than separately.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

During theta these cells fired at a mean of 5.2 hertz, preferentially on the descending phase of the local theta wave.

During sharp wave ripples they did not increase their firing, averaging about 0.7 hertz, which is the opposite of what trilaminar and hippocampo-septal cells do.

Both figures come from only two identified cells, so they must be treated as provisional, and any simulation should expose them as parameters rather than constants.

The ripple result is nonetheless informative: this projection is a theta-time channel, not a replay channel.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are Schaffer collateral glutamate from CA3 onto the radiatum portion of its dendrites, temporoammonic glutamate from entorhinal cortex layer three onto the lacunosum-moleculare portion, and thalamic input from nucleus reuniens onto the same distal region.

Local inhibitory input arrives from CA1 interneurons.

Outputs are GABA-A synapses onto the apical tuft dendrites of retrosplenial layer five pyramidal neurons in layer one, onto subicular and presubicular neurons in their molecular layers, and onto local CA1 elements.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Long-range, at least partly myelinated once it enters white matter, conducting at roughly 1 to 2 metres per second.

Terminal branches in layer one of the retrosplenial cortex are fine and unmyelinated, and the synapses there are described as potent.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA.

The two cells originally characterised were immunonegative for every standard marker tested apart from glutamic acid decarboxylase, the enzyme that makes GABA, which is itself a useful negative fingerprint.

Related long-range populations projecting from CA1 to retrosplenial cortex express netrin-G1, and the overlapping LINC population expresses neuronal nitric oxide synthase and often neuropeptide Y.

MYELINATION:

Yes along the long central stretch, absent at the terminals.

The myelinated stretch is what makes a cortical veto arrive fast enough to matter within a theta cycle.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, and dominated by axon maintenance rather than by firing rate, since 5 hertz is modest.

Long thin axons through white matter make these cells dependent on axonal transport and on oligodendrocyte metabolic support, and they are correspondingly vulnerable to white matter disease.

PLASTICITY:

Honestly, this is largely unknown.

No long-term potentiation or depression protocol has been characterised at either the input or the output synapses of identified radiatum-retrohippocampal cells.

What can be said is that the cell sits on two input streams that are themselves highly plastic, and that its output targets, cortical apical tufts, are the classic site of plasticity gating, so it is well placed to be a plasticity controller even if its own plasticity is uncharacterised.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes at the radiatum and lacunosum-moleculare border have a specific role, because that border is where two glutamatergic pathways with different release statistics abut, and astrocytic glutamate uptake there prevents cross-talk between the CA3 and entorhinal streams onto the same dendrite.

Oligodendrocytes of the cingulum bundle carry this axon across the brain, which places it in a white matter environment quite unlike the rest of the hippocampus.

Otherwise its microglial environment appears unremarkable.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and two regions change flavour.

CA1 loses very little, because its local arbour is modest.

The retrosplenial cortex loses its hippocampal veto: the anterior thalamic input to layer one would drive apical tuft plateau potentials unopposed, so retrosplenial layer five neurons would burst and undergo plasticity whenever the thalamus said so, regardless of what the hippocampus knew.

The concrete loss is arbitration between two accounts of where you are, the thalamic head-direction and landmark account and the hippocampal memory account, with the hippocampus no longer able to say "not that one".

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is a dendritic computer at both ends.

At its own input end, its dendrites cross two laminae carrying different information, so it multiplies rather than merely sums the CA3 recollection stream and the entorhinal present-tense stream.

At its output end, it does not merely reduce firing in its targets: by inhibiting the apical tuft it blocks NMDA-receptor-dependent plateau potentials and calcium spikes, which is a categorical veto on burst firing and on the plasticity that bursts induce.

That is control over learning in a distant cortex, exercised by a single inhibitory hippocampal neuron.

Because parts of this population express neuronal nitric oxide synthase, they can also release nitric oxide as a diffusible signal that dilates local vessels and modulates transmitter release in the target cortex.

Their long white matter axons place them in continuous metabolic dialogue with oligodendrocytes, and their conduction delay is therefore adjustable.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Schaffer collateral glutamate from CA3 onto proximal dendrites, 0 to 20 nanosiemens.

◦ Temporoammonic glutamate from entorhinal cortex layer three and nucleus reuniens onto distal dendrites, 0 to 15 nanosiemens.

◦ Local CA1 GABA input, 0 to 5 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA-A conductance onto retrosplenial layer five apical tufts in layer one, sufficient to raise the plateau threshold by roughly 10 to 20 millivolts.

◦ GABA-A conductance onto subicular and presubicular molecular layers.

◦ Nitric oxide as a diffusible field in the nNOS-expressing subset.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential in two dendritic compartments plus soma, theta phase estimate, axonal delay buffer, target tuft plateau timer.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Theta firing rate 5.2 hertz, preferred theta phase on the descending slope, ripple firing rate about 0.7 hertz, conduction velocity 1 to 2 metres per second, human axon length 30 to 70 millimetres, tuft inhibition strength 10 to 20 millivolts equivalent.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, GABA-A decay at the cortical tuft 8 to 20 milliseconds, target plateau duration 30 to 100 milliseconds, conduction delay 15 to 40 milliseconds in human.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Retrosplenial cortex is one of the earliest regions to show reduced glucose metabolism in Alzheimer's disease, and loss of this hippocampal input is one candidate contributor to that early disconnection.

◦ Damage to the cingulum or to this projection would leave retrosplenial plasticity ungated by hippocampal state, which maps onto the topographical disorientation seen after retrosplenial lesions, in which patients recognise landmarks but cannot use them to navigate.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a retrosplenial apical tuft fires a plateau potential given thalamic drive and hippocampal long-range inhibition.
Create a number variable called tuft_voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called soma_voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called plateau_timer with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called plateau_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called somatic_spikes with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step_count with initial value 0.
While step_count is less than 1200, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the remainder of step_count divided by 400.
    Check if that remainder is less than 100.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set thalamic_drive to 30.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set thalamic_drive to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set hippocampal_inhibition to the current long-range GABA input in millivolts.
    Calculate the difference of thalamic_drive and hippocampal_inhibition.
    Set net_drive to that result.
    Calculate the difference of -70 and tuft_voltage.
    Calculate the sum of that difference and net_drive.
    Calculate the quotient of that sum divided by 24.
    Calculate the sum of tuft_voltage and that quotient.
    Set tuft_voltage to that result.
    Check if both plateau_timer is less than or equal to 0 and tuft_voltage is greater than or equal to -45 are true.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set plateau_timer to 80.
        Calculate the sum of plateau_count and 1.
        Set plateau_count to that result.
    End the conditional block.
    Set plateau_boost to 0.
    Check if plateau_timer is greater than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of plateau_timer and 1.
        Set plateau_timer to that result.
        Set plateau_boost to 22.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of tuft_voltage and plateau_boost.
    Calculate the sum of that sum and 70.
    Calculate the product of that sum and 0.45.
    Calculate the difference of -70 and soma_voltage.
    Calculate the sum of that difference and that product.
    Calculate the quotient of that sum divided by 30.
    Calculate the sum of soma_voltage and that quotient.
    Set soma_voltage to that result.
    Check if soma_voltage is greater than or equal to -52.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set soma_voltage to -70.
        Calculate the sum of somatic_spikes and 1.
        Set somatic_spikes to that result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of step_count and 1.
    Set step_count to that result.
End the loop.
Display plateau_count to the console.
Display somatic_spikes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: a two-compartment neuron with a regenerative dendritic event is a
# tiny differential-equation problem, and Python states it in the fewest lines.
DT = 0.5   # milliseconds per step
class RetrosplenialTuft:
    """Layer 5 retrosplenial neuron: apical tuft in layer 1, soma below."""
    def __init__(self):
        self.tuft = -70.0        # tuft membrane potential, millivolts
        self.soma = -70.0
        self.tau_t, self.tau_s = 12.0, 15.0
        self.plateau = 0.0       # milliseconds of plateau left to run
        self.plateau_thresh = -45.0
        self.coupling = 0.45     # fraction of tuft voltage reaching the soma
        self.spike_thresh = -52.0
        self.somatic_spikes = 0
        self.plateaus = 0
    def step(self, thalamic_mv, hippocampal_gaba_mv):
        # Anterior thalamic axons excite the tuft in layer 1; the hippocampal
        # GABAergic axon inhibits the same tuft in the same layer.
        drive = thalamic_mv - hippocampal_gaba_mv
        self.tuft += ((-70.0 - self.tuft) + drive) / self.tau_t * DT
        if self.plateau <= 0.0 and self.tuft >= self.plateau_thresh:
            self.plateau = 40.0          # NMDA plateau, tens of milliseconds
            self.plateaus += 1
        boost = 0.0
        if self.plateau > 0.0:
            self.plateau -= DT
            boost = 22.0                 # the plateau clamps the tuft depolarised
        self.soma += ((-70.0 - self.soma)
                      + self.coupling * (self.tuft + boost + 70.0)) / self.tau_s * DT
        if self.soma >= self.spike_thresh:
            self.soma = -70.0
            self.somatic_spikes += 1
def run(gaba_mv):
    cell = RetrosplenialTuft()
    for k in range(1200):                        # 600 milliseconds
        t = k * DT
        thal = 30.0 if (int(t) % 200) < 50 else 0.0   # thalamic bursts
        cell.step(thal, gaba_mv)
    return cell.plateaus, cell.somatic_spikes
for label, g in (("hippocampal axon silent", 0.0), ("hippocampal axon active", 14.0)):
    p, s = run(g)
    print("%-26s plateaus %d, somatic spikes %d" % (label, p, s))
# Output: silent -> 3 plateaus and 3 somatic spikes; active -> 0 and 0.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A GABA cell body sitting precisely on the stratum radiatum and stratum lacunosum-moleculare border whose axon is found, centimetres away, in layer one of the retrosplenial cortex, and never in the medial septum.


PART FOUR: AMYGDALA, OLFACTORY CORTEX, AND CLAUSTRUM

CHAPTER 60. AMYGDALA PRINCIPAL NEURONS (Threat-And-Reward Valuing Neuron) (COG)

The flinch you feel when a shadow moves the wrong way is written first into a few million spiny cells buried an inch behind your temple.

Principal is a committee word, telling a student only that the cell is numerous rather than what it does.

Threat-And-Reward records the discovery that this population is not a fear centre alone but two intermingled opposed groups, one answering to bad outcomes and one to good, which suppress each other through shared inhibitory partners.

Valuing names the work itself, the stamping of an emotional worth onto an event before that value is shipped out to the prefrontal cortex, the striatum and the amygdala's own output nucleus.

Neuron marks it as the spiny excitatory cell that makes up roughly eighty to ninety percent of the basolateral amygdala.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These excitatory workhorses of the basolateral amygdala bind a sensory pattern arriving from thalamus and cortex to whatever good or bad thing happened next, so that afterwards the cue alone drives them.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A pyramid-shaped body sends three to seven thick dendrites, the branching antennae that gather input, out in all directions rather than in a layer, crusted with spines.

SIZE:

The body is 15 to 25 micrometres across, a quarter the width of a hair, and the dendritic tree spans 300 to 600 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Anatomy gives lateral, basal and accessory basal cells, while mouse genetics gives Rspo2 cells biased to bad outcomes and Ppp1r1b cells biased to good ones.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They fill the lateral, basal and accessory basal nuclei, plus the paralaminar nucleus, a thin shelf at the interface with entorhinal cortex and hippocampus.

Laterally they stop at the external capsule, a sheet of passing white matter, and medially at the intercalated clusters guarding the central nucleus.

NUMBER:

Roughly 8 to 10 million per hemisphere, so 16 to 20 million in both, from counts of 12.2 and 15.3 million neurons per amygdala, about 80 percent of them basolateral and 80 percent of those principal.

Confidence is moderate, and the total is near two hundredths of one percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They rest 65 to 75 thousandths of a volt negative inside, show an input resistance of 100 to 250 megohms, fire under one spike per second, and adapt strongly.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Ten to twenty thousand excitatory contacts arrive from thalamus, temporal and prefrontal cortex, ventral hippocampus, insula and the pain-carrying parabrachial nucleus, checked by fewer but stronger contacts from parvalbumin and somatostatin interneurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is 0.3 to 0.8 micrometres wide, branches early, and leaves by the stria terminalis and the ventral amygdalofugal pathway at one to ten metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

They release glutamate, the main excitatory chemical, onto fast AMPA and slow NMDA receptors, named after alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid and N-methyl-D-aspartate, while dopamine, noradrenaline, serotonin and acetylcholine set the mood.

MYELINATION:

Long axons wear thin myelin, the fatty insulation that speeds conduction, and human amygdala myelination is unusually slow, still thickening into the third decade of life.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Energy use sits near the whole-brain average of about 30 micromoles of glucose per 100 grams each minute, spent mostly on holding the tree ready.

PLASTICITY:

This is the textbook site of associative learning, where pairing a sound with a shock strengthens the sound pathway by NMDA-receptor-dependent long-term potentiation.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Perineuronal nets, the lattice cages that lock synapses in place, wrap the local inhibitory cells densely and leave principal cells uncaged, keeping the excitatory population editable for life.

The neighbouring paralaminar nucleus holds immature neurons that keep maturing into principal cells through adolescence, a growth pool almost unknown in the adult forebrain.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the amygdala becomes a wire rather than a memory, still passing sights and sounds but unable to make anything neutral frightening or attractive.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Thin dendrites fire local NMDA spikes, small self-amplifying events that let one branch decide alone, and each somatic spike travels backwards up the tree to license active synapses to strengthen.

They build protein at the synapse and send endocannabinoids backwards to mute their own inhibition.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: sensory glutamate 0 to 20 nanosiemens, teaching signal 0 to 10 nanosiemens, local GABA 0 to 40 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate to central amygdala, intercalated clusters, accumbens, prefrontal cortex and hippocampus at 0 to 40 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation current, synaptic weights, calcium tags, branch voltages, slow excitability variable.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 0.070 volts, threshold minus 0.050 volts, resistance 100 to 250 megohms, 10000 to 20000 spines.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 40 milliseconds, adaptation 100 to 300 milliseconds, tag 1 to 10 seconds, consolidation 1 to 6 hours.

• FAILURE MODE: over-strengthened cue pathways give the intrusive threat memories of post-traumatic stress disorder.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a neutral cue should be treated as a warning and to strengthen that warning when harm follows.
Create a number variable called membrane with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called cueWeight with initial value 0.005.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
For each timeStep in trialTimeline, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of cueWeight and the cue level.
    Set drive to that result.
    Calculate the sum of drive and the harm level.
    Set drive to that result.
    Calculate the sum of membrane and drive.
    Set membrane to that result.
    Check if membrane is greater than or equal to 0.020.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane to 0.
        Calculate the difference of 0.030 and cueWeight.
        Calculate the product of that result and 0.05.
        Calculate the sum of cueWeight and that result.
        Set cueWeight to that result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display cueWeight to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because plain loops with no libraries port directly into any simulator.

# Threat association in one basolateral amygdala principal neuron.
dt, tauM, tauW = 0.001, 0.030, 0.150
vRest, vThresh, bAdapt = -0.070, -0.050, 0.003
learnRate, wMax = 0.05, 0.030
def runTrial(cue, shock, weight):
    v, adapt, spikes = vRest, 0.0, 0
    for t in range(len(cue)):
        drive = weight * cue[t] + 0.050 * shock[t]   # learned cue plus innate harm
        v = v + dt * (vRest - v - adapt + drive) / tauM
        adapt = adapt - dt * adapt / tauW
        if v >= vThresh:
            v, spikes = vRest, spikes + 1
            adapt = adapt + bAdapt
            weight = weight + learnRate * cue[t] * (wMax - weight)   # Hebbian
    return spikes, weight
cue, silent = [1.0] * 600, [0.0] * 600
shock = [0.0] * 300 + [1.0] * 300
w = 0.005
before, w = runTrial(cue, silent, w)
for trial in range(3):
    paired, w = runTrial(cue, shock, w)
after, w = runTrial(cue, silent, w)
print(before, after, round(w, 4))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A spiny pyramid-like cell in a nucleus with no layers, firing rarely, adapting hard, and changing what it answers to only after the world teaches it that a sound means pain.

CHAPTER 61. AMYGDALA INTERCALATED CELLS (Safety-Learning Brake Neuron) (COG)

Wedged into the thin white seams between the amygdala's big nuclei sit clusters of tiny cells that decide whether fear is expressed or suppressed.

Intercalated means only inserted between, an address describing where the cells sit rather than what they achieve.

Safety-Learning names the occasion they own, extinction, the process by which an animal learns that a once-frightening cue is now harmless, since the ventromedial cluster is required for forming and recalling that safety memory while a second cluster pulls the other way during fear expression.

Brake names the mechanism, because their single output is inhibition, laid onto the amygdala's fear output nucleus so that a learned alarm is held back.

Neuron marks it as one of the tight clusters of small inhibitory cells wrapped around the basolateral amygdala, about ninety-five percent of them medium spiny cells with somas of nine to eighteen micrometres.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Small inhibitory neurons packed into islands, inserted between the larger nuclei rather than belonging to any of them, they release GABA, short for gamma-aminobutyric acid, across the path from the learning part of the amygdala to its output part.

They are the machinery of extinction, by which an outdated fear stops producing a reaction.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small round body carries three to five spiny dendrites that stay inside the island, and the cell develops like a striatal medium spiny neuron with the same Foxp2 transcription factor.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are only 10 to 15 micrometres across and the islands are 50 to 300 micrometres wide, small enough that one electrode pass can miss them entirely.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There is a main intercalated nucleus plus dorsal medial and lateral paracapsular clusters, and the dorsal and ventral medial clusters inhibit each other, flipping the amygdala between fear and extinction.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They live inside white matter, in the external capsule outside the basolateral amygdala and in the intermediate capsule between the basolateral amygdala and the central nucleus.

The main nucleus sits exactly at the ventral interface where the basal nucleus meets the central nucleus, and these are the only amygdala neurons whose job is defined by a boundary.

NUMBER:

The defensible bound is 0.1 to 0.4 million per hemisphere, from rodent island counts scaled to human volume and capped at a few percent of the 12 to 15 million amygdala neurons, well under one thousandth of one percent of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Input resistance is high at 200 to 500 megohms, adaptation is slight, firing holds at 40 to 80 hertz, and a constant background chloride current through delta-subunit GABA-A receptors sets their gain.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They take glutamate from basolateral principal cells and the safety-signalling infralimbic cortex, plus dense dopamine and enkephalin fibres, and send GABA onto central amygdala output cells and onto each other.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are very thin and under a millimetre long, making dense baskets so inhibition lands within a few milliseconds of the excitation it must cancel.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA is their only transmitter, but they carry dense dopamine D1 and mu-opioid receptors, and activating either silences them, which is how opioids release fear circuits from restraint.

MYELINATION:

Their own axons are bare, and the oddity is the address rather than the wiring, since these unmyelinated cells live inside heavily myelinated fibre bundles.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Demand is modest because the cells are small, but the background chloride current is a standing cost, since every ion that leaks in must be pumped out using adenosine triphosphate.

PLASTICITY:

Extinction training strengthens the basolateral input onto these cells, and blocking that change leaves an animal able to learn fear but unable to shed it.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here are white matter glia, dominated by oligodendrocytes servicing passing axons rather than the astrocyte-rich neuropil of a normal nucleus.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the amygdala can still learn to be afraid but never to stop, so every therapy that works by safe repeated exposure is an attempt to talk to these cells.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Mutual inhibition between the medial clusters turns a graded input into a two-state switch rather than a dimmer, with the background chloride conductance as the volume knob.

Dopamine and opioids reach them by volume transmission, spilling into the tissue rather than acting at one synapse, and coupling lets a few cells pull in the rest.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from basolateral amygdala and infralimbic cortex 0 to 15 nanosiemens, cross-cluster GABA 0 to 30 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto central amygdala output cells, basolateral principal cells and the opposing cluster, 0 to 80 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage, background chloride conductance, one rate variable per cluster, basolateral input weight.

• PARAMETERS: resistance 200 to 500 megohms, rest minus 0.075 volts, cross-inhibition 1.4 normalised, background conductance 0.5 to 2 nanosiemens.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 25 milliseconds, inhibitory decay 5 to 15 milliseconds, cluster switching 50 to 200 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: weakened cells give fear that cannot be extinguished, the core of post-traumatic stress disorder and of relapse after exposure therapy.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether the fear brake is engaged by letting two intercalated clusters compete through mutual inhibition.
Create a number variable called dorsalRate with initial value 0.1.
Create a number variable called ventralRate with initial value 0.1.
Create a number variable called dorsalNet with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called ventralNet with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 2000 times.
    Calculate the product of 1.4 and ventralRate.
    Calculate the difference of the safety input and that result.
    Set dorsalNet to that result.
    Calculate the product of 1.4 and dorsalRate.
    Calculate the difference of the threat input and that result.
    Set ventralNet to that result.
    Check if dorsalNet is less than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set dorsalNet to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if ventralNet is less than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set ventralNet to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set dorsalRate to dorsalNet.
    Set ventralRate to ventralNet.
End the loop.
Display dorsalRate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because a two-variable rate model is the clearest statement of a mutual inhibition switch.

# Two intercalated clusters compete; the winner sets the fear state.
dt, tau, cross = 0.001, 0.020, 1.4
def clamp(x):
    return 0.0 if x < 0.0 else x
def step(dorsal, ventral, safety, threat, opioid):
    gain = 1.0 - opioid                      # opioids silence both clusters
    dorsal = dorsal + dt * (-dorsal + clamp(gain * safety - cross * ventral)) / tau
    ventral = ventral + dt * (-ventral + clamp(gain * threat - cross * dorsal)) / tau
    return clamp(dorsal), clamp(ventral)
dorsal, ventral = 0.1, 0.1
for i in range(2000):
    safety = 2.0 if i > 1000 else 0.2        # extinction training starts halfway
    dorsal, ventral = step(dorsal, ventral, safety, 0.8, 0.0)
    if i == 999:
        print("before", round(dorsal, 3), round(ventral, 3))
print("after ", round(dorsal, 3), round(ventral, 3))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A striatum-like cell smaller than its neighbours, living inside a white matter seam, drenched in opioid and dopamine receptors, whose only output is a veto.

CHAPTER 62. CENTRAL AMYGDALA NEURONS (Defence-Response Selecting Neuron) (COG)

If the basolateral amygdala is where fear is learned, the central amygdala is where fear is spoken, in the language of a stopped breath and a hammering heart.

Central Amygdala is a coordinate, not a job description.

Defence-Response names what its targets produce, the whole coordinated package of freezing, blood pressure change and even the breath-holding that accompanies a frozen animal assessing danger.

Selecting names the computation, because the lateral part of the nucleus does not simply pass fear along but chooses among competing reactions by disinhibiting one output line while holding the others shut.

Neuron marks it as the amygdala's inhibitory exit door, projecting to the hypothalamus and to hindbrain centres including the periaqueductal grey and the pre-Botzinger complex, the brainstem's breathing rhythm generator.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These inhibitory output neurons turn a learned emotional judgement into bodily action, releasing freezing, a jump in blood pressure, a surge of stress hormone, or an escape run.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

They resemble striatal medium spiny neurons, with a compact body, three to six moderately spiny dendrites and a dense local axon web, and medial division cells add one long descending axon.

SIZE:

Bodies are 12 to 20 micrometres across with fields of 200 to 400 micrometres, and the whole human central nucleus is a few cubic millimetres, smaller than a grain of rice.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The capsular, lateral and medial parts differ, and the lateral part holds opposing populations marked by protein kinase C delta, by somatostatin driving freezing, and by corticotropin releasing factor driving flight.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They occupy the capsular, lateral and medial divisions of the central nucleus, tucked dorsomedially just beneath the globus pallidus and substantia innominata.

Medially they do not stop at a border but blend into the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis through the sublenticular extended amygdala, while laterally they meet the intercalated clusters.

NUMBER:

About 0.36 million per hemisphere by direct stereological counting, so roughly 0.7 million in both, which is three percent of amygdala neurons and under one thousandth of one percent of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Three patterns dominate, late-firing cells that delay their first spike 100 to 300 milliseconds through a transient potassium current, regular spiking cells, and low-threshold bursting cells, all near 200 to 500 megohms.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from basolateral cells, intercalated clusters, the pain-carrying parabrachial nucleus, insula, paraventricular thalamus and the nucleus of the solitary tract, while outputs reach the periaqueductal grey for freezing, the lateral hypothalamus for blood pressure and the paraventricular hypothalamus for cortisol.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Descending axons are 0.5 to 1 micrometre wide and run by the ventral amygdalofugal pathway to the medulla, while dense short collaterals inside the lateral division carry the internal competition.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA is the fast transmitter, layered with peptides including somatostatin, corticotropin releasing factor, enkephalin, dynorphin and neurotensin, which need high firing rates, so the same cell says different things when calm and when alarmed.

MYELINATION:

Descending axons carry thin myelin, enough to reach the brainstem in tens of milliseconds, while local collaterals stay bare because a millisecond over a hundred micrometres costs nothing.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Peptide release is expensive in a particular way, since the large vesicles holding peptides can only be built in the cell body and shipped out, and chronic stress raises that bill for weeks.

PLASTICITY:

Parabrachial synapses onto lateral cells undergo long-term potentiation in models of persistent pain, a leading account of how an injury becomes chronic pain.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here are not passive, since their calcium signals are recruited during fear learning and shift the excitation reaching output cells, glial gatekeeping shown more clearly here than in most nuclei.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the amygdala becomes a philosopher with no voice, still judging a thing dangerous while producing no freezing, no faster heart, no cortisol and no startle.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Mutual inhibition between subtypes turns a graded threat estimate into a discrete choice between freezing and fleeing, and peptides spread through tissue rather than crossing one synapse, so one busy cell shifts a neighbourhood for minutes.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from basolateral, parabrachial, insular and thalamic sources 0 to 20 nanosiemens, GABA from intercalated clusters and neighbours 0 to 40 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS: GABA and peptides to periaqueductal grey, lateral hypothalamus, paraventricular hypothalamus, vagal motor nucleus and locus coeruleus at 0 to 60 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage, potassium current availability, releasable peptide pool, subtype competition variable, slow expression level.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 0.072 volts, threshold minus 0.048 volts, delaying conductance 1 to 2 normalised, peptide release above about 10 hertz sustained.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds, potassium recovery 100 to 300 milliseconds, peptide action seconds to minutes, autonomic response 0.5 to 5 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: runaway parabrachial potentiation gives chronic pain, overactive corticotropin releasing factor cells give sustained anxiety and drug withdrawal states.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to let a central amygdala output cell fire only when a threat signal outlasts the delay set by its slow potassium current and beats the intercalated brake.
Create a number variable called membrane with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called availability with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spikeCount with initial value 0.
For each timeStep in stimulusWindow, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of the basolateral input and 0.035.
    Set drive to that result.
    Calculate the product of availability and membrane.
    Calculate the difference of drive and that result.
    Calculate the quotient of that result divided by 50.
    Calculate the sum of membrane and that result.
    Set membrane to that result.
    Calculate the product of availability and 0.996.
    Set availability to that result.
    Check if membrane is greater than or equal to 0.024.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane to 0.
        Calculate the sum of spikeCount and 1.
        Set spikeCount to that result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spikeCount to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the delaying potassium current becomes one explicit variable a reader can watch decay.

# Late-firing central amygdala output cell, gated by intercalated inhibition.
dt, tauM, tauA = 0.0005, 0.025, 0.120
vRest, vThresh = -0.072, -0.048
gA = 1.6
def output(blaDrive, itcBrake, steps):
    v, a, spikes = vRest, 1.0, 0             # a is delaying channel availability
    for i in range(steps):
        delaying = gA * a * (v - vRest)      # opposes depolarisation early on
        v = v + dt * ((vRest - v) + (blaDrive - itcBrake) - delaying) / tauM
        a = a - dt * a / tauA                # availability decays, cell escapes
        if v >= vThresh:
            v, spikes = vRest, spikes + 1
    return spikes
print("brake off", output(0.040, 0.000, 2000))
print("brake on ", output(0.040, 0.035, 2000))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

An inhibitory striatum-shaped cell that waits a fifth of a second before its first spike, carries a bag of peptides, and can stop your breath from inside the temporal lobe.

CHAPTER 63. PIRIFORM CORTEX SEMILUNAR CELLS AND SUPERFICIAL PYRAMIDAL CELLS (COG)

Smell is the one sense that reaches the cortex directly without being relayed through the thalamus, and these are the cells it lands on.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are the two excitatory principal classes of layer 2 of the piriform cortex, the largest piece of primary smell cortex, where the frontal and temporal lobes meet, and together they turn a chemical fragment into a recognised thing such as coffee, or smoke.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Semilunar cells have a half-moon body and, unusually for a cortical neuron, no basal dendrites, so they listen only upward, while superficial pyramidal cells keep basal dendrites too.

SIZE:

Bodies are 10 to 15 micrometres across, the apical dendrite runs 300 to 500 micrometres, and a superficial pyramidal cell carries 3000 to 5000 micrometres of dendrite.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The two named classes are the main subtypes, split by depth into layer 2a and 2b and by target, semilunar cells favouring the olfactory tubercle, superficial pyramidal cells favouring orbitofrontal cortex and amygdala.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They occupy layer 2 of anterior and posterior piriform cortex, with equivalents in periamygdaloid cortex and olfactory tubercle, and in humans the band breaks into islands.

The key interface is the limen insulae, bridging frontal and temporal lobes, and a second lies under layer 3 where this cortex becomes endopiriform nucleus and then claustrum.

NUMBER:

About 2 to 3 million layer 2 principal cells per hemisphere, so 4 to 6 million in both, perhaps a quarter of them semilunar, which is about six thousandths of one percent of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Semilunar cells have higher input resistance and a weaker afterhyperpolarisation, the dip after a spike, so they sum inputs longer and adapt less than superficial pyramidal cells.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Bulb fibres in the lateral olfactory tract land on both classes in layer 1a, more strongly on semilunar cells, each cortical cell sampling a scattered subset of bulb channels rather than a map.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Associational axons run many millimetres, so the region behaves as one network with no map, while projection axons leave for orbitofrontal cortex, amygdala and entorhinal cortex.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Both release glutamate and both are modulated by acetylcholine from the diagonal band, which suppresses associational fibres while sparing incoming ones, switching the cortex between learning a smell and recognising one.

MYELINATION:

The lateral olfactory tract is heavily myelinated and delivers the bulb's message in milliseconds, while thin associational axons run the recurrent computation slower than its own input.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Energy use is high because the recurrent network idles even without an odour, and only sparse coding keeps the bill down.

PLASTICITY:

Associational synapses show strong long-term potentiation, and it is these, not the incoming fibres, that store what a smell means.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

What is special is a reserve of dormant immature neurons around layer 2, marked by doublecortin, persisting into adulthood in many mammals including primates as a slow structural reserve.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and smell becomes a detector without a dictionary, so you would know the air had changed but could not tell coffee from smoke.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Distal synapses force dendritic amplification so far contacts count as much as near ones, recurrent excitation completes an odour from a fragment, and global inhibition holds the active count steady.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: lateral olfactory tract glutamate 0 to 10 nanosiemens per active bulb channel, associational glutamate 0 to 20 nanosiemens, global GABA feedback 0 to 50 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate to other piriform cells, orbitofrontal cortex, amygdala, entorhinal cortex and mediodorsal thalamus at 0 to 50 hertz, sparseness 3 to 15 percent.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation current, associational weight matrix, global inhibition level, running population activity.

• PARAMETERS: resistance 150 to 400 megohms semilunar and 100 to 250 megohms pyramidal, target sparseness about 8 percent, associational weights 0 to 0.4.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 30 milliseconds, incoming synapse 3 to 10 milliseconds, associational loop 10 to 30 milliseconds, sniff cycle 150 to 500 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: an early casualty in Alzheimer's disease, with tau and amyloid arriving before memory symptoms, and a key relay in temporal lobe epilepsy.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a fragment of a familiar smell into the full learned pattern by letting a small winning set of cells excite one another under a fixed inhibitory threshold.
Create a list variable called active with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called nextActive with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called cellInput with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value 0.9.
Repeat the following steps exactly 3 times.
    Set nextActive to empty list.
    For each cell in cellList, perform the following operations.
        Set cellInput to the bulb drive for that cell.
        For each partner in active, perform the following operations.
            Calculate the sum of cellInput and the learned weight from partner to cell.
            Set cellInput to that result.
        End the loop.
        Check if cellInput is greater than threshold.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Add that cell to the end of nextActive.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
    Set active to nextActive.
End the loop.
Display active to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because an explicit ranking step makes the sparseness rule visible.

# Piriform layer 2: pattern completion from a fragment, with fixed sparseness.
n, winners = 100, 8
def step(afferent, weights, previous):
    total = []
    for i in range(n):
        s = afferent[i]
        for j in range(n):
            s = s + weights[i][j] * previous[j]
        total.append(s)
    order = sorted(range(n), key=lambda i: total[i], reverse=True)
    active = [0] * n
    for i in order[:winners]:               # global inhibition keeps 8 alive
        active[i] = 1
    return active
afferent = [0.01 * ((i * 37) % 13) for i in range(n)]     # weak background
for i in range(4):
    afferent[i] = 1.0                       # only half the learned cues arrive
weights = [[0.0] * n for i in range(n)]
for i in range(8):
    for j in range(8):
        if i != j:
            weights[i][j] = 0.30            # cells 0 to 7 were learned together
state = [0] * n
for t in range(3):
    state = step(afferent, weights, state)
print(sum(state), state[:10])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Two shallow cells in a three-layered cortex with no map at all, one with no basal dendrites listening only to the nose, the other listening mostly to its neighbours.

CHAPTER 64. CLAUSTRUM PROJECTION NEURONS (Engagement-Gating Sheet Neuron) (COG)

A sheet of grey matter thinner than a credit card, hidden between the insula and the putamen, is wired to more of the cortex per cubic millimetre than anywhere else in the brain.

Claustrum is Latin for enclosure and projection neuron says only that an axon leaves, so the existing label teaches nothing about purpose.

Engagement names the behavioural variable these cells track, since activity in those projecting to anterior cingulate cortex rises during the deepest slow-wave sleep and predicts whether a mouse sleeps through a waking tone, and the same signal rises during attentional lapses in awake animals.

Gating names the direction of the effect, an outward push of feed-forward inhibition that turns down commerce with the outside world rather than turning it up.

Sheet keeps the one plain anatomical fact worth carrying, that these cells live in a thin flat lamina of grey matter with one of the densest connection profiles per unit volume anywhere in the forebrain, single cells sending collateral branches across wide stretches of cortex.

Neuron marks it as a long-range cortical projection cell rather than a local one.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These excitatory output cells each address several distant cortical areas at once through one branching axon.

Because they land preferentially on cortical inhibitory cells, switching the claustrum on quietens cortex, which is why it is linked to salience, attention and slow-wave sleep.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Thick densely spiny dendrites leave a compact body in three to six directions with no laminar orientation, because the claustrum has no layers.

SIZE:

Bodies are 12 to 20 micrometres across, in a sheet only 0.5 to 2 millimetres thick and 20 to 35 millimetres long, near 0.7 to 0.8 cubic centimetres per hemisphere.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Recording separates slow-adapting type one cells from burst-prone type two cells, projection tracing in mice resolves up to nine classes, and anatomy adds a core marked by parvalbumin, Gng2, Gnb4 and Nr4a2.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The sheet is sandwiched between the extreme capsule, separating it from insular cortex, and the external capsule, separating it from the putamen.

Ventrally it becomes continuous with the endopiriform nucleus and so with deep piriform cortex, an interface with no clean cellular boundary.

NUMBER:

About 1 to 2 million neurons per hemisphere, of which 85 to 90 percent are projection cells, giving 2 to 3.5 million in both hemispheres, near three thousandths of one percent of the nervous system.

Confidence is moderate, since the volume is well measured but the disputed border with insula and endopiriform nucleus moves the count by tens of percent.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Most fire regularly with moderate adaptation near 100 to 300 megohms, so these are ordinary cells whose interest lies entirely in their wiring.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortex most densely, plus sensory cortices, thalamus, amygdala and hippocampus, and outputs engage cortical inhibitory cells containing neuropeptide Y and parvalbumin.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin but long, leaving through the capsules and collateralising so that one cell can innervate frontal and sensory areas together.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the transmitter, but the striking feature is receptors, since this is one of the densest sites of serotonin 2A receptors, the target of classic psychedelics, and of kappa opioid receptors.

MYELINATION:

Axons gain myelin on entering the capsules, which matters because the same signal must reach widely separated cortical areas at roughly the same moment.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Per cubic millimetre this is among the most connection-dense forebrain tissue, so most of the energy budget leaves with the axons rather than being spent in the sheet.

PLASTICITY:

Honestly, far less is known here than for amygdala or cortex, and no canonical plasticity rule has been established for these cells.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Parvalbumin cells in the claustral core wear dense perineuronal nets, locking the inhibitory gate into a stable configuration after development.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

The claustrum is nothing but these cells and their gatekeepers, so removing them removes the structure and leaves cortex with many local conversations and no chairman.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The signature computation is broadcast, one spike delivered to several lobes at once through collaterals, something almost no other forebrain cell does.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from cingulate, prefrontal and sensory cortex and thalamus 0 to 15 nanosiemens per source, local parvalbumin GABA 0 to 30 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto cortical layer 1 and layer 5 inhibitory cells across several areas at 0 to 50 hertz, net effect inhibitory.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation current, one predicted value per input stream, broadcast refractory flag.

• PARAMETERS: resistance 100 to 300 megohms, 2 to 6 cortical targets per cell, surprise threshold near 0.5 normalised, cortical inhibitory gain 0.005 to 0.02.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 30 milliseconds, adaptation 100 to 200 milliseconds, prediction update 50 to 200 milliseconds, cortical inhibition 200 to 800 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: alpha-synuclein and amyloid loading tracks the onset of dementia in Lewy body disease, and lesions disturb attention, sleep and pain.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to detect a sudden change in any cortical input stream and to broadcast one brief inhibitory pulse to every cortical target when the change is large enough.
Create a number variable called surprise with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called difference with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firingRate with initial value 0.
For each frame in inputStream, perform the following operations.
    Set surprise to 0.
    For each area in corticalAreas, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the difference of the current value and the expected value for that area.
        Set difference to that result.
        Check if difference is less than 0.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Calculate the product of difference and negative one.
            Set difference to that result.
        End the conditional block.
        Calculate the sum of surprise and difference.
        Set surprise to that result.
        Set the expected value for that area to the current value.
    End the loop.
    Set firingRate to 0.
    Check if surprise is greater than 0.5.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of surprise and 0.5.
        Calculate the product of that result and 40.
        Set firingRate to that result.
    End the conditional block.
    Display firingRate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because a short list routine mirrors the many-to-many broadcast without hiding it in matrix notation.

# Claustrum salience detection with brain-wide inhibitory broadcast.
def claustrumStep(inputs, expected, adaptRate, cortexGain):
    surprise = 0.0
    for a in range(len(inputs)):
        d = inputs[a] - expected[a]
        surprise = surprise + (d if d >= 0.0 else -d)
    rate = 0.0
    if surprise > 0.5:                      # only real change gets broadcast
        rate = 40.0 * (surprise - 0.5)
        if rate > 200.0:
            rate = 200.0
    broadcast = [-cortexGain * rate for a in range(len(inputs))]
    nextExpected = []
    for a in range(len(inputs)):
        nextExpected.append(expected[a] + adaptRate * (inputs[a] - expected[a]))
    return rate, broadcast, nextExpected
expected = [0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2]             # visual, auditory, touch, prefrontal
stream = [[0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2], [0.2, 0.9, 0.2, 0.2], [0.2, 0.9, 0.2, 0.2]]
for frame in stream:
    rate, broadcast, expected = claustrumStep(frame, expected, 0.5, 0.01)
    print(round(rate, 1), round(broadcast[0], 3))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

An ordinary spiny cell in a layerless sheet, packed with serotonin 2A receptors, whose single axon reaches several lobes at once and whose excitatory output makes cortex go quiet.

CHAPTER 65. HARM-CONVERGING GATEKEEPER NEURON (COG) (PUC)

At the outer rim of the central amygdala sits a small set of cells that will not sound the alarm for one bad signal, but sound it the instant two arrive together.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a Previously Unnamed Construct, named here as a functional class and offered as a testable proposal rather than as settled anatomy.

It is defined by convergence rather than by a marker, receiving bodily harm from the parabrachial nucleus, body state from the insula and learned threat from the basolateral amygdala, and it fires only when two channels agree.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The predicted form is a medium spiny neuron with a flattened dendritic field lying in the plane where the three incoming fibre systems overlap.

SIZE:

Predicted body 12 to 18 micrometres across, indistinguishable by eye, with a flattened field about 250 by 250 by 60 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two are proposed, a fast gate requiring agreement within about 100 milliseconds that drives escape, and a slow gate integrating over tens of seconds that drives guarding.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The predicted home is the capsular division of the central amygdala and the outer strip of the lateral division.

This is an interface in the strictest sense, at the junction of central amygdala, intercalated clusters and external capsule, continuing medially into the sublenticular extended amygdala.

NUMBER:

Predicted at 20 to 60 thousand per hemisphere, so 40 to 120 thousand in both, about one ten-thousandth of one percent of the nervous system.

Confidence is low, and the estimate is carved out of the measured 0.36 million central amygdala neurons rather than added, so it takes no extra share of the regional budget.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Predicted high resistance of 250 to 500 megohms and near-silence at rest, with hysteresis as the signature, since switching the alarm on takes more input than keeping it on.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Predicted inputs are parabrachial fibres carrying pain, insular fibres carrying temperature and nausea, and basolateral fibres carrying prediction, with intercalated cells enforcing the threshold.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A predicted thin axon under one micrometre splits into a short branch to the medial central amygdala and a longer descending branch.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Predicted GABA as the fast transmitter, with dynorphin sustaining the alarm after spiking stops, and the calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor as the cleanest drug handle.

MYELINATION:

Predicted bare local branch and thinly myelinated descending branch, so a simulation can use central amygdala defaults.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Predicted low at rest and higher during an alarm, and a gate latched on for weeks makes peptide manufacture a standing expense.

PLASTICITY:

Predicted to inherit the documented potentiation of parabrachial synapses after injury, dropping the requirement from two agreeing channels to one, which is the construct's central clinical claim.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Predicted astrocytes that must clear peptide as well as transmitter, since calcitonin gene-related peptide diffuses further than glutamate.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the central amygdala loses its editor, so a twinge, a queasy stomach or a bad memory would each trigger the full defensive response on its own.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The core operation is dendritic coincidence detection, where two separately placed inputs must both be active to trigger a regenerative dendritic event rather than simple summation at the body.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: three channels, parabrachial harm, insular interoception and basolateral learned threat, each 0 to 1 normalised.

• OUTPUTS: a scalar harm alarm at 0 to 60 hertz to medial central amygdala, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and parabrachial nucleus.

• STATE: accumulated evidence, alarm latch, per-channel weights, slow calcium variable holding the latch, peptide pool.

• PARAMETERS: weights 0.5 harm, 0.3 interoception, 0.4 learned threat, switch-on 0.45, switch-off 0.25, two agreeing channels required.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds, coincidence window 50 to 150 milliseconds fast or 10 to 60 seconds slow, latch decay 5 to 30 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: potentiating one channel drops the requirement to one, the proposed mechanism of chronic pain after healing and of hypervigilance in post-traumatic stress disorder.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to raise a harm alarm only when at least two independent harm channels agree, and to hold it on until the evidence falls well below the level that started it.
Create a number variable called evidence with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called channelsAbove with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called alarmIsOn with initial value false.
For each channel in harmChannels, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of the weight of that channel and the level of that channel.
    Calculate the sum of evidence and that result.
    Set evidence to that result.
    Check if the level of that channel is greater than 0.3.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of channelsAbove and 1.
        Set channelsAbove to that result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Check if channelsAbove is less than 2.
If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the product of evidence and 0.25.
    Set evidence to that result.
End the conditional block.
If alarmIsOn is true, then perform the following actions.
    Check if evidence is greater than 0.25.
    Set alarmIsOn to that result.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Check if evidence is greater than 0.45.
    Set alarmIsOn to that result.
End the conditional block.
Display alarmIsOn to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because explicit per-channel bookkeeping keeps the agreement rule auditable.

# Harm-converging gatekeeper: two channels must agree, and the alarm latches.
def harmGate(levels, weights, thetaOn, thetaOff, alarmOn, needed):
    evidence = 0.0
    channelsAbove = 0
    for c in range(len(levels)):
        evidence = evidence + weights[c] * levels[c]
        if levels[c] > 0.3:
            channelsAbove = channelsAbove + 1
    if channelsAbove < needed:
        evidence = evidence * 0.25          # a lone channel is discounted
    if alarmOn:
        alarmOn = evidence > thetaOff       # hysteresis: easier to stay on
    else:
        alarmOn = evidence > thetaOn
    output = 0.0
    if alarmOn:
        output = 60.0 * (evidence - thetaOff)
        if output < 0.0:
            output = 0.0
    return alarmOn, output
weights = [0.5, 0.3, 0.4]                   # parabrachial, insular, basolateral
alarm = False
frames = [[0.9, 0.0, 0.0], [0.9, 0.5, 0.0], [0.4, 0.35, 0.0], [0.0, 0.0, 0.0]]
for f in frames:
    alarm, out = harmGate(f, weights, 0.45, 0.25, alarm, 2)
    print(alarm, round(out, 2))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The only cell here defined by a rule rather than a shape, silent until two independent cries of pain agree, and then latched on.


PART FIVE: BASAL GANGLIA - MOVEMENT, HABIT, AND REWARD

CHAPTER 66. MEDIUM SPINY NEURONS (MSNS), ALSO CALLED SPINY PROJECTION NEURONS (COG)

Ninety-five out of every hundred nerve cells in the deep forebrain structure called the striatum are the same kind of cell, and that one cell type is the gate through which almost every intention you have must pass before it becomes a movement.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A neuron is a cell that carries electrical signals, and the medium spiny neuron is the workhorse neuron of the striatum.

The striatum is the large input station of the basal ganglia, a set of deep brain structures that select which action to run and which to suppress.

The medium spiny neuron, also called the spiny projection neuron, receives a torrent of excitatory signals from the cerebral cortex, the wrinkled outer sheet of the brain that plans and perceives, and from the thalamus, the relay hub in the middle of the brain.

It sits almost silent most of the time, and it fires only when a large number of those inputs happen to agree within a few tens of milliseconds.

Its job is therefore not to relay but to detect coincidence.

When it does fire, it releases gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the main inhibitory, or quietening, chemical messenger of the brain, onto the output nuclei of the basal ganglia.

Those output nuclei are themselves firing constantly and holding movement down, so a burst from a medium spiny neuron is a brief release of the brake.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is round or slightly egg-shaped and unremarkable to look at.

From it spring three to five thick primary dendrites, the branching antennae that collect incoming signals.

Those dendrites are smooth for their first ten to twenty micrometres, and then, from the first branch point outwards, they are carpeted in dendritic spines.

A dendritic spine is a tiny mushroom-shaped bump about one micrometre long that carries a single excitatory contact point, and the density of spines on this cell is what gives it its name.

The whole dendritic tree branches four to seven times and fills a roughly spherical volume, so the cell looks like a dense ball of thorny twigs.

A single thin axon, the output cable, leaves the cell body, gives off local branches that stay inside the striatum, and then travels out of the structure entirely.

SIZE:

The cell body is about twelve to twenty micrometres across in the human, which is medium by the standards of the brain and is the origin of the word medium in its name.

The dendritic ball spans about two hundred to three hundred micrometres in rodents and is larger in humans, reaching roughly three hundred to five hundred micrometres.

Total dendritic length is on the order of four thousand micrometres, that is four millimetres of cable folded into a sphere you could not see without a microscope.

Spine counts per cell are usually quoted in the range of five thousand to fifteen thousand, with most rodent estimates clustering near ten thousand, and human counts are not firmly established.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Direct pathway cells carrying the dopamine D1 receptor together with the peptides substance P and dynorphin, projecting to the internal globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata.

• Indirect pathway cells carrying the dopamine D2 receptor together with enkephalin and the adenosine A2A receptor, projecting to the external globus pallidus.

• Striosome cells, sitting in the mu-opioid-receptor-rich patches, which uniquely project back onto the dopamine neurons that supply the striatum.

• Matrix cells, the surrounding majority, which serve the sensorimotor and associative loops.

• Ventral striatal cells in the nucleus accumbens core and shell, which are smaller, less densely spined, and serve motivation rather than limb movement.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives throughout the striatum, which in the human is split by the internal capsule, a thick sheet of passing fibres, into the caudate nucleus and the putamen.

It also fills the ventral striatum, which includes the nucleus accumbens with its core and its shell.

Inside the striatum it occupies both of the two chemically distinct compartments: the striosomes, also called patches, which are islands rich in the opioid receptor called the mu-opioid receptor, and the matrix, the surrounding sea.

The striosome-matrix boundary is a genuine interface, and medium spiny neurons whose cell bodies sit at that border send dendrites into both compartments and so sample two different information streams at once.

NUMBER:

About one hundred and five million in the two hemispheres combined, taken as ninety-five percent of an estimated one hundred and ten million striatal neurons.

Confidence is moderate: the ninety-five percent figure comes from rodent work and human studies suggest a somewhat larger interneuron fraction, so a defensible human range is ninety to one hundred and five million.

This entry counts the whole population, and the two entries that follow, the D1-type and D2-type cells, divide this same total between them rather than adding to it.

Against roughly eighty-six billion neurons in the whole human nervous system, this is about zero point one two percent, so one neuron in every eight hundred is a medium spiny neuron.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The resting voltage across the membrane sits at about minus eighty to minus eighty-five millivolts, which is unusually negative for a brain cell.

That deep rest is enforced by an inward rectifier potassium channel of the Kir2 family, a pore that lets potassium ions leak out strongly when the cell is at rest and then closes as the cell depolarises.

The consequence is a two-state life: a hyperpolarised down state near minus eighty-five millivolts, and, when cortical input is strong and synchronous, an up state near minus fifty-five to minus fifty millivolts that can last hundreds of milliseconds.

Only in the up state can the cell reach its firing threshold near minus forty-five millivolts.

A fast-inactivating potassium current called the A-type current, carried by Kv4.2 channels with their KChIP accessory proteins, slows the first spike and keeps firing rates low.

In an awake animal a typical dorsal striatal medium spiny neuron fires less than one spike per second at rest and rises only to about ten to thirty spikes per second during a movement it participates in.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Roughly ten to fifteen thousand excitatory contacts land on this one cell, almost all of them on spines, and roughly half of them come from the cortex and much of the rest from the thalamus.

Each individual cortical axon contributes only one or a few contacts, so no single cortical cell can drive it; agreement among thousands is required.

Inhibitory contacts land on the dendritic shafts, the cell body and the initial segment of the axon, and they come from local interneurons and from the axon collaterals of other medium spiny neurons.

Dopamine-releasing axons from the substantia nigra pars compacta wrap the necks of the spines, so dopamine arrives at exactly the point where cortical excitation enters.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, under one micrometre in diameter, and it first gives off a local collateral field about two hundred to three hundred micrometres wide that contacts neighbouring medium spiny neurons.

That local network is real but weak: connections are sparse, one-directional more often than reciprocal, and prone to transmission failure.

The main axon then leaves the striatum and travels in tight fascicles that in the human are visible under the microscope as the pencil fibres of Wilson.

Conduction is slow, on the order of half a metre to two metres per second, so a striatal command reaches the midbrain in a few milliseconds rather than a fraction of one.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The fast transmitter is GABA, acting on GABA-A receptors, which are pores that open to let chloride ions in and so quieten the target cell.

Every medium spiny neuron also carries neuropeptides, which are small protein messengers released more slowly and only during heavy firing: substance P and dynorphin in one population, enkephalin in the other.

Both are opioid or opioid-like peptides or, in the case of substance P, a peptide acting on the neurokinin-1 receptor, and they act over seconds rather than milliseconds.

MYELINATION:

Myelin is a fatty insulating wrap made by oligodendrocytes that speeds conduction.

The local axon collaterals inside the striatum are unmyelinated, so local inhibition is slow and graded.

The long projection axons pick up a thin myelin sheath once they gather into bundles, and those bundles are what make the human putamen look faintly striped, which is where the word striatum comes from.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Holding a membrane at minus eighty-five millivolts against a constantly leaking potassium channel costs energy continuously, because the sodium-potassium pump must run to restore the gradients.

The striatum is one of the most densely vascularised and glucose-hungry grey matter regions in the brain, and it is also loaded with mitochondria in the dendrites near the spines.

That standing energy cost is the reason this cell type is the first to die when energy metabolism is impaired, as in Huntington's disease or in carbon monoxide poisoning, which classically destroys the globus pallidus and putamen.

PLASTICITY:

Corticostriatal synapses onto this cell can be strengthened or weakened, and dopamine decides which.

Long-term potentiation, a lasting strengthening, needs N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, a calcium-permeable glutamate receptor, together with dopamine acting on D1 receptors.

Long-term depression, a lasting weakening, needs metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5), calcium entering through L-type calcium channels, and the manufacture of endocannabinoids, which are fatty retrograde messengers that travel backwards across the synapse and switch off transmitter release from the cortical terminal.

Because dopamine arrives with a delay of tens to hundreds of milliseconds after the events that caused it, the striatum solves the credit assignment problem with an eligibility trace: the synapse is tagged when it is active, and dopamine arriving shortly after converts the tag into a change.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Striatal astrocytes, the star-shaped support cells, do something unusual here: they express high levels of the GABA transporters GAT-1 and GAT-3, and by controlling the ambient bath of GABA around the cell they also set how much dopamine is released nearby.

They also take up dopamine itself and degrade it with monoamine oxidase, which matters because the striatum is drenched in dopamine.

Microglia, the brain's resident immune cells, are unusually dense in the striatum and prune spines from these dendrites during adolescence.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the striatum stops being an output structure at all.

The region would still receive the entire cortex, but nothing would leave, and the basal ganglia brake on movement would be permanently on.

Concretely, the flavour lost is selection: the striatum's characteristic behaviour of staying silent through almost everything and then committing decisively to one action.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The dendrites of this cell compute on their own.

A cluster of neighbouring spines activated together can trigger a local dendritic plateau potential, a sustained voltage shelf lasting fifty to two hundred milliseconds, driven by NMDA receptors and L-type calcium channels, and it is these plateaus that constitute the up state rather than a simple summing of inputs at the cell body.

Action potentials also travel backwards from the cell body into the dendrites, and their arrival is the signal that says the cell fired, which the spine needs in order to know whether it contributed.

The cell makes protein locally in its dendrites, so a strengthened synapse can build itself new receptors without waiting for the nucleus.

Firing drives gene transcription through the immediate early genes c-Fos and Arc, and repeated drug exposure drives the persistent transcription factor DeltaFosB, which is the molecular residue of addiction.

Endocannabinoids released from these dendrites act as retrograde messengers, and because they diffuse they also reach neighbouring synapses that were never active, a form of volume transmission.

The cell couples metabolically to astrocytes through the lactate shuttle, borrowing fuel that astrocytes prepare from glucose.

It also remodels constantly: spines appear and disappear over hours during motor learning, and the pattern of surviving spines is the physical form of a learned habit.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS. Glutamatergic excitation from named cortical areas (motor, premotor, prefrontal, orbitofrontal, cingulate, sensory) and from thalamic nuclei (centromedian and parafascicular), delivered as ten to fifteen thousand synaptic conductances each of roughly zero point two to one nanosiemens peak; GABAergic inhibition from local parvalbumin, somatostatin and tyrosine hydroxylase interneurons and from neighbouring spiny neurons; dopamine from substantia nigra pars compacta at tonic concentrations of about twenty to fifty nanomolar rising to micromolar transients; acetylcholine from local cholinergic interneurons; serotonin from the dorsal raphe.

• OUTPUTS. GABA release onto the globus pallidus (external and internal segments), substantia nigra pars reticulata, and, via collaterals, onto other spiny neurons; peptide co-release of substance P and dynorphin or of enkephalin at firing rates above about ten hertz.

• STATE. Membrane voltage; inward rectifier activation; A-type potassium inactivation; L-type calcium channel state; intracellular calcium in each dendritic compartment; NMDA receptor magnesium block state; per-synapse eligibility trace; per-synapse weight; endocannabinoid concentration; up-state or down-state flag.

• PARAMETERS. Capacitance about one hundred picofarads; input resistance about fifty to two hundred megohms at rest; resting potential minus eighty to minus eighty-five millivolts; threshold about minus forty-five millivolts; maximal inward rectifier conductance about five to ten nanosiemens; spine count five thousand to fifteen thousand.

• TIME CONSTANTS. Membrane time constant five to fifteen milliseconds; alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor decay two to four milliseconds; NMDA receptor decay fifty to one hundred and fifty milliseconds; up-state duration one hundred to one thousand milliseconds; eligibility trace decay about one to two seconds; endocannabinoid signalling five to twenty seconds.

• FAILURE MODE. In Huntington's disease this cell type degenerates first and most severely, with striatal neuron loss reaching eighty to ninety-five percent by the late pathological grades, producing chorea and then rigidity; in Parkinson's disease it loses spines and its up states become abnormally synchronised; in obsessive-compulsive disorder and in addiction its plasticity is captured so that one action loop repeats without end.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a medium spiny neuron leaves its silent down state and fires a burst of action potentials.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative eighty five.
Create a number variable called active cortical inputs with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called coincidence threshold with initial value five hundred.
Create a number variable called dopamine level with initial value zero.
Create a boolean variable called enough drive with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called in up state with initial value false.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
While clock is less than two thousand, repeat the following steps.
    Set active cortical inputs to the count of cortical and thalamic synapses active during this millisecond.
    Check if active cortical inputs is greater than or equal to coincidence threshold.
    Set enough drive to the result of that check.
    If enough drive is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set in up state to true.
        Set membrane voltage to negative fifty two.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set in up state to false.
        Set membrane voltage to negative eighty five.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if both in up state and dopamine level is greater than zero point five are true.
    Set enough drive to the result of that check.
    If enough drive is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and four.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative forty five.
    Set enough drive to the result of that check.
    If enough drive is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add clock to the end of spike times.
        Set membrane voltage to negative sixty.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and one.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in spike times.
Display the total number of items in spike times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this is a small numerical simulation whose whole point is the shape of the inward-rectifier arithmetic, and that arithmetic is easiest to audit when the code reads like the equations.

import math, random
DT = 0.1                # ms per step
C_M = 100.0             # pF, whole-cell capacitance
E_L = -85.0             # mV, potassium reversal
G_KIR = 6.0             # nS, maximal inward rectifier conductance
V_HALF = -60.0          # mV, half-block voltage of the rectifier
K_SLOPE = 12.0          # mV, steepness of the block
G_LEAK = 1.2            # nS, voltage-independent leak
V_THRESH = -45.0        # mV
V_RESET = -60.0         # mV
def kir(v):
    """Open near rest, closed once the cell depolarises: this is what makes
       the down state deep and the up state possible."""
    return G_KIR / (1.0 + math.exp((v - V_HALF) / K_SLOPE))
def run(seconds=2.0, seed=1):
    random.seed(seed)
    v, spikes, steps = E_L, [], int(seconds * 1000.0 / DT)
    for i in range(steps):
        t = i * DT
        # cortex delivers a synchronous barrage between 500 and 1500 ms
        g_exc = 2.2 if 500.0 <= t < 1500.0 else 0.2
        g_exc *= 0.8 + 0.4 * random.random()      # synaptic noise
        i_kir = kir(v) * (v - E_L)
        i_leak = G_LEAK * (v - E_L)
        i_exc = g_exc * (v - 0.0)                 # excitatory reversal 0 mV
        v += -(i_kir + i_leak + i_exc) / C_M * DT
        if v >= V_THRESH:
            spikes.append(round(t, 1))
            v = V_RESET
    return v, spikes
v_end, sp = run()
print("down-state voltage settles near %.1f mV" % run(0.4)[0])
print("spikes during the cortical barrage: %d" % len(sp))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A ball of densely spined dendrites two to three hundred micrometres wide, a resting potential of minus eighty-five millivolts held there by an inward rectifier, near-total silence punctuated by up states, and GABA plus a peptide as its output.

No other cell in the brain is both this quiet and this numerous.

CHAPTER 67. D1-TYPE MEDIUM SPINY NEURONS OF THE DIRECT PATHWAY (Go-Signal Movement Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that says yes.

The dopamine receptor label D1 was a staining convenience and taught nothing about what the cell does.

Go-Signal names the permission this cell grants, because its inhibitory axon lands on the basal ganglia output stations and switches off their constant suppression of the thalamus, so a movement already sketched by cortex is released rather than created.

Movement names the currency, since switching these cells on with light makes a mouse walk more.

Neuron marks it as a spiny projection cell, and the name is deliberately paired with the Stop-Signal Movement Neuron so that the single dimension the two differ along, permission versus refusal, is visible in the names themselves.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Half of the medium spiny neurons of the striatum carry the dopamine D1 receptor, and those cells form the direct pathway.

A receptor is a protein on the cell surface that recognises a chemical messenger and changes the cell's behaviour in response, and the D1 receptor recognises dopamine.

The direct pathway is called direct because these cells reach the output nuclei of the basal ganglia in one step, without any relay in between.

Those output nuclei are the internal segment of the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra pars reticulata, and they fire continuously at sixty to eighty spikes per second, holding the motor thalamus down and thereby holding movement down.

When a D1 cell fires, it inhibits those output nuclei, the thalamus is released, and the cortex is free to run the movement.

So this cell releases the brake, and the phrase used throughout the field is that it is the go pathway.

Its second job is learning what to do again.

Dopamine acting on the D1 receptor raises the internal messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP), activates protein kinase A, an enzyme that tags other proteins with phosphate groups, and strengthens exactly those synapses that were active just before the dopamine arrived.

Because dopamine surges when an outcome is better than expected, the D1 cell is the substrate of reward-based reinforcement: do that again.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Structurally it is a medium spiny neuron and is indistinguishable from its D2 sibling under a plain stain.

Reliable telling apart requires chemistry, not shape: it carries the neuropeptides substance P and dynorphin, and in laboratory animals it is labelled by a fluorescent reporter driven from the Drd1a gene.

There are two consistent but subtle differences.

Its dendritic tree is slightly less branched than the D2 cell's, with a somewhat smaller total dendritic length, and its main axon is longer because it must travel all the way to the midbrain.

SIZE:

Cell body twelve to twenty micrometres; dendritic field roughly three hundred to five hundred micrometres in the human.

Its axon is the longest of any striatal cell: from the putamen to the substantia nigra pars reticulata is on the order of two to three centimetres in the human brain, and along that route the same axon also drops off branches in the globus pallidus.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Matrix D1 cells, the majority, project to the internal globus pallidus and to substantia nigra pars reticulata and drive movement selection.

• Striosome D1 cells, which sit in the mu-opioid-rich patches, project instead to the dopamine neurons of substantia nigra pars compacta and so control the reward signal itself rather than movement.

• Ventral striatal D1 cells in the nucleus accumbens, which project to the ventral pallidum and to the ventral tegmental area and carry motivation rather than limb movement.

• Nucleus accumbens shell cells that carry both D1 and D2 receptors, roughly seventeen percent of shell spiny neurons, forming a genuine third population where the two signalling systems interact inside one cell.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Caudate nucleus, putamen, nucleus accumbens core and shell, and the olfactory tubercle.

Within each it occupies both striosome and matrix compartments, and the striosome-matrix interface is functionally important because striosomal D1 cells are the only striatal neurons that project back onto the dopamine cells that taught them.

NUMBER:

About fifty-two million in the two hemispheres, taken as half of the roughly one hundred and five million medium spiny neurons.

Confidence is moderate for the total and good for the near-fifty-fifty split, which has been confirmed in rodent, primate and human tissue.

This is a subdivision of the previous entry, not an addition to it.

That is about zero point zero six percent of the roughly eighty-six billion neurons in the human nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential minus eighty to minus eighty-five millivolts, as for all spiny neurons, but with a stronger inward rectifier conductance than the D2 cell, which makes its down state deeper and harder to leave.

Consequently it is measurably less excitable at baseline: it needs more injected current to fire its first spike, and its input resistance is lower.

Dopamine reverses this asymmetry.

D1 receptor activation, through protein kinase A, increases the L-type calcium current carried by Cav1.2 and Cav1.3 channels, increases NMDA receptor current, and reduces the slow potassium currents, so the same cortical input that failed a moment ago now produces a plateau and a burst.

The cell is therefore a dopamine-gated coincidence detector rather than a fixed one.

Firing rates in the awake animal are below one spike per second at rest, with bursts of ten to forty spikes per second locked to movement onset.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives cortical input preferentially from the deeper cortical layer five cells of the intratelencephalic type, which project to both hemispheres.

It receives thalamic input from the centromedian and parafascicular nuclei.

It is inhibited by parvalbumin fast-spiking interneurons and by neighbouring spiny neurons, and notably it receives more collateral inhibition from D2 cells than it gives back, so the indirect pathway can veto the direct pathway locally.

Its own axon terminals in the substantia nigra pars reticulata are large and form multiple contacts on each target dendrite, so a single D1 cell has real leverage on its target.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, under one micrometre, thinly myelinated once it enters the pallidal and nigral bundles.

It is a branching axon rather than a point-to-point line: the same cell contacts globus pallidus internal segment, substantia nigra pars reticulata, and, in passing, the external pallidum, which is why the textbook picture of two cleanly separate pathways is an approximation.

Conduction time from striatum to substantia nigra is a few milliseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA as the fast transmitter.

Substance P, which acts on the neurokinin-1 receptor and excites the target, and dynorphin, which acts on the kappa-opioid receptor and inhibits transmitter release, are co-released during strong firing.

Dynorphin released back into the striatum from local collaterals suppresses dopamine release, which is a negative feedback loop and part of why intense reward is followed by dysphoria.

MYELINATION:

Thin myelin on the long projection axon, none on local collaterals.

Because the axon is long and the myelin thin, this cell is disproportionately sensitive to white matter disease, and striatal projection fibre loss is an early feature of Huntington's disease.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High and unrelenting, for the same inward-rectifier reason as all spiny neurons, plus the cost of maintaining a two to three centimetre axon.

The cell must ship mitochondria and vesicle proteins the full length of that axon by motor-protein transport, and failure of that transport is one of the proposed mechanisms of striatal degeneration.

PLASTICITY:

This is the clearest case in the brain of a three-factor learning rule: presynaptic activity, postsynaptic depolarisation, and dopamine.

Dopamine arriving within roughly zero point three to two seconds of coincident cortical and postsynaptic activity converts an eligibility tag into long-term potentiation through D1, cyclic AMP, protein kinase A and the phosphoprotein DARPP-32.

DARPP-32 is a molecular switch: when protein kinase A phosphorylates it at one site it blocks protein phosphatase 1 and locks in the change.

Absence of dopamine at the same synapse produces the opposite, an endocannabinoid-dependent weakening.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes around D1 cells in the nucleus accumbens are known to retract from D1 cell synapses during drug withdrawal and to regain contact when the animal stops seeking the drug, and their GABA transporter GAT-3 levels track that behaviour.

That is a specific, measurable, behaviourally coupled glial change that is not seen around most other cell types.

Otherwise the oligodendrocyte and microglial support is broadly typical of grey matter with long projection axons.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the striatum can still say no but can never say yes.

Every action would be vetoed; the region would become a pure suppressor, and the animal would be akinetic, unable to initiate movement despite intact muscles and intact cortex.

The specific flavour lost is permission, and with it the ability to learn from reward, because reward-driven strengthening lives largely in these cells.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The D1 receptor is a G-protein-coupled receptor, meaning it works by triggering a chain of chemical reactions inside the cell rather than by opening a pore, and the chain runs on a timescale of hundreds of milliseconds to minutes.

That makes this cell a chemical computer bolted onto an electrical one: cyclic AMP, protein kinase A, DARPP-32 and protein phosphatase 1 form a bistable switch that can hold a memory of recent dopamine long after the electrical trace has gone.

Dendritic plateau potentials, driven by NMDA receptors and Cav1.3 channels, are amplified by D1 signalling, so dopamine literally changes what the dendrite can compute.

Back-propagating action potentials invading the dendrite are also boosted by D1, tightening the link between firing and plasticity.

The cell releases dynorphin from its dendrites as well as its terminals, a form of volume transmission that quietens dopamine release across a neighbourhood of tens of micrometres.

Its firing drives transcription of c-Fos, and repeated psychostimulant exposure accumulates DeltaFosB specifically in D1 cells, which is one of the few molecular changes that persists for weeks after drug exposure stops.

Endocannabinoid production, local dendritic protein synthesis, and spine turnover all proceed as in the generic spiny neuron, but each is under D1 control.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS. Glutamate from cortical layer five intratelencephalic neurons and from centromedian and parafascicular thalamus, ten to fifteen thousand synapses; GABA from parvalbumin fast-spiking interneurons, somatostatin interneurons and neighbouring spiny neurons; dopamine from substantia nigra pars compacta, tonic twenty to fifty nanomolar with phasic transients into the low micromolar over one hundred to five hundred milliseconds; acetylcholine from cholinergic interneurons acting on M1 and M4 muscarinic receptors.

• OUTPUTS. GABA onto globus pallidus internal segment and substantia nigra pars reticulata, plus collaterals in globus pallidus external segment and within the striatum; substance P and dynorphin at high firing rates; for striosomal members, GABA onto substantia nigra pars compacta dopamine neurons.

• STATE. Membrane voltage; inward rectifier and A-type channel states; dendritic calcium per compartment; cyclic AMP concentration; protein kinase A activity; DARPP-32 phosphorylation at threonine 34; per-synapse eligibility trace and weight; DeltaFosB accumulation.

• PARAMETERS. Capacitance about one hundred picofarads; input resistance about fifty to one hundred and fifty megohms, lower than the D2 cell; rheobase, the least current that makes it fire, roughly one hundred and fifty to three hundred picoamps; threshold about minus forty-five millivolts; D1 receptor affinity for dopamine in the high nanomolar to low micromolar range, so it reads phasic bursts rather than tonic level.

• TIME CONSTANTS. Membrane five to fifteen milliseconds; NMDA decay fifty to one hundred and fifty milliseconds; dopamine transient one hundred to five hundred milliseconds; cyclic AMP and protein kinase A cascade one to ten seconds; eligibility trace zero point three to two seconds; DeltaFosB weeks.

• FAILURE MODE. Loss or silencing produces akinesia and loss of reward learning; over-activation produces levodopa-induced dyskinesia, the involuntary writhing that eventually afflicts most treated Parkinson's patients, in which D1 cells become supersensitive and their extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway is abnormally engaged; in Huntington's disease D1 cells are lost later than D2 cells, and their loss marks the transition from chorea to rigidity.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to gate a direct-pathway spiny neuron with dopamine so that it fires only for inputs that were recently rewarded.
Create a number variable called cortical drive with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called dopamine burst with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called eligibility trace with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called synaptic weight with initial value zero point five.
Create a number variable called excitability gain with initial value one.
Create a boolean variable called fired with initial value false.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
While clock is less than three thousand, repeat the following steps.
    Set cortical drive to the summed glutamate conductance arriving during this millisecond.
    Calculate the product of cortical drive and synaptic weight.
    Set cortical drive to that product.
    Calculate the product of cortical drive and excitability gain.
    Set cortical drive to that product.
    Check if cortical drive is greater than one point zero.
    Set fired to the result of that check.
    If fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set eligibility trace to one.
        Display clock to the console.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of eligibility trace and zero point nine nine nine.
        Set eligibility trace to that product.
    End the conditional block.
    Set dopamine burst to the dopamine concentration above baseline during this millisecond.
    Check if dopamine burst is greater than zero point five.
    Set fired to the result of that check.
    If fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of eligibility trace and zero point zero one.
        Calculate the sum of synaptic weight and that product.
        Set synaptic weight to that sum.
        Set excitability gain to one point six.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set excitability gain to one.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and one.
End the loop.
Display synaptic weight to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the claim being tested is a before-and-after comparison of the same cell with and without dopamine, and a readable numerical loop makes that comparison inspectable line by line.

import math
DT, C_M, E_L, G_L = 0.1, 100.0, -85.0, 3.0     # ms, pF, mV, nS
V_TH, V_RESET = -45.0, -60.0
def run(dopamine, ms=1000.0, drive_ns=1.7):
    """dopamine is 0..1 and acts through the D1 receptor, which raises cyclic
       AMP, activates protein kinase A, and boosts both the Cav1.3 L-type
       calcium current and the NMDA current in this same cell."""
    g_ltype = 0.6 + 2.4 * dopamine             # nS available L-type calcium
    nmda_gain = 1.0 + 0.8 * dopamine           # protein kinase A boost
    v, spikes, t = E_L, 0, 0.0
    while t < ms:
        on = 200.0 <= t < 800.0                # cortical barrage window
        g_ampa = drive_ns if on else 0.05
        g_nmda = drive_ns * 0.6 * nmda_gain if on else 0.0
        mg = 1.0 / (1.0 + 0.28 * math.exp(-0.062 * v))   # magnesium unblock
        i_l = G_L * (v - E_L)
        i_ampa = g_ampa * (v - 0.0)
        i_nmda = g_nmda * mg * (v - 0.0)
        act = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(v + 35.0) / 6.0))  # L-type activation
        i_ca = g_ltype * act * (v - 60.0)
        v += -(i_l + i_ampa + i_nmda + i_ca) / C_M * DT
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes += 1
            v = V_RESET
        t += DT
    return spikes
for da in (0.0, 0.5, 1.0):
    print("dopamine %.1f -> %d spikes for identical cortical input" % (da, run(da)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A spiny projection neuron that carries substance P and dynorphin, reaches the substantia nigra pars reticulata in a single hop, sits deeper in its down state than its neighbour, and becomes dramatically more excitable the moment dopamine arrives.

If dopamine makes a striatal cell easier to fire, it is a D1 cell.

CHAPTER 68. D2-TYPE MEDIUM SPINY NEURONS OF THE INDIRECT PATHWAY (Stop-Signal Movement Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that says no, and it is the cell that dies first in Huntington's disease.

The dopamine receptor label D2 named a stain rather than a function, exactly as its partner did.

Stop-Signal names the refusal, because this cell's route runs through the external pallidum and the subthalamic nucleus and ends by strengthening, not weakening, the output stations' suppression of the thalamus.

Movement again names the currency, and the evidence is blunt, since switching these cells on with light makes a mouse freeze on the spot.

Neuron marks it as the opposite number of the Go-Signal Movement Neuron, the shared word Movement keeping the family legible while Stop and Go carry the whole difference, which is exactly one receptor and one destination.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The other half of the striatum's projection neurons carry the dopamine D2 receptor instead of the D1 receptor, and they form the indirect pathway.

Indirect means what it says: instead of reaching the output nuclei in one hop, these cells inhibit the external segment of the globus pallidus, which in turn inhibits the subthalamic nucleus, which in turn excites the output nuclei.

Count the sign changes along that chain and the arithmetic is simple: firing a D2 cell makes the output nuclei fire harder, the motor thalamus is clamped down more firmly, and movement is suppressed.

So this is the stop pathway, or more precisely the pathway that cancels the actions you did not choose while the direct pathway lets through the one you did.

Its learning role is the mirror image of the D1 cell's.

The D2 receptor is inhibitory in its signalling, meaning it lowers cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP) rather than raising it, and it is roughly ten to one hundred times more sensitive to dopamine than the D1 receptor.

That sensitivity means the D2 cell is saturated by the ordinary background level of dopamine and notices most sharply when dopamine falls.

A dip in dopamine, which is what happens when an outcome is worse than expected, releases the D2 cell from inhibition and strengthens the synapses that were just active, tagging that action as one not to repeat.

The D1 cell learns from reward; the D2 cell learns from disappointment.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A medium spiny neuron in every visible respect, with a round soma, three to five primary dendrites, a smooth proximal stretch and then a dense carpet of spines.

Compared with the D1 cell it is slightly bushier, with more dendritic branch points and a somewhat greater total dendritic length, and its projection axon is shorter because it stops at the external pallidum.

Its local axon collateral field inside the striatum is denser than the D1 cell's, which is the anatomical basis for the fact that D2 cells inhibit D1 cells more strongly than the reverse.

SIZE:

Cell body twelve to twenty micrometres; dendritic field roughly three hundred to five hundred micrometres in the human.

Its projection axon travels only from the putamen to the adjacent external pallidum, a matter of a few millimetres, and it terminates in dense baskets around pallidal cell bodies.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Dorsal striatal D2 cells of the matrix, the main population, projecting to the external globus pallidus and suppressing competing limb movements.

• Striosomal D2 cells, which participate in a parallel indirect loop aimed at the dopamine neurons themselves rather than at the motor output.

• Nucleus accumbens D2 cells, which project to the ventral pallidum and mediate aversion, effort cost, and the suppression of reward seeking.

• Accumbens shell cells co-expressing D1 and D2 receptors, about seventeen percent of shell projection neurons, in which the two receptors can form a physical pair, a heteromer, that signals through a different internal pathway using calcium rather than cyclic AMP.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Caudate nucleus, putamen, nucleus accumbens core and shell, and olfactory tubercle, in both the striosome and matrix compartments.

Its terminal field is the external segment of the globus pallidus, and the striatopallidal border is a sharp interface at which its axons arrive in the tight bundles that give the human pallidum its pale, fibre-crossed appearance.

NUMBER:

About fifty-two million in the two hemispheres, the other half of the roughly one hundred and five million medium spiny neurons.

Confidence is moderate for the total and good for the split.

This is a subdivision of the medium spiny neuron entry, not an addition to it, so the three spiny neuron entries together consume one hundred and five million of the striatum's one hundred and ten million cells.

That is about zero point zero six percent of the roughly eighty-six billion neurons in the human nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential minus eighty to minus eighty-five millivolts, with a weaker inward rectifier potassium conductance than the D1 cell.

The practical result, measured repeatedly in mouse and rat slices, is that the D2 cell is the more excitable of the two: higher input resistance, lower rheobase, more spikes for the same injected current.

Dopamine, acting on D2 receptors, then pushes it the other way, lowering cyclic AMP, reducing the L-type calcium current, increasing potassium leak and dampening the cell.

Adenosine, a by-product of energy use that accumulates in active tissue, acts on adenosine A2A receptors found almost exclusively on this cell type and pushes in the opposite direction, raising cyclic AMP.

The D2 cell is therefore the point in the brain where dopamine and adenosine fight, which is exactly why caffeine, an adenosine receptor blocker, is mildly stimulating, and why the drug istradefylline, an A2A blocker, helps Parkinson's patients.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives cortical input preferentially from layer five pyramidal tract neurons, the cells that send axons down into the brainstem and spinal cord, giving it a copy of the motor command actually being issued.

It receives strong thalamic input from the parafascicular nucleus.

It gets more inhibition from parvalbumin fast-spiking interneurons than the D1 cell does, so feedforward inhibition is biased toward suppressing the stop pathway when cortex speaks loudly.

Its output synapses in the external pallidum are large perisomatic baskets that can reliably control pallidal firing, and they show strong short-term depression, meaning the first spikes in a burst are far more effective than the later ones.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, under one micrometre, with a short projection to the external pallidum and a dense local collateral plexus inside the striatum.

A minority of these axons continue past the external pallidum and reach the internal pallidum and substantia nigra, so the separation between the two pathways is not absolute.

Conduction to the pallidum takes on the order of one to three milliseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA as the fast transmitter, acting on GABA-A receptors on pallidal neurons.

Enkephalin, an endogenous opioid peptide acting on delta-opioid and mu-opioid receptors, is co-released at high firing rates and suppresses GABA release from the same terminals, an automatic gain control that stops the stop pathway from running away.

Enkephalin messenger ribonucleic acid levels in the human striatum are the standard laboratory marker for this population.

MYELINATION:

Thinly myelinated over the short striatopallidal run, unmyelinated locally.

Because the journey is short, this cell depends far less on long-range axonal transport than its D1 sibling, which makes its early death in Huntington's disease all the more striking and points to a cause inside the cell body rather than in the axon.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, as for all spiny neurons, and with an additional twist: because it is the more excitable of the two types, it does more work for the same input, and it is the cell that becomes chronically over-active when dopamine is lost.

Chronic over-activity means chronic calcium loading, and calcium loading is a plausible route to the excitotoxic death seen in Huntington's disease.

The presence of A2A receptors also ties its excitability directly to the local energy state of the tissue, since adenosine is released when adenosine triphosphate is consumed.

PLASTICITY:

Long-term depression at its cortical synapses is the well-characterised change and it needs D2 receptor activation together with metabotropic glutamate receptor 5, calcium through L-type channels and endocannabinoid release.

Long-term potentiation at this cell is favoured by a dip in dopamine, which is the three-factor rule running with the opposite sign to the D1 cell.

Loss of dopamine in Parkinson's disease removes the D2 brake and produces a lasting increase in excitability plus a pruning of about twenty to forty percent of this cell's dendritic spines, one of the most reproducible structural findings in the disease.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in the striatum express the adenosine-generating enzyme ecto-5-prime-nucleotidase and are a major source of the adenosine that drives A2A receptors on this cell, so the glial cells here are not merely supportive but are an active partner in setting its excitability.

Striatal astrocytes also carry the GABA transporters GAT-1 and GAT-3, which set the ambient GABA tone this cell both contributes to and swims in.

Microglial activation in Huntington's disease is detectable in the striatum years before symptoms and tracks the loss of these cells specifically.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the striatum loses its ability to say no.

Movements would start and never be cancelled, and unwanted movements would leak out alongside wanted ones.

This is not a thought experiment: it is early Huntington's disease, where preferential loss of enkephalin-positive indirect pathway projections produces chorea, the restless involuntary dance of movements that the patient never chose.

The flavour lost is competition, the striatum's ability to run a contest in which most candidate actions are eliminated.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell hosts one of the best-documented molecular tug-of-wars in the brain.

The D2 receptor and the A2A receptor sit in the same membrane, physically associate as a heteromer, and each one reduces the other's signalling, so the cell's excitability is set by a ratio rather than by either transmitter alone.

The D2 receptor also signals through a second, slower route using the scaffolding protein beta-arrestin-2 and the enzyme glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta, and this is the route on which antipsychotic drugs and lithium are thought to act.

Its dendrites generate NMDA-dependent plateau potentials, and back-propagating action potentials into those dendrites are damped by D2 signalling, which is a direct chemical control over what the dendrite is allowed to learn.

Endocannabinoids made in these dendrites are the retrograde messenger for long-term depression and also spill onto neighbouring synapses as volume transmission.

Enkephalin release from dendrites and collaterals spreads over tens of micrometres and tunes a whole local neighbourhood.

The cell's own housekeeping matters here more than almost anywhere: in Huntington's disease the mutant huntingtin protein aggregates preferentially in these cells, impairs the proteasome and autophagy systems that clear damaged protein, disrupts transcription by sequestering the coactivator CREB-binding protein, and cripples mitochondrial biogenesis through the regulator PGC-1 alpha.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS. Glutamate from cortical layer five pyramidal tract neurons and from parafascicular thalamus, ten to fifteen thousand synapses; GABA from parvalbumin fast-spiking interneurons, which contact this cell more heavily than the D1 cell, and from neighbouring spiny neurons; dopamine from substantia nigra pars compacta, read mainly as tonic level and as dips below it; adenosine from astrocytes and from tissue energy use, low nanomolar to low micromolar; acetylcholine from cholinergic interneurons acting on excitatory M1 muscarinic receptors.

• OUTPUTS. GABA onto globus pallidus external segment neurons in perisomatic baskets; GABA onto neighbouring spiny neurons, preferentially D1 cells; enkephalin at firing rates above about ten hertz; a minority projection onward to globus pallidus internal segment and substantia nigra pars reticulata.

• STATE. Membrane voltage; inward rectifier and A-type channel states; dendritic calcium; cyclic AMP concentration; D2 and A2A occupancy; beta-arrestin-2 recruitment; endocannabinoid concentration; per-synapse eligibility trace and weight; short-term depression state of the pallidal terminals.

• PARAMETERS. Capacitance about one hundred picofarads; input resistance roughly one hundred to two hundred and fifty megohms, higher than the D1 cell; rheobase roughly one hundred to two hundred picoamps, lower than the D1 cell; threshold about minus forty-five millivolts; D2 receptor affinity for dopamine in the low nanomolar range, so it tracks tonic dopamine.

• TIME CONSTANTS. Membrane five to fifteen milliseconds; AMPA decay two to four milliseconds; NMDA decay fifty to one hundred and fifty milliseconds; short-term depression recovery two hundred to eight hundred milliseconds; D2 to cyclic AMP signalling hundreds of milliseconds to seconds; dopamine dip detection window about zero point five to two seconds.

• FAILURE MODE. Preferential early degeneration in Huntington's disease, producing chorea before the later loss of D1 cells produces rigidity; pathological over-activity in Parkinson's disease, producing bradykinesia and beta-band oscillations near twenty hertz throughout the basal ganglia; blockade of its D2 receptors by antipsychotic drugs produces drug-induced parkinsonism and, over years, tardive dyskinesia; loss of its restraining influence in the ventral striatum removes the effort cost of seeking a reward and contributes to compulsive drug use.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to set the excitability of an indirect-pathway spiny neuron from the competition between dopamine and adenosine, and then to test whether it fires.
Create a number variable called dopamine level with initial value one.
Create a number variable called adenosine level with initial value zero point five.
Create a number variable called cyclic amp with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called calcium conductance with initial value one point four.
Create a number variable called potassium leak with initial value one point five.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative eighty five.
Create a number variable called cortical drive with initial value zero.
Create a boolean variable called condition holds with initial value false.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
While clock is less than one thousand, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the difference of adenosine level and dopamine level.
    Set cyclic amp to that difference.
    Calculate the sum of one point four and cyclic amp.
    Set calcium conductance to that sum.
    Calculate the difference of one point five and cyclic amp.
    Set potassium leak to that difference.
    Set cortical drive to the glutamate conductance arriving during this millisecond.
    Check if both cortical drive is greater than two and calcium conductance is greater than one point five are true.
    Set condition holds to the result of that check.
    If condition holds is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to negative forty four.
    Else if cortical drive is greater than two is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to negative fifty two.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to negative eighty five.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative forty five.
    Set condition holds to the result of that check.
    If condition holds is true, then perform the following actions.
        Display clock to the console.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and one.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the interesting result is a small table of three clinical conditions compared side by side, and a readable script that prints that table is more useful to a reader than a fast one.

import math
DT, C_M, E_L = 0.1, 100.0, -85.0        # ms, pF, mV
V_TH, V_RESET, G_L, DRIVE_NS = -45.0, -60.0, 1.5, 2.9
def run(dopamine, adenosine, ms=800.0):
    """D2 receptors are inhibitory in signalling: they lower cyclic AMP, which
       shrinks the Cav1.3 L-type calcium current and enlarges the Kir2 leak.
       A2A adenosine receptors raise cyclic AMP and push the other way."""
    tone = adenosine - dopamine                 # net cyclic AMP drive, -1..1
    g_ltype = 1.4 + 1.0 * tone                  # nS
    g_kir = 1.5 - 1.0 * tone                    # nS of extra potassium leak
    v, spikes, t = E_L, 0, 0.0
    while t < ms:
        g_ampa = DRIVE_NS if 100.0 <= t < 700.0 else 0.05
        i_leak = (G_L + g_kir) * (v - E_L)
        i_ampa = g_ampa * (v - 0.0)
        act = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(v + 35.0) / 6.0))
        i_ca = g_ltype * act * (v - 60.0)
        v += -(i_leak + i_ampa + i_ca) / C_M * DT
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes += 1
            v = V_RESET
        t += DT
    return spikes
print("healthy      dopamine 1.0 adenosine 0.5 -> %3d spikes" % run(1.0, 0.5))
print("parkinsonian dopamine 0.0 adenosine 0.5 -> %3d spikes" % run(0.0, 0.5))
print("A2A blocked  dopamine 0.0 adenosine 0.0 -> %3d spikes" % run(0.0, 0.0))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A spiny projection neuron that carries enkephalin and the adenosine A2A receptor, stops at the external pallidum, is the more excitable of the two spiny neuron types before dopamine acts and the less excitable after, and is the cell that caffeine reaches.

If a striatal cell gets quieter when dopamine arrives and louder when caffeine does, it is a D2 cell.

CHAPTER 69. STRIATAL CHOLINERGIC INTERNEURONS, ALSO CALLED TONICALLY ACTIVE NEURONS (TANS) (Steady-Beat Surprise-Pause Neuron) (COG)

One in a hundred striatal cells never stops firing, and when something surprising happens it does the one thing that matters: it goes silent.

The acronym tonically active neuron described only the beat and hid the pause, which is the part that matters.

Steady-Beat records the one thing every recording agrees on, that this cell fires on its own without being asked, a few spikes a second, all day.

Surprise-Pause names the event it owns, the brief synchronised silence the whole population falls into when a salient cue or an unexpected reward appears, timed to coincide with the dopamine burst so that the two together open a window for learning.

Neuron marks it as the striatum's large cholinergic interneuron, whose pause depends on the Kv1 ion channel family and disappears in dyskinetic animals.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An interneuron is a neuron whose axon stays inside the region where its cell body lives, so it talks only to its neighbours.

The striatal cholinergic interneuron is the giant among those neighbours, and it is the sole source of acetylcholine inside the striatum.

Acetylcholine is a chemical messenger best known for telling muscles to contract, and inside the striatum it is the volume knob for everything else.

Unlike almost every other neuron in the forebrain, this cell fires on its own, continuously, without needing any input at all, at a steady three to ten spikes per second.

That is why electrophysiologists recording in awake monkeys named them tonically active neurons before anyone knew what chemical they used.

Their signature behaviour is not the firing but the interruption of it.

When a reward-predicting cue appears, or when something unexpected happens, thousands of these cells across the striatum pause together for one hundred to three hundred milliseconds, and that synchronous silence is one of the clearest population signals in the awake brain.

The pause briefly lifts acetylcholine's grip on the spiny neurons and on the dopamine axons, opening a window in which the striatum can be rewritten.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A large, pale, aspiny cell, meaning its dendrites are bare of the mushroom-shaped bumps that cover the spiny neurons.

The cell body is elongated and gives rise to two to five long, sparsely branching, gently varicose dendrites that radiate outwards for hundreds of micrometres, crossing freely between the striosome and matrix compartments.

Its axon is the extraordinary part: a single thin process that branches immediately and repeatedly into an arbour so dense that it looks like a fog in stained tissue.

SIZE:

The cell body is twenty-five to forty micrometres along its long axis in the human, and can exceed fifty micrometres, making it two to three times the diameter of the spiny neurons around it and by far the largest neuron in the striatum.

Its dendrites reach five hundred to a thousand micrometres from the soma.

Its axonal arbour fills a volume roughly one millimetre across and carries on the order of five hundred thousand varicosities, the small swellings from which transmitter is released.

Half a million release sites from one cell, in a structure whose spiny neurons have ten thousand inputs each, is why one percent of the cells can control the other ninety-five percent.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Dorsal striatal cholinergic interneurons of the caudate and putamen, the classic tonically active neurons, densest in the associative and sensorimotor territories.

• Ventral striatal cholinergic interneurons of the nucleus accumbens, which are somewhat less regular in their firing and are strongly implicated in the switch between reward seeking and disengagement.

• A population with unusually strong hyperpolarisation-activated current that shows rhythmic bursting rather than regular pacing.

• In the human specifically, a markedly uneven distribution, with the highest densities in the associative caudate and the lowest in the ventral striatum, a gradient that is far weaker in rodents.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Throughout caudate nucleus, putamen, nucleus accumbens core and shell, and the olfactory tubercle.

Their cell bodies concentrate at the striosome-matrix interface, sitting in the boundary shell around the patches with dendrites in both, which is a strong hint that one of their jobs is to compare what the two compartments are doing.

Density is not uniform: human studies using stains for choline acetyltransferase, the enzyme that makes acetylcholine, find them most numerous in the associative caudate.

NUMBER:

About one point three million in the two hemispheres, taken as roughly one point two percent of the striatum's one hundred and ten million neurons.

Confidence is moderate: the widely repeated figure is one to two percent of striatal cells in both rodents and humans, giving a defensible range of one point one to two point two million, and this entry deliberately takes the low end so that the interneuron budget for the striatum is not overspent.

That is about zero point zero zero one five percent of the roughly eighty-six billion neurons in the human nervous system, so this cell type is rarer than one in sixty thousand neurons and yet is a household name in neurology.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential around minus sixty millivolts, which is twenty-five millivolts more depolarised than the spiny neurons and already close to threshold.

It has no true rest, because it is an autonomous pacemaker: a hyperpolarisation-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated current, called the h current and carried by HCN2 and HCN4 channels, switches on whenever the cell dips low and drags it back up, and a persistent sodium current finishes the climb to threshold.

Its action potential is broad, one to two milliseconds at half height, several times wider than a spiny neuron's.

Each spike is followed by a deep and long afterhyperpolarisation lasting one hundred to three hundred milliseconds, produced by calcium-activated potassium channels of the small-conductance, or SK, family, and this is what keeps the firing rate slow.

The pause after excitation is not simple fatigue: it requires a slowly inactivating Kv1-family potassium current, and it is promoted by dopamine acting on D2 receptors on this same cell.

The pause therefore has two causes at once, a fast glutamatergic burst from the thalamus that loads the Kv1 current, and a dopamine surge arriving at the same moment.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Its dominant excitatory input is not from cortex but from the thalamus, specifically the centromedian and parafascicular nuclei, which report salient and unexpected events.

Cortical input is present but weaker, which is unusual in the striatum and is the anatomical reason this cell reports surprise rather than intention.

It receives dopamine directly onto its soma and dendrites and carries both inhibitory D2 receptors and excitatory D5 receptors.

It receives GABA from the low-threshold-spiking interneurons and from tyrosine hydroxylase interneurons, and it inhibits and is inhibited by its own kind through mutual connections.

Its output contacts the spiny neurons, the fast-spiking interneurons, the low-threshold-spiking interneurons, and, crucially, the dopamine axons themselves.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, unmyelinated, and enormous in total length, with estimates of tens of centimetres of axon packed inside a cubic millimetre of tissue.

Most of its half million varicosities do not form conventional synapses with a named partner; they release acetylcholine into the extracellular space, which then diffuses to receptors tens of micrometres away.

This is volume transmission, and it means the cell broadcasts rather than addresses.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine, made by choline acetyltransferase and broken down in the cleft by acetylcholinesterase, which the striatum contains in higher concentration than almost any other brain region.

It also co-releases glutamate, the main excitatory transmitter, from a subset of its terminals using the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT3, and there is evidence for GABA release as well, partly by taking up GABA made elsewhere.

A single cell that broadcasts an excitatory transmitter, an inhibitory transmitter and a slow modulator is a genuinely unusual object.

MYELINATION:

None.

Its axon is entirely unmyelinated, which suits a cell whose job is slow, diffuse, local broadcast rather than fast point-to-point delivery, and it means conduction within its arbour takes milliseconds to tens of milliseconds, spreading the signal out in time as well as space.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high and continuous, because the cell never stops firing and each broad spike admits a large amount of sodium and calcium that must be pumped back out.

Maintaining half a million release sites and their vesicle pools is a large protein and lipid burden, and the cell must synthesise acetylcholine continuously from choline, which it must import.

That choline demand is thought to make the cell vulnerable when membrane phospholipid turnover is disturbed, and this cell type is unusually sensitive to metabolic and oxidative stress.

PLASTICITY:

Its own synapses show long-term changes, but its greater importance is as the enabler of plasticity in other cells.

Acetylcholine acting on M1 muscarinic receptors on spiny neurons opens the door to long-term potentiation; the pause, by removing acetylcholine from M2 and M4 receptors, permits endocannabinoid-dependent long-term depression at the same synapses.

The burst-pause sequence therefore carves a temporal window, on the order of two hundred milliseconds wide, during which the striatum learns.

Its own excitability is reshaped by experience: after repeated cocaine exposure, and after motor learning, the size and reliability of its pause change measurably.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here do something not required elsewhere.

Acetylcholinesterase is expressed at extremely high levels in the striatal neuropil, much of it associated with glial and extracellular matrix elements, and it hydrolyses acetylcholine within milliseconds, which is what keeps a volume-transmitted signal from becoming a permanent bath.

Astrocytes supply the choline that the cell needs as raw material, and they express muscarinic receptors themselves, so they listen to the very transmitter they help supply.

Striatal astrocytes also respond to acetylcholine with calcium waves that then modulate nearby spiny neurons, making the glia an amplifier in this cell's broadcast circuit.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the striatum keeps working but loses its sense of occasion.

Ordinary and surprising events would be treated identically, because nothing would mark the moment at which something worth learning about had happened.

Dopamine release would also change, because acetylcholine acting on nicotinic receptors on dopamine axons drives a large fraction of dopamine release independently of the firing of dopamine cell bodies.

Concretely, the flavour lost is salience: the striatum's ability to punctuate a continuous stream of activity with the equivalent of an exclamation mark.

Clinically, the loss is not hypothetical, because post-mortem work in severe Tourette syndrome reports a fifty to sixty percent reduction in these cells in the associative striatum.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is a cell whose most important output is chemical broadcast, not spikes to a named partner.

Acetylcholine released from its varicosities reaches nicotinic acetylcholine receptors sitting on the axons of dopamine neurons, and activating those receptors makes dopamine axons fire locally and release dopamine even when the dopamine cell bodies in the midbrain are quiet.

That is a striking piece of circuit engineering: one striatal interneuron can command the release of a neuromodulator whose source is two centimetres away.

The cell is autonomously rhythmic, so it is a clock as much as a computing element.

It shows dendritic calcium signalling and calcium-dependent potassium feedback that shape its own rhythm, and it is subject to ephaptic and gap-junction interaction with the low-threshold-spiking interneurons, with which it forms a mutual control loop.

It engages in retrograde signalling too: spiny neurons release endocannabinoids and dynorphin that act back on cholinergic terminals.

Its housekeeping is demanding, with continuous vesicle recycling across half a million sites and continuous synthesis of the enzyme that makes its transmitter.

Its firing regulates local blood flow through nitric oxide produced by neighbouring interneurons that it excites, coupling its activity to the fuel supply of the region.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS. Glutamate from centromedian and parafascicular thalamus, delivered as short high-probability bursts; weaker glutamate from cortex; dopamine from substantia nigra pars compacta and ventral tegmental area acting on inhibitory D2 and excitatory D5 receptors; GABA from low-threshold-spiking interneurons, tyrosine hydroxylase interneurons, neighbouring cholinergic cells and spiny neuron collaterals; serotonin from dorsal raphe; and it needs no input to fire.

• OUTPUTS. Acetylcholine released by volume transmission from roughly five hundred thousand varicosities per cell, acting on M1 muscarinic receptors on spiny neuron dendrites (excitatory), M4 on direct pathway cells (inhibitory), M2 autoreceptors on itself, and nicotinic alpha4-beta2 and alpha6 receptors on dopamine axons (driving dopamine release); glutamate through VGLUT3 at a subset of terminals; some GABA.

• STATE. Membrane voltage; h current activation; persistent sodium activation; intracellular calcium; small-conductance calcium-activated potassium channel activation; slow Kv1 inactivation, which is the pause variable; vesicular acetylcholine pool; local extracellular acetylcholine concentration in a diffusion field.

• PARAMETERS. Capacitance about eighty to one hundred and fifty picofarads; input resistance one hundred to four hundred megohms; resting potential about minus sixty millivolts; threshold about minus forty-five millivolts; spontaneous rate three to ten hertz; action potential half width one to two milliseconds; axonal varicosities about five hundred thousand.

• TIME CONSTANTS. Interspike interval one hundred to three hundred milliseconds; afterhyperpolarisation one hundred to three hundred milliseconds; h current activation hundreds of milliseconds; pause duration one hundred to three hundred milliseconds; acetylcholine hydrolysis under one millisecond at the enzyme, with an effective extracellular lifetime of a few milliseconds; muscarinic receptor signalling hundreds of milliseconds to seconds.

• FAILURE MODE. Reported fifty to sixty percent loss in severe refractory Tourette syndrome, associated with tics; in Parkinson's disease and in levodopa-induced dyskinesia the pause is lost entirely, which is why anticholinergic drugs such as trihexyphenidyl were among the first useful Parkinson's treatments; in dystonia the balance between acetylcholine and dopamine tips toward acetylcholine; over-activity contributes to compulsive and stereotyped behaviour, and reduced pausing is reported after chronic psychostimulant exposure.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to reproduce the burst and pause of a tonically active striatal cholinergic interneuron in response to a surprising event.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative sixty.
Create a number variable called pause current with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called thalamic input with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called pacemaker drive with initial value zero point one five.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
Create a boolean variable called condition holds with initial value false.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
While clock is less than fifteen hundred, repeat the following steps.
    Set thalamic input to the glutamate conductance arriving from the parafascicular nucleus during this millisecond.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and pacemaker drive.
    Set membrane voltage to that sum.
    Calculate the product of pause current and zero point five.
    Calculate the difference of membrane voltage and that product.
    Set membrane voltage to that difference.
    Calculate the sum of membrane voltage and thalamic input.
    Set membrane voltage to that sum.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative forty five.
    Set condition holds to the result of that check.
    If condition holds is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add clock to the end of spike times.
        Set membrane voltage to negative fifty eight.
        Calculate the sum of pause current and zero point zero seven.
        Set pause current to that sum.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of pause current and zero point nine nine five.
    Set pause current to that product.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and one.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in spike times.
Display the total number of items in spike times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because what has to be verified here is a shape in time, the burst followed by a silence, and printing the interspike intervals in plain numbers is the clearest possible check of that shape.

import math
DT = 0.1                                  # ms
C_M, E_L, G_L = 80.0, -60.0, 1.0          # pF, mV, nS
V_TH, V_RESET = -45.0, -58.0
G_H, E_H = 1.0, -30.0                     # h current: the pacemaker
G_NAP, E_NA = 0.25, 55.0                  # persistent sodium: finishes the climb
G_KV1, E_K, TAU_KV1 = 1.2, -90.0, 200.0   # slow Kv1 current: makes the pause
def simulate(ms=1500.0, burst_at=700.0, burst_ms=20.0):
    v, kv1, t, spikes = E_L, 0.0, 0.0, []
    while t < ms:
        # a salient event arrives from the parafascicular thalamus
        g_glu = 6.0 if burst_at <= t < burst_at + burst_ms else 0.0
        i_leak = G_L * (v - E_L)
        i_h = G_H / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 75.0) / 8.0)) * (v - E_H)
        i_nap = G_NAP / (1.0 + math.exp(-(v + 55.0) / 5.0)) * (v - E_NA)
        i_kv1 = G_KV1 * kv1 * (v - E_K)
        i_glu = g_glu * (v - 0.0)
        v += -(i_leak + i_h + i_nap + i_kv1 + i_glu) / C_M * DT
        kv1 -= kv1 / TAU_KV1 * DT          # the pause variable decays slowly
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes.append(round(t, 1))
            v = V_RESET
            kv1 += 0.07                    # every spike loads the pause current
        t += DT
    return spikes
sp = simulate()
base = [s for s in sp if s < 700.0]
gap = max((sp[i + 1] - sp[i] for i in range(len(sp) - 1)), default=0.0)
print("baseline rate %.1f Hz over the first 700 ms" % (len(base) / 0.7))
print("longest silence anywhere in the run: %.0f ms (the pause)" % gap)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The biggest cell body in the striatum, bare dendrites reaching a millimetre, a broad spike with a deep long afterhyperpolarisation, ceaseless firing at three to ten hertz that nothing needs to trigger, and a synchronous silence when the world surprises you.

If a striatal recording never stops and then stops, it is this cell.

CHAPTER 70. STRIATAL PARVALBUMIN FAST-SPIKING INTERNEURONS (Split-Second Impulse-Curbing Neuron) (COG)

Fewer than one striatal cell in a hundred, wired to each other by holes in their membranes, firing two hundred times a second, and able to silence a spiny neuron with a single spike.

Parvalbumin is a calcium-binding protein used as a stain and never described any function at all.

Split-Second names the timescale, because this cell fires in bursts far faster than its neighbours and delivers its inhibition onto the cell body of the projection neuron, where a single well-timed input can cancel a spike outright.

Impulse-Curbing names the behavioural job, since suppressing these cells in animals releases premature, impulsive action initiation, and in people the same population is depleted in Tourette syndrome and dystonia.

Neuron marks it as a fast-spiking local inhibitory cell of the striatum.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is the striatum's veto cell.

Parvalbumin is a calcium-binding protein that this cell makes in large amounts, and it is used as the standard laboratory label for the type.

The cell takes glutamate, the main excitatory transmitter, straight from the cerebral cortex, and converts it within a couple of milliseconds into a powerful burst of inhibition aimed at the cell bodies of the surrounding medium spiny neurons.

This arrangement is called feedforward inhibition, meaning inhibition that arrives from the same source as the excitation and just behind it.

The functional consequence is a stopwatch: a spiny neuron gets a very short window, of the order of two to five milliseconds, in which cortical excitation can act before the inhibition catches up and shuts it down.

That window is what enforces coincidence detection in the striatum, and it is why only near-simultaneous cortical inputs can drive an action.

Because these cells contact hundreds of spiny neurons each and inhibit them at the cell body, where the axon begins, a single fast-spiking interneuron can determine whether a whole neighbourhood of projection neurons fires or not.

Behaviourally they are the cells that cancel the wrong movement, and their sudden recruitment underlies the ability to stop an action already in progress.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A medium to large aspiny or sparsely spiny cell with a round or fusiform body.

Its dendrites are smooth, moderately branched, and often varicose, forming a bushy tuft rather than the neat sphere of a spiny neuron.

Its axon branches profusely close to home and forms dense pericellular baskets, wreaths of terminals wrapped around the cell bodies and initial axon segments of spiny neurons, which is the most electrically effective place in the brain to place an inhibitory synapse.

Many of these cells carry a perineuronal net, a lattice of sugar-rich extracellular matrix that encases the soma and proximal dendrites like a string bag and restricts where new synapses can form.

SIZE:

Cell body ten to twenty-five micrometres, overlapping with but on average larger than the spiny neurons.

Dendritic field two hundred to five hundred micrometres.

Its local axonal arbour spans roughly three hundred to nine hundred micrometres and can contain thousands of terminals, contacting on the order of one hundred and thirty to five hundred spiny neurons.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Classic basket-forming cells that target spiny neuron somata, the majority.

• A smaller group whose axons target the axon initial segment specifically, the most powerful placement of all.

• Cells with restricted, dense local arbours versus cells with wide, sparse arbours; the wide type is better placed to coordinate across a whole functional territory.

• A dorsolateral, sensorimotor population that is denser and more strongly cortically driven, and a ventral population in the nucleus accumbens that is sparser and more strongly modulated by dopamine.

• In the primate and human striatum, the parvalbumin population is proportionally larger and more morphologically varied than in the rodent, and includes larger cells with longer dendrites that have no clean rodent equivalent.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Caudate nucleus, putamen, nucleus accumbens core and shell.

Distribution is strongly graded: densest dorsolaterally in the sensorimotor putamen and sparsest ventromedially, which mirrors the strength of the motor cortical projection.

They sit overwhelmingly in the matrix rather than the striosomes, and cells at the striosome-matrix interface send axons that respect the boundary, contributing to keeping the two compartments computationally separate.

NUMBER:

About zero point nine million in the two hemispheres, taken as roughly zero point eight percent of the striatum's one hundred and ten million neurons.

Confidence is low to moderate.

The commonly cited figure is about one percent of striatal neurons in rodents, and human counts are less certain but suggest a somewhat higher proportion, so a defensible range is zero point seven to two million; this entry takes a conservative value so that the striatal interneuron budget accommodates the remaining interneuron types.

That is about zero point zero zero one percent of the roughly eighty-six billion neurons in the human nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The name is literal.

Resting potential around minus seventy to minus eighty millivolts, a very short membrane time constant of one to three milliseconds, and an action potential lasting well under half a millisecond at half height, three to five times narrower than a spiny neuron's.

Sustained firing can exceed two hundred spikes per second with little slowing, which is possible only because of Kv3-family potassium channels that activate and deactivate extremely fast and so repolarise the membrane almost instantly after each spike.

Its characteristic laboratory signature is stuttering: at drive levels just above threshold it fires irregular high-frequency runs separated by unpredictable pauses, a behaviour traced to the slow inactivation and recovery of a Kv1-family current.

It is silent or near-silent at rest in the slice, but in the behaving animal it fires at ten to twenty spikes per second between events and bursts far higher during movement.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Cortical synapses onto this cell are stronger, more numerous per axon, and land closer to the cell body than the cortical synapses onto spiny neurons, which is precisely why cortex recruits it first.

It also receives thalamic input, dopaminergic input acting on D1-like and D2-like receptors, and cholinergic input from the tonically active neurons.

It receives GABA from other fast-spiking interneurons and from tyrosine hydroxylase interneurons, but almost none from spiny neurons, so the projection cells cannot easily switch off their own inhibitor.

On the output side it targets spiny neuron somata and proximal dendrites, contacts both D1 and D2 cells but statistically favours D2 cells, and also inhibits other fast-spiking interneurons.

The most important extra connection is not chemical at all.

These cells are joined to one another by gap junctions, protein channels made of connexin-36 that connect the interiors of two cells directly so that current flows between them, and each cell is coupled to something like thirty to forty percent of its immediate neighbours.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, mostly unmyelinated within the striatum, with a very high branch density and a total length of several millimetres packed into a small volume.

Conduction is fast for an unmyelinated axon because the distances are short, so the delay from a cortical spike to inhibition arriving at a spiny neuron soma is only about two to four milliseconds.

Release probability at its terminals is high, and the synapses depress strongly with repeated use, so the veto is strongest at the onset of a cortical volley.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA only, acting on GABA-A receptors containing the alpha1 subunit, which produce unusually fast inhibitory currents that decay in a few milliseconds.

That fast decay is a design decision by evolution: the veto must be sharp and then gone, so the next window can open.

MYELINATION:

Largely absent, although some proximal axon segments of striatal parvalbumin cells receive short, patchy myelin sheaths, a phenomenon documented for cortical parvalbumin interneurons and increasingly reported in the striatum.

Where present, this patchy myelination is thought to sharpen spike timing rather than to speed long-distance conduction, since the axon never leaves the region.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Among the highest of any neuron in the brain.

Firing two hundred times a second means pumping sodium and potassium back across the membrane two hundred times a second, and parvalbumin interneurons everywhere are packed with mitochondria and stain heavily for cytochrome c oxidase, the terminal enzyme of the respiratory chain.

This is not a neutral fact: the same high oxidative load makes them the cells most damaged by oxidative stress, which is why parvalbumin interneuron loss appears in schizophrenia, in ischaemia and in ageing across many brain regions.

The perineuronal net around them is partly protective, buffering ions and shielding the cell from oxidative damage.

PLASTICITY:

Its cortical input synapses show long-term potentiation and depression, and dopamine acting on D1-like receptors increases the cell's excitability, so dopamine sharpens the veto.

The perineuronal net is itself the plasticity switch: it matures during adolescence, and its formation closes a critical period by physically preventing new synapses onto the cell.

Enzymes that digest the net, including matrix metalloproteinase 9, can reopen it, and this is one of the most actively pursued routes to restoring juvenile plasticity in adults.

Gap junction coupling strength is also modulated, notably by dopamine, so the degree of synchrony across the network is itself a variable the brain can set.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The specialised support here is not a cell but a structure that glia build: the perineuronal net, assembled from aggrecan, brevican, neurocan and hyaluronan, laid down with the participation of astrocytes and oligodendrocyte precursor cells and largely unique to this cell class.

It buffers the large potassium and sodium fluxes that high-frequency firing produces, holds inhibitory and excitatory synapses in fixed positions, and slows the diffusion of ions away from the membrane.

Oligodendrocyte precursor cells also form direct synapses onto these interneurons in some regions, an unusual neuron-to-glia synapse, and they are the cells that would lay the patchy myelin.

Astrocytes near them are enriched for the potassium channel Kir4.1, which clears the potassium that fast firing dumps into the extracellular space.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the striatum loses its edge in time.

The window in which cortical inputs must coincide would widen from a few milliseconds to tens of milliseconds, so the striatum would accept sloppy, poorly synchronised inputs and would trigger actions on weak evidence.

Competing actions would no longer be suppressed at their outset, so movements would overlap and intrude.

This has been tested: selectively killing these cells in the dorsal striatum of mice reproduces the deficit found in post-mortem Tourette tissue and produces excessive grooming and anxiety, and acutely silencing them produces dyskinesias, involuntary movements.

The flavour lost is precision, both in time and in choice.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The gap junction network is the headline.

Because current flows directly between coupled cells, subthreshold voltages are shared, and a population of these interneurons can lock into synchrony without any chemical synapse firing at all.

Whether that synchrony emerges depends on how hard the cortex is driving them, which makes the network a switch between independent local vetoes and one coordinated region-wide veto.

Electrical coupling also produces small ephaptic effects, in which the current from one cell's spike slightly biases its neighbour's membrane through the extracellular space, aided by the tight, low-volume geometry the perineuronal net imposes.

The cell buffers its own calcium with parvalbumin, a slow buffer, which paradoxically permits a build-up of calcium late in a spike train and so gives the terminals a form of short-term facilitation on top of their depression.

It engages in immune signalling: perineuronal net remodelling is driven by microglia and by the complement system, and this cell type is a specific target of neuroinflammation.

It also participates in metabolic coupling to astrocytes through the lactate shuttle more heavily than most neurons, simply because its demand is so high.

Finally, the perineuronal net is a physical memory: its density records the cell's developmental history and constrains everything the cell can learn afterwards.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS. Strong glutamate from cortical layer five, particularly motor and premotor cortex, with large-amplitude, perisomatically placed synapses; glutamate from centromedian and parafascicular thalamus; dopamine from substantia nigra pars compacta acting on D1-like and D2-like receptors; acetylcholine from cholinergic interneurons acting on nicotinic receptors; GABA from other fast-spiking cells and from tyrosine hydroxylase interneurons; direct electrical current from thirty to forty percent of its immediate parvalbumin neighbours through connexin-36 gap junctions, with a coupling coefficient of about one to five percent.

• OUTPUTS. Fast GABA onto the somata and axon initial segments of one hundred and thirty to five hundred spiny neurons, favouring D2-type cells; GABA onto other fast-spiking interneurons; electrical current back through the same gap junctions.

• STATE. Membrane voltage; Kv3 activation; Kv1 slow inactivation, which is the stuttering variable; sodium channel availability; free and parvalbumin-bound calcium; short-term depression state of each output terminal; gap junction currents to each coupled neighbour.

• PARAMETERS. Capacitance about twenty to sixty picofarads; input resistance one hundred to three hundred megohms; membrane time constant one to three milliseconds; resting potential minus seventy to minus eighty millivolts; threshold about minus forty millivolts; maximum sustained rate two hundred hertz and above; gap junction conductance about zero point one to one nanosiemens per pair.

• TIME CONSTANTS. Membrane one to three milliseconds; action potential half width zero point two to zero point five milliseconds; refractory period under one millisecond; GABA-A alpha1 inhibitory current decay two to five milliseconds; cortex-to-inhibition latency two to four milliseconds; short-term depression recovery one hundred to five hundred milliseconds; Kv1 slow inactivation recovery hundreds of milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE. Roughly forty percent bilateral loss reported post-mortem in severe refractory Tourette syndrome, associated with tics; acute silencing produces dyskinesias in animals; loss of the perineuronal net and of parvalbumin expression is a robust finding in schizophrenia and disrupts the timing of action selection; in Parkinson's disease these cells become abnormally entrained to beta-band oscillations near twenty hertz and help propagate them; they are highly vulnerable to oxidative stress and to loss of blood flow.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to impose a short coincidence window on a spiny neuron using feedforward inhibition from a fast-spiking interneuron.
Create a number variable called cortical volley time with initial value one hundred.
Create a number variable called inhibition delay with initial value three.
Create a number variable called inhibition duration with initial value five.
Create a number variable called spiny excitation with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called spiny inhibition with initial value zero.
Create a boolean variable called interneuron fired with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called spiny fired with initial value false.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value zero.
While clock is less than three hundred, repeat the following steps.
    Check if clock is equal to cortical volley time.
    Set interneuron fired to the result of that check.
    If interneuron fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set spiny excitation to one point two.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of spiny excitation and zero point eight.
        Set spiny excitation to that product.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of cortical volley time and inhibition delay.
    Check if clock is greater than or equal to that sum.
    Set interneuron fired to the result of that check.
    Calculate the sum of cortical volley time and inhibition delay.
    Calculate the sum of that sum and inhibition duration.
    Check if clock is less than that sum.
    Set spiny fired to the result of that check.
    Check if both interneuron fired and spiny fired are true.
    Set spiny fired to the result of that check.
    If spiny fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set spiny inhibition to one point five.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set spiny inhibition to zero.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of spiny excitation and spiny inhibition.
    Check if that difference is greater than one.
    Set spiny fired to the result of that check.
    If spiny fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Display clock to the console.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and one.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because a whole-striatum model must step roughly a million cells that fire up to two hundred times a second while exchanging gap-junction current every time step, which forces a sub-millisecond step size and makes interpreter overhead the dominant cost.

/* Two electrically coupled striatal fast-spiking interneurons. Build with:
   cc -O2 -o fsi fsi.c -lm    and run with: ./fsi                        */
#include <stdio.h>
#define N 2
#define DT 0.025          /* ms, forced by 0.2 ms spikes */
#define STEPS 40000       /* 1000 ms of simulated time */
#define C_M 20.0          /* pF, small compact interneuron */
#define G_L 10.0          /* nS, giving a 2 ms membrane time constant */
#define E_L (-70.0)       /* mV */
#define V_TH (-40.0)      /* mV */
#define V_RESET (-55.0)   /* mV */
#define T_REF 0.5         /* ms; Kv3 channels repolarise this fast */
#define G_GAP 0.5         /* nS, connexin-36 electrical synapse */
int main(void) {
    double v[N], refr[N], drive[N], vn[N];
    int count[N], i, s;
    for (i = 0; i < N; i++) { v[i] = E_L; refr[i] = 0.0; count[i] = 0; }
    drive[0] = 320.0;     /* pA of cortical drive, just above rheobase */
    drive[1] = 310.0;     /* the partner is driven slightly less hard  */
    for (s = 0; s < STEPS; s++) {
        for (i = 0; i < N; i++) {            /* compute all updates first */
            int j = 1 - i;                   /* the coupled neighbour     */
            double i_gap = G_GAP * (v[j] - v[i]);
            double i_leak = G_L * (E_L - v[i]);
            if (refr[i] > 0.0) { vn[i] = V_RESET; refr[i] -= DT; }
            else vn[i] = v[i] + (i_leak + i_gap + drive[i]) / C_M * DT;
        }
        for (i = 0; i < N; i++) {            /* then commit them together */
            v[i] = vn[i];
            if (v[i] >= V_TH) { v[i] = V_RESET; refr[i] = T_REF; count[i]++; }
        }
    }
    printf("cell 0 fired %d Hz, cell 1 fired %d Hz\n", count[0], count[1]);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A parvalbumin-filled, perineuronal-net-wrapped, aspiny cell with a half-millisecond spike, sustained firing above two hundred hertz, stuttering just above threshold, baskets around spiny neuron cell bodies, and electrical coupling to its neighbours.

Nothing else in the striatum is this fast, and nothing else is wired to its own kind by direct electrical contact.

CHAPTER 71. STRIATAL SOMATOSTATIN, NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE, AND NEUROPEPTIDE Y LOW-THRESHOLD-SPIKING INTERNEURONS (Free-Spreading Messenger Neuron) (COG)

This is the only cell in the movement centre of your brain that speaks in a gas.

The old label was a committee minute listing three separate stains, and about seventy-three percent of the cells carrying any one of them carry all of them, so the list was largely redundant.

Free-Spreading names the unique tool and its consequence together, because this is the only neuron in the striatum that makes nitric oxide, a gas that leaks straight through membranes and acts on whatever is nearby rather than travelling down an axon to a chosen partner.

Messenger names the role that follows, since its influence spreads broadly over surrounding tissue and local blood vessels rather than being delivered to a named recipient.

Neuron marks it as a low-threshold-spiking interneuron with an unusually large dendritic and axonal spread and very high input resistance, so that a small input makes it fire.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The striatum is the big input gateway of the basal ganglia, the deep clump of brain tissue that chooses which movement or habit runs next.

This cell is a striatal interneuron, meaning a small local cell whose wiring stays inside the striatum instead of leaving it.

It carries three chemical badges at once: somatostatin, a small signalling protein; neuropeptide Y, another small signalling protein; and neuronal nitric oxide synthase, the enzyme that manufactures nitric oxide gas.

Neuroscientists usually call it the low-threshold-spiking interneuron, or the persistent low-threshold-spike cell, because it fires a burst at unusually gentle levels of excitation.

Its job is to be the striatum's slow, diffuse, chemical weather system.

Where other inhibitory cells deliver a sharp private veto, this one leaks a cloud of gas and peptides across a wide patch of tissue and changes how everything inside that patch learns.

It is the only known source of nitric oxide in the striatum, which makes it irreplaceable.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is oval or spindle-shaped and looks unremarkable under a microscope until you stain for its enzyme.

Three to five dendrites, the branching antennae that collect incoming signals, leave the cell body and travel long distances with very few branch points.

The dendrites are aspiny or sparsely spiny, meaning they lack the dense carpet of little mushroom-shaped input knobs that the striatum's main projection cells wear.

The axon, the single output cable, leaves the cell body or a proximal dendrite and breaks into a loose, sprawling, thin-fibred web that covers far more territory than the dendrites do.

Under the classic NADPH-diaphorase stain, a simple chemical reaction that marks nitric oxide synthase, these cells light up as a scattered constellation across the whole striatum.

SIZE:

The cell body measures roughly 12 to 25 micrometres across, which is medium-sized for a striatal neuron and about one fifth the width of a human hair.

The dendritic field spans about 300 to 600 micrometres.

The axonal field is far larger, commonly exceeding 1 millimetre and in some reconstructions covering several cubic millimetres of striatum.

Nitric oxide gas itself diffuses about 100 to 200 micrometres from its source before it is destroyed, so the cell's true zone of influence is a sphere, not a wire.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

At least two families carry neuropeptide Y in the striatum, and they are not the same cell.

• The persistent low-threshold-spike cell described here, which carries all three badges and has long, sparse, far-reaching processes.

• The neuropeptide Y neurogliaform cell, which has a dense, compact, bushy axon like a tangle of wool, does not usually make nitric oxide, and produces slow blanket inhibition through gamma-aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical.

Single-cell genetic surveys of the human dorsal striatum published in 2024 split the somatostatin family further still, so the two-way split above should be treated as the coarse, reliable version rather than the final answer.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It is scattered through the entire dorsal striatum, which in humans means the caudate nucleus and the putamen, and it continues without a break into the ventral striatum and the nucleus accumbens.

It is present in both the striosome compartment, the patchy islands of striatal tissue, and the matrix, the sea around them, with a modest preference for the matrix.

Density is higher near the border with the internal capsule, the great white-matter cable bundle that separates caudate from putamen, so this cell sits directly at the grey-matter-to-white-matter interface.

The same cell type reappears in the olfactory tubercle at the ventral edge of the striatal continuum.

NUMBER:

The human dorsal striatum holds roughly 110 million neurons, of which about 95 percent are medium spiny projection neurons, leaving about 5.5 million interneurons of all kinds.

Careful rat counts put the somatostatin, nitric oxide synthase, and neuropeptide Y interneurons at about 0.8 percent of all striatal neurons, and human post-mortem work finds them at under 1 percent.

Scaling that to the human striatum gives a best estimate near 1 million cells, with a defensible range of 500 thousand to 1.7 million.

Confidence is moderate for the fraction and low for the absolute human count, because no unbiased stereological census of this subtype in human tissue exists.

That is about 0.5 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the basal ganglia and about 0.001 percent of the 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Input resistance, which measures how strongly a cell's voltage responds to a given trickle of current, is extraordinarily high here, commonly 500 to 1,000 megaohms and sometimes higher.

A tiny input therefore produces a large voltage swing, so this cell is the striatum's hair trigger.

The resting voltage sits depolarised, often near minus 56 millivolts, close enough to threshold that the cell fires spontaneously without any input at all, typically at 1 to 10 spikes per second.

Its signature is the low-threshold calcium spike, a slow hump of voltage carried by T-type calcium channels that must first be released from inactivation by a period of hyperpolarisation.

On top of that sits a persistent sodium current that produces plateau potentials, long shoulders of sustained depolarisation lasting hundreds of milliseconds, during which the cell fires a ragged train of action potentials.

The result is a cell that answers a brief, weak input with a long, self-sustaining reply.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from the cerebral cortex, from the thalamus, from dopamine axons of the substantia nigra pars compacta, and from serotonin axons of the dorsal raphe nucleus, which strongly inhibit it.

Local cholinergic interneurons, the giant acetylcholine-releasing cells of the striatum, excite it, and the favour is returned, so the two form a mutually reinforcing pair.

Outputs are unusual in their targeting: gamma-aminobutyric acid synapses land on the dendrites and cell bodies of medium spiny projection neurons and on other interneurons, while nitric oxide is released without a synapse at all.

Some somatostatin cells in the striatum release glutamate, the main excitatory chemical, onto a different set of targets from the ones they inhibit, so a single cell can push and pull at once.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, roughly 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres in diameter, and conducts slowly at well under 1 metre per second.

It branches sparsely but travels far, and boutons, the small swellings where transmitter is released, are strung along it at wide intervals.

Many boutons sit next to no obvious postsynaptic partner, which is exactly what a cell built for chemical broadcasting should look like.

The axon never leaves the striatum.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases gamma-aminobutyric acid, which opens chloride channels and hushes the target cell within milliseconds.

It releases neuropeptide Y, which acts on Y1 and Y2 receptors, damps glutamate release, and is broadly protective and anti-seizure.

It releases somatostatin, which acts on the sst1 to sst5 receptor family and slows target cells over seconds.

Above all it makes nitric oxide from the amino acid arginine, and because nitric oxide is a small uncharged gas it simply diffuses through membranes, entering neighbouring cells and activating soluble guanylyl cyclase, an enzyme that makes the second messenger cyclic guanosine monophosphate.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable in the usual sense, and the reason matters.

This cell's axon is unmyelinated, because myelin, the fatty insulation that speeds conduction, is reserved almost entirely for long projection axons, and this axon never leaves its home nucleus.

Slow conduction is not a defect here, since the cell's message is a diffusing gas whose timescale is hundreds of milliseconds anyway.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Baseline demand is modest because the cell is small, fires slowly, and supports no long axon.

The exception is nitric oxide synthesis, which consumes nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, oxygen and arginine, and which is switched on by calcium entering through N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, a class of glutamate receptor that admits calcium.

Peptide manufacture adds a further load, because somatostatin and neuropeptide Y must be built in the cell body, packaged, and carried out along the axon, unlike gamma-aminobutyric acid which is made locally.

PLASTICITY:

The nitric oxide this cell releases is a required ingredient for long-term depression at corticostriatal synapses, the weakening of cortex-to-striatum connections that lets the striatum unlearn a habit.

The pathway runs nitric oxide to cyclic guanosine monophosphate to protein kinase G inside the receiving medium spiny neuron.

Dopamine acting on D1 and D5 receptors on this interneuron triggers the nitric oxide release, so this cell is one of the hands through which dopamine rewrites the striatum.

The cell's own synapses also change strength, and its excitability is tuned over hours by neuropeptide signalling.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes, the star-shaped support cells, do something specific here: they are direct targets of the gas, because nitric oxide crosses into them and alters their calcium signalling and their glutamate uptake.

Astrocytes also supply the arginine this cell needs, since neurons are poor at regenerating arginine and depend on the astrocytic citrulline-to-arginine pathway to keep nitric oxide production going.

Microglia, the brain's resident immune cells, are held in check by nitric oxide at low concentrations and provoked by it at high concentrations, so the glial mood of a striatal neighbourhood partly reflects this cell's firing rate.

Oligodendrocytes are not specially involved, since the axon is unmyelinated.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this one cell type and the striatum keeps moving but stops breathing properly and stops forgetting properly.

The gas is gone, so local blood vessels no longer dilate on demand and the tissue loses its fast metabolic response to activity.

Long-term depression at cortex-to-striatum synapses is crippled, so old habits stop being erasable and the striatum becomes a place that can only add.

Gap junction coupling between striatal cells, which nitric oxide opens, falls away, and the tissue loses a layer of slow electrical gossip.

Practically, the region would become rigid: still capable of selecting an action, no longer capable of quietly revising the selection.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Volume transmission is the headline: this cell releases a messenger with no synapse, no receptor on the outside of the target, and a sphere of influence roughly 100 to 200 micrometres wide.

It controls local blood flow, because nitric oxide relaxes the smooth muscle of arterioles, making this interneuron a direct participant in neurovascular coupling and therefore in what a functional brain scan actually measures.

It opens gap junctions, the protein tunnels that let ions pass directly between cells, so cortical input can change the electrical connectedness of striatal tissue through this cell.

It signals to the immune system, since nitric oxide is a classic microglial cue.

It has plateau potentials and dendritic calcium electrogenesis, so its dendrites perform local computation rather than passively summing.

It resists excitotoxic death: despite carrying working N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, it fails to generate damaging mitochondrial reactive oxygen species when overstimulated, which is why it is one of the very few striatal populations spared in Huntington's disease.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Cortical glutamate, event rate 0 to 50 hertz, excitatory conductance 0 to 5 nanosiemens.

◦ Thalamic glutamate, event rate 0 to 30 hertz.

◦ Cholinergic interneuron acetylcholine, producing slow depolarisation of 2 to 8 millivolts.

◦ Dopamine at D1 and D5 receptors, concentration 5 to 500 nanomolar, gating nitric oxide output.

◦ Serotonin from dorsal raphe, inhibitory, reducing firing rate by up to 100 percent.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid onto medium spiny neuron dendrites and somata, and onto fast-spiking interneurons.

◦ Nitric oxide, released as a concentration field, peak 10 to 100 nanomolar, radius 100 to 200 micrometres.

◦ Somatostatin and neuropeptide Y, released only above a burst threshold.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ T-type calcium channel availability, 0 to 1.

◦ Persistent sodium plateau flag, boolean.

◦ Intracellular calcium concentration in micromolar.

◦ Nitric oxide pool in nanomolar.

◦ Peptide vesicle stock, 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Input resistance 500 to 1,000 megaohms.

◦ Resting voltage minus 56 millivolts, spike threshold about minus 45 millivolts.

◦ Spontaneous rate 1 to 10 hertz.

◦ Nitric oxide diffusion coefficient about 3,300 square micrometres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane time constant 20 to 40 milliseconds.

◦ T-type de-inactivation about 50 to 100 milliseconds.

◦ Plateau potential duration 200 to 1,000 milliseconds.

◦ Nitric oxide lifetime about 100 to 500 milliseconds.

◦ Peptide replenishment tens of seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of nitric oxide signalling blocks corticostriatal long-term depression and is implicated in the rigid, over-consolidated habits of obsessive-compulsive disorder and in levodopa-induced dyskinesia.

◦ Messenger ribonucleic acid for nitric oxide synthase and somatostatin falls in the striatum in Huntington's disease even though the cells themselves survive, so the survivors go quiet rather than dying.

◦ Excess nitric oxide combines with superoxide to form peroxynitrite, a highly damaging molecule that injures neighbouring cells.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a striatal low-threshold-spiking interneuron that fires a rebound burst after inhibition and releases a diffusing cloud of nitric oxide.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -56.
Create a number variable called calcium channel availability with initial value 0.2.
Create a number variable called nitric oxide with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called burst record with initial value empty list.
While step is less than 4000, repeat the following steps.
    Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 0.
    Check if both step is greater than 500 and step is less than 2500 is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set inhibition to -14.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if voltage is less than -70.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of calcium channel availability and 0.01.
        Set calcium channel availability to that result.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of calcium channel availability and 0.995.
        Set calcium channel availability to that result.
    End the conditional block.
    Create a number variable called rebound drive with initial value 0.
    Check if both voltage is greater than -62 and calcium channel availability is greater than 0.5 is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set rebound drive to 18.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of inhibition and rebound drive.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and that result multiplied by 0.05.
    Check if voltage is greater than -45.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add step to the end of burst record.
        Calculate the sum of nitric oxide and 1.
        Set nitric oxide to that result.
        Set voltage to -55.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of nitric oxide and 0.999.
    Set nitric oxide to that result.
    Calculate the sum of step and 1.
    Set step to that result.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in burst record.
Display that number to the console.
Display nitric oxide to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this cell's behaviour is a small system of slow differential equations, and Python reads almost like the biology while running anywhere without extra libraries.

import math

dt = 0.1                  # milliseconds per step
v = -56.0                 # membrane voltage, millivolts
h = 0.2                   # T-type calcium channel availability, 0 to 1
no = 0.0                  # nitric oxide pool, arbitrary units
spikes = []

for step in range(4000):
    t = step * dt
    # a burst of pallidal-style inhibition from 50 ms to 250 ms
    i_inh = -22.0 if 50.0 <= t < 250.0 else 0.0
    # T-type channels recover only when the cell is hyperpolarised
    h_inf = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 78.0) / 5.0))
    h += dt * (h_inf - h) / 60.0
    # the low-threshold calcium current needs voltage AND availability
    m_inf = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(v + 58.0) / 6.0))
    i_t = 2.6 * m_inf * h * (120.0 - v)
    # leak toward a depolarised rest: this is a very high-resistance cell
    i_leak = 0.06 * (-56.0 - v)
    v += dt * (i_leak + i_t + 0.06 * i_inh) / 0.35
    if v > -45.0:
        spikes.append(round(t, 1))
        no += 1.0             # every spike lets calcium in, which makes gas
        v = -55.0
    no -= dt * no / 300.0     # nitric oxide is destroyed in a few hundred ms

print("spike count:", len(spikes))
print("first spikes after release (ms):", [s for s in spikes if s > 250.0][:5])
print("nitric oxide remaining:", round(no, 3))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only striatal cell that stains for NADPH-diaphorase, the only one that makes nitric oxide, and the only one that answers a pause with a slow calcium hump followed by a plateau hundreds of milliseconds long.

If a striatal cell has an input resistance near 1,000 megaohms, carries somatostatin, neuropeptide Y and nitric oxide synthase together, and is still alive in a Huntington's disease brain where the projection cells around it have vanished, it is this one.

CHAPTER 72. STRIATAL CALRETININ INTERNEURONS (Human-Enriched Quiet Sentinel Neuron) (COG)

In the human striatum the most numerous local helper cell is also the one we understand least, and it is defined by a protein whose only job is to mop up calcium.

Honesty comes first here, because the function of this cell is genuinely not established and inventing one would be worse than admitting the gap.

Human-Enriched records the single solid fact that survives every study, that calretinin-expressing cells are by far the most abundant interneuron class in the human and primate striatum while being scarce in rodents, which is why they are routinely left out of circuit models built on mice.

Quiet Sentinel states the position without overclaiming the role, since the cell is present in force, is inhibitory, and is watching, while its circuit function remains unmapped.

Neuron marks it as an interneuron and not one population but at least three structurally and molecularly distinct types hiding under a single stain.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a small inhibitory cell that lives entirely inside the striatum, the big input structure of the basal ganglia that sits deep under the cortex and turns intention into action.

Inhibitory means it releases gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main "quieten down" chemical messenger.

It is named for calretinin, a calcium-binding protein, which is a molecule that grabs free calcium ions inside the cell and holds them, acting like a sponge.

That sponge matters because every time a neuron fires, calcium floods in, and calcium is both a signal and a poison.

By soaking up that calcium the cell can fire long trains without triggering the calcium-activated potassium currents that normally slow a neuron down.

Its day job appears to be shaping the timing of the striatum's output cells, but its precise circuit role is still genuinely unsettled, and any honest account must say so.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is round or spindle-shaped, with dendrites, the branching input antennae, that are aspiny or only sparsely spiny.

Sparsely spiny means the dendrites lack the dense forest of little mushroom-shaped bumps that the striatum's main output neurons carry.

In rodents the dendrites are often tortuous and wandering; in primates they are more often straight and bipolar, meaning two main dendrites leave the cell body in opposite directions.

The axon, the output cable, stays local and branches into a modest bush a few hundred micrometres across.

SIZE:

In monkey and human striatum, calretinin cells fall into three size bands: small cells with a cell body 10 to 12 micrometres across, medium cells 10 to 20 micrometres across, and large cells 25 to 40 micrometres across.

A micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre, so even the large ones are far smaller than a full stop on this page.

In rodents the equivalent classes are tighter: small cells 7 to 11 micrometres, medium cells 12 to 15 micrometres, and large cells 12 to 20 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Three molecular subtypes are now recognised, and they map onto the size bands.

• Small cells that also carry secretagogin (Scgn) and the transcription factor SP8, with tortuous partly spiny dendrites, biased towards the front of the striatum.

• Medium cells with neither secretagogin nor SP8 nor Lhx7, with simple bipolar dendrites, spread evenly through the striatum.

• Large cells that carry Lhx7, with thick dendrites that branch rarely; in primates most of these giant calretinin cells also carry choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), the enzyme that makes acetylcholine, so they are really cholinergic cells wearing a calretinin coat.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives throughout the caudate nucleus and the putamen, the two halves of the dorsal striatum, and throughout the nucleus accumbens, the ventral striatum.

It is found both in the striosomes, which are chemically distinct patches, and in the surrounding matrix, and it is one of the few striatal cell types that does not respect that border strongly.

The small secretagogin-positive subtype is concentrated rostrally, meaning towards the front of the striatum near the head of the caudate.

Calretinin cells also crowd the interface between the striatum and the adjacent structures: they are dense in the subcallosal streak beneath the corpus callosum, and along the border zone where the putamen meets the external capsule.

NUMBER:

I allocate about 2.5 million calretinin interneurons across both striata, with a defensible range of 2 to 3.3 million.

That is roughly 45 to 60 percent of the striatum's non-projecting cells, taken from a total striatal budget of 110 million neurons of which about 95 percent are medium spiny projection neurons.

Confidence here is low to moderate, and there is an honest tension in the literature: stereological counting in monkeys puts calretinin cells at about 57 percent of striatal interneurons but also at about 8 percent of all striatal neurons counted, which if applied to humans would give nearly 9 million and would burst the conventional 5 percent interneuron allowance.

I hold to the lower figure to stay inside the regional budget, and flag the higher primate estimate as a real upper bound rather than pretending the matter is settled.

At 2.5 million this type is about 1.25 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the basal ganglia, and about 3 in every 100,000 of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the human brain.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Honesty first: the calretinin cell is the least well characterised electrically of all striatal interneurons, because no clean genetic handle exists to target it in living tissue.

What recordings exist describe a cell with high input resistance, roughly 300 to 800 megaohms, meaning a small injected current produces a large voltage swing.

Resting membrane potential sits around minus 70 to minus 60 millivolts, and action potentials, the brief electrical spikes that are the neuron's output, are relatively narrow at 0.6 to 1.0 milliseconds wide.

Firing is generally low threshold and adapting, and many cells show a depolarising sag, a slow drift back upward when hyperpolarised, which is the signature of the hyperpolarisation-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channel.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from the cortex, from the thalamus by way of the intralaminar nuclei, and from dopamine axons of the substantia nigra pars compacta.

Outputs go onto the dendrites and cell bodies of medium spiny neurons, the striatum's projection cells, and onto other interneurons.

Calretinin cells contact cholinergic interneurons and are contacted by them, forming a small mutual loop that is thought to set the striatum's background acetylcholine tone.

Unlike parvalbumin basket cells, calretinin cells appear to avoid the axon initial segment, so they modulate rather than veto their targets.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, under 0.5 micrometres in diameter, and stays within a sphere of roughly 200 to 500 micrometres around the parent cell body.

Conduction is slow, on the order of 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second, which is walking pace, so local delays of 0.5 to 2 milliseconds are typical.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The small and medium subtypes release GABA and are therefore inhibitory.

The large Lhx7-positive subtype, which in primates mostly also carries choline acetyltransferase, releases acetylcholine, a modulatory transmitter that changes how excitable other cells are rather than directly commanding them.

Calretinin itself is not a transmitter; it is a buffer sitting inside the cytoplasm.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none.

Striatal interneuron axons are unmyelinated, meaning they lack the fatty insulating wrap that speeds conduction, which is why they are slow and why they are cheap to run.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest by striatal standards, because the cell fires at low rates and has a small membrane area.

The calretinin buffer itself costs energy indirectly: calcium that is bound must eventually be pumped out, and calcium pumping is one of the largest single energy costs in any neuron.

PLASTICITY:

Little is known, and inventing detail here would be dishonest.

What is documented is developmental and pathological plasticity: calretinin cell numbers appear relatively preserved in Huntington's disease while medium spiny neurons die around them, so their fractional share of the striatum rises even as the striatum shrinks.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Its glial support is unremarkable, and it is worth saying that plainly rather than manufacturing a special relationship.

Striatal astrocytes around it do the standard work of clearing glutamate through the transporter GLT-1 and buffering potassium, exactly as they do for neighbouring cells.

The one modest point of interest is that striatal astrocytes also express monoamine oxidase, so the local chemical environment of this cell is unusually good at destroying dopamine.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the striatum would lose its most numerous source of soft, distributed, slow inhibition.

Parvalbumin basket cells would still deliver the hard, fast, veto-style inhibition, and the striatum would still work, but it would lose the gentle background tone that keeps medium spiny neuron ensembles from all rising together.

Losing the large cholinergic-calretinin cells specifically would strip the primate striatum of a modulatory layer that rodents simply do not have, which is one of the clearest cell-level differences between a rat striatum and a human one.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The defining non-spiking behaviour of this cell is calcium handling.

Calretinin has six calcium-binding domains and binds calcium with medium affinity and medium speed, which makes it a shaper of calcium signals rather than a simple sink.

The practical result is a buffer capacity of roughly 20 to 100, meaning that for every 21 to 101 calcium ions entering, only one stays free.

That changes dendritic computation, because local calcium spikes in the dendrite are damped and spread further before they decay.

Back-propagating action potentials, which are spikes that travel backwards from the cell body into the dendrites and tell the dendrite that the cell just fired, therefore leave a smaller but wider calcium footprint here than in an unbuffered cell.

Calretinin cells are coupled to each other and to other interneurons by gap junctions, direct pores between cells that let electrical current pass without any chemical step, which synchronises small clusters at gamma frequencies.

They participate in volume transmission, meaning dopamine and acetylcholine reach them by diffusing through the extracellular space rather than through a dedicated synapse.

Their housekeeping is dominated by calcium adenosine triphosphatase pumps and the sodium-calcium exchanger, both of which run continuously to undo what calretinin only temporarily holds.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Cortical glutamate from motor, premotor, prefrontal and limbic cortex, arriving as excitatory postsynaptic potentials of 0.5 to 3 millivolts each.

◦ Thalamic glutamate from the centromedian and parafascicular nuclei, arriving in short high-probability bursts.

◦ Dopamine from substantia nigra pars compacta axons by volume transmission, ambient concentration 5 to 50 nanomolar with transients to 1 micromolar.

◦ Local GABA from other interneurons and from medium spiny neuron axon collaterals.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA onto medium spiny neuron dendrites and somata, with unitary inhibitory postsynaptic potentials of 0.2 to 1 millivolt.

◦ GABA onto cholinergic and low-threshold-spiking interneurons.

◦ Acetylcholine, for the large Lhx7-positive primate subtype only, released by volume transmission.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential in millivolts.

◦ Free intracellular calcium concentration in micromolar.

◦ Bound calretinin fraction, from 0 to 1.

◦ Calcium-activated potassium conductance activation, from 0 to 1.

◦ HCN channel activation, from 0 to 1.

◦ Synaptic conductance for each of the glutamate and GABA inputs.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Input resistance 300 to 800 megaohms.

◦ Membrane time constant 15 to 30 milliseconds.

◦ Spike threshold minus 48 to minus 42 millivolts.

◦ Calcium buffer capacity 20 to 100.

◦ Soma diameter 10 to 40 micrometres depending on subtype.

◦ Axonal conduction velocity 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 15 to 30 milliseconds.

◦ Calcium extrusion 200 to 600 milliseconds because of the buffer.

◦ Calcium-activated potassium current activation 20 to 50 milliseconds.

◦ HCN sag 100 to 400 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In Huntington's disease these cells survive while their targets die, leaving inhibition that has nothing left to inhibit.

◦ In Tourette syndrome post-mortem studies report loss of parvalbumin and cholinergic interneurons in the caudate and putamen while calretinin cells are unchanged or relatively increased, shifting the striatum's inhibitory balance towards slow modulation and away from fast veto.

◦ If the calcium buffer is genetically removed, the cell accommodates rapidly and drops out of sustained trains, so the striatum loses tonic background inhibition during long movements.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire a striatal calretinin interneuron through a long input train and show that its calcium buffer holds back the calcium-activated potassium brake.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative seventy.
Create a number variable called free calcium with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called buffer capacity with initial value forty.
Create a number variable called potassium brake with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called synaptic drive with initial value forty.
Create a number variable called leak with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called net drive with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called calcium per spike with initial value zero point two.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called elapsed time with initial value zero.
While elapsed time is less than one thousand, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the quotient of free calcium divided by the sum of free calcium and zero point five.
    Set potassium brake to the product of that result and twelve.
    Calculate the difference of negative seventy and membrane voltage.
    Set leak to that result.
    Calculate the sum of leak and synaptic drive.
    Calculate the difference of that result and potassium brake.
    Set net drive to that result.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of net drive divided by two hundred.
    Set free calcium to the product of free calcium and zero point nine nine nine six seven.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative forty five.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to negative sixty.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and one.
        Calculate the quotient of calcium per spike divided by the sum of buffer capacity and one.
        Set free calcium to the sum of free calcium and that result.
    End the conditional block.
    Set elapsed time to the sum of elapsed time and zero point one.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

I chose Python because the point being made is a numerical comparison between two buffer settings, and Python states that comparison in the fewest lines with no build step.

# Striatal calretinin interneuron: calcium buffering versus spike-frequency adaptation.
DT = 0.1                # integration step, milliseconds
TAU_M = 20.0            # membrane time constant, milliseconds
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -70.0, -45.0, -60.0   # millivolts
CA_PER_SPIKE = 0.20     # micromolar of calcium entering per action potential
TAU_CA = 300.0          # calcium extrusion time constant, milliseconds
G_SK_MAX = 12.0         # maximum calcium-activated potassium brake, in millivolts
K_SK = 0.5              # micromolar calcium giving half of that brake
DRIVE = 40.0            # steady synaptic drive above rest, in millivolts

def run(kappa, ms=1000.0):
    """kappa is the calcium buffer capacity: 40 for calretinin, 0 for none."""
    v, ca, t, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, 0.0, 0
    steps = int(ms / DT)
    for n in range(steps):
        brake = G_SK_MAX * ca / (ca + K_SK)        # slow potassium opposition
        dv = ((V_REST - v) + DRIVE - brake) / TAU_M
        v += dv * DT
        ca -= ca / TAU_CA * DT                     # pumps grind the calcium down
        if v >= V_TH:
            v = V_RESET
            ca += CA_PER_SPIKE / (1.0 + kappa)     # the buffer swallows most of it
            spikes += 1
    return spikes

with_buffer = run(40.0)
without_buffer = run(0.0)
print("with calretinin buffer:", with_buffer, "spikes in 1 second")
print("without any buffer:    ", without_buffer, "spikes in 1 second")
print("adaptation removed by buffering:", with_buffer - without_buffer, "spikes")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only striatal cell class whose identity rests on a calcium sponge rather than on a transmitter, a receptor or a target.

If you see a striatal interneuron that is numerous, aspiny, slow, unmyelinated, GABA-releasing, and stains for calretinin but not parvalbumin, somatostatin or choline acetyltransferase, you have found the small or medium subtype.

If it stains for both calretinin and choline acetyltransferase and its cell body is 25 to 40 micrometres across, you have found the giant primate-only subtype, and you are looking at something a rodent brain does not contain.

CHAPTER 73. STRIATAL TYROSINE HYDROXYLASE-EXPRESSING INTERNEURONS (Dopamine-Marked Inhibitory Neuron) (COG)

This cell carries the machine that makes dopamine, gets counted as a dopamine neuron in a hundred papers, and does not release a molecule of dopamine.

The old label invites a straightforward error, because this cell carries tyrosine hydroxylase, the enzyme that begins dopamine manufacture, yet it does not release dopamine and is not a dopamine neuron.

Dopamine-Marked names the stain accurately while stripping the false implication, since the marker is real but the identity it suggests is not.

Inhibitory names what the cell actually is and does, a local cell that releases the inhibitory transmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid onto its neighbours.

Neuron marks it as a striatal interneuron whose removal in mice leaves reflexive movement intact but impairs goal-directed behaviour, so that the animal keeps working for an outcome it no longer values.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is a rare inhibitory interneuron inside the striatum that expresses tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), the rate-limiting enzyme in the manufacture of dopamine.

Rate-limiting means it is the slowest step in the chemical assembly line, so its presence is normally taken as proof that a cell makes dopamine.

Here that inference is wrong: careful work has shown these cells lack aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase, the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 and the dopamine transporter, which are the other three parts required to actually package and release dopamine.

Without those parts the cell can start the recipe but cannot finish it, cannot load the product into vesicles and cannot recapture it.

What it does instead is release GABA, powerfully, onto both the direct-pathway and indirect-pathway output neurons of the striatum, delaying their spiking.

It also does something almost no other striatal cell does: it fires long plateau potentials, self-sustaining depolarised shelves lasting hundreds of milliseconds, and dopamine itself lengthens them.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is small to medium and often fusiform, meaning spindle-shaped with a taper at each end.

Dendrites are aspiny or very sparsely spiny and typically number three to five, spreading 200 to 500 micrometres.

The axon arborises densely and locally, and in some subtypes it forms a remarkably tight basket-like plexus close to the parent soma.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 9 to 16 micrometres in the longest axis, so on the small side of striatal interneurons.

The whole dendritic field occupies a sphere roughly 300 to 500 micrometres in diameter, which is small enough to sit inside a single striatal matrix compartment.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Whole-cell recordings in mouse striatum sorted these cells into four electrophysiologically distinct types, labelled Type I through Type IV.

• Type I is by far the most abundant, has very high input resistance, and shows prolonged depolarisation-induced plateau potentials with a striking depolarisation block.

• Type II fires more regularly and shows a prominent slow afterhyperpolarisation.

• Type III has a low-threshold calcium spike and resembles the low-threshold-spiking interneurons of the striatum.

• Type IV shows fast, weakly adapting firing; together Type I and Type IV account for close to 80 percent of all striatal tyrosine hydroxylase interneurons.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It is scattered through the caudate nucleus, the putamen and the nucleus accumbens, with a clear bias towards the ventral and medial striatum.

Density is highest in the nucleus accumbens shell, in the subcallosal streak just under the corpus callosum, and along the medial edge of the caudate at the interface with the lateral ventricle and the subventricular zone.

It is also concentrated at the striatal border with the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and it appears in the olfactory tubercle, which is part of the ventral striatum.

The subventricular interface matters, because that is exactly where newly generated cells would enter if any of these cells are born in adulthood, which remains an open question.

NUMBER:

I allocate about 100,000 of these cells across both human striata, with a defensible range of 50,000 to 200,000.

Confidence is low, and the reasoning must be shown: stereological counting in mouse found roughly 2,700 such neurons per striatum, which is about 0.15 percent of that striatum's neurons, and scaling that fraction to a human striatal budget of 110 million gives about 165,000.

I take a slightly conservative 100,000 because human tissue is harder to stain reliably for tyrosine hydroxylase against a background of dense dopamine axons.

That makes this type about 0.05 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the basal ganglia, and roughly 1 in every million of the brain's 86 billion neurons.

The number is not fixed: after the dopamine supply is destroyed, the count of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive striatal cells rises, by about 1.9 times in one mouse model, and an upregulated population appears after MPTP lesioning in monkeys and in humans with Parkinson's disease.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Input resistance is exceptionally high, commonly 600 megaohms to over 1 gigaohm, meaning a current of a few tens of picoamperes moves the cell tens of millivolts.

Resting potential is unusually negative, around minus 80 to minus 70 millivolts, so the cell sits quiet until pushed.

Once pushed past roughly minus 55 millivolts, Type I cells enter a plateau potential lasting 200 to 1,500 milliseconds, during which they fire slowly and then often enter depolarisation block, a state where the cell is too depolarised to reset its sodium channels and simply stops spiking while remaining depolarised.

These plateaus are sensitive to dopamine and to agonists and antagonists of the D1 and D5 receptors, which is a rare and directly testable case of a transmitter changing a cell's operating mode rather than just its rate.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input arrives from the cortex and from the thalamic parafascicular nucleus.

Inhibitory input arrives from other striatal interneurons and from medium spiny neuron axon collaterals.

Dopamine axons from the substantia nigra pars compacta and the ventral tegmental area synapse on them and also bathe them by volume transmission.

Outputs are GABAergic and go onto both direct-pathway and indirect-pathway medium spiny neurons; paired recordings show unitary inhibitory potentials strong enough to measurably delay an evoked spike in the target cell.

They also inhibit each other and inhibit cholinergic interneurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, under 0.4 micrometres, unmyelinated, and confined within roughly 400 micrometres of the soma.

Conduction velocity is low, about 0.2 to 0.4 metres per second, so all of its influence is local and delayed by well under 2 milliseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA is the transmitter, full stop.

Tyrosine hydroxylase is present and functional as an enzyme, so the cell makes L-DOPA, the immediate chemical precursor of dopamine, but it cannot convert, store or release dopamine itself.

Some of these cells co-express neuropeptide Y or somatostatin, peptides that act slowly and over longer distances than GABA.

MYELINATION:

None.

This is an unmyelinated local circuit cell, and its speed is irrelevant to its function because plateau potentials operate on a timescale a thousand times slower than conduction delay.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low at rest, because the cell is quiet and small.

During a plateau potential the demand rises sharply, because the cell holds itself depolarised for up to a second and the sodium-potassium pump must work continuously to undo the sodium load.

Running tyrosine hydroxylase also costs tetrahydrobiopterin and molecular oxygen, and produces hydrogen peroxide as a by-product, so the cell carries a small permanent oxidative burden that a plain GABA interneuron does not.

PLASTICITY:

The headline plasticity here is phenotypic, meaning the cell changes what proteins it expresses rather than changing a synapse.

After dopamine denervation the striatum shows a marked increase in tyrosine hydroxylase-positive cells, most likely because existing interneurons switch the gene on rather than because new cells are born.

This looks like an attempted compensation for lost dopamine, and it is a failed one: stimulating these cells does not elicit striatal dopamine release in either control or lesioned tissue.

Their GABAergic synapses onto medium spiny neurons also show ordinary short-term depression during repetitive firing.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Its glial support is largely unremarkable, but there is one genuinely specific point.

Striatal astrocytes contain aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase, the very enzyme this neuron lacks, so L-DOPA made by this cell can in principle be converted to dopamine outside it.

That makes the neuron and the astrocyte a potential two-part factory, which is a real and testable hypothesis rather than an established fact, and any simulation should mark it as such.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the ventral striatum would lose a slow, latching, dopamine-tunable brake.

Most striatal inhibition is fast and event-locked; this one commits to a decision and holds it for up to a second, which is roughly the timescale of a whole action rather than a single movement.

The striatum would also lose the false-alarm signal that has misled dopamine researchers for decades, and, more seriously, it would lose whatever compensation the parkinsonian striatum is attempting when it multiplies these cells.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The plateau potential is the whole story, and it is not integrate and fire in any sense.

It is a bistable membrane, meaning the cell has two stable operating states, a quiet one near minus 75 millivolts and a depolarised one near minus 40 millivolts, and a brief input flips it between them.

Bistability of this kind is generated by a persistent sodium current and a calcium-activated non-selective cation current, and it turns a millisecond input into a second-long output.

D1 and D5 receptor activation raises cyclic adenosine monophosphate inside the cell and lengthens the plateau, so dopamine sets how long the latch holds.

The cell releases GABA from conventional axon terminals and, through its peptide co-transmitters, by volume transmission that does not need a synapse at all.

It carries the oxidative chemistry of catecholamine synthesis without the protective vesicular packaging that dopamine neurons use, which is a plausible reason these cells are stress-sensitive.

Back-propagating action potentials into its dendrites are unusually effective because the dendrites are short and the cell is electrically compact.

Its housekeeping includes continuous degradation of tyrosine hydroxylase by the ubiquitin-proteasome system, the cell's protein shredder, which is one lever by which enzyme levels change so quickly after denervation.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Cortical glutamate, chiefly from limbic and prefrontal cortex, excitatory postsynaptic potentials 1 to 5 millivolts given the high input resistance.

◦ Thalamic glutamate from the parafascicular nucleus.

◦ Dopamine at D1 and D5 receptors, ambient 5 to 50 nanomolar, transients to 1 micromolar, acting as a plateau-duration control rather than a drive.

◦ Local GABA from other interneurons and from medium spiny neuron collaterals.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA onto direct-pathway and indirect-pathway medium spiny neurons, unitary inhibitory postsynaptic potentials 0.5 to 2 millivolts.

◦ GABA onto cholinergic interneurons and onto other tyrosine hydroxylase interneurons.

◦ Neuropeptide Y or somatostatin by volume transmission, for the subset that carries them.

◦ L-DOPA released or leaked locally, with no dopamine output.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential in millivolts.

◦ Plateau flag, true or false.

◦ Plateau time remaining in milliseconds.

◦ Depolarisation block flag, true or false.

◦ Cyclic adenosine monophosphate level as a proxy for D1 and D5 occupancy, 0 to 1.

◦ Synaptic conductances for glutamate and GABA.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Input resistance 600 to 1,200 megaohms.

◦ Resting potential minus 80 to minus 70 millivolts.

◦ Plateau trigger threshold minus 58 to minus 52 millivolts.

◦ Baseline plateau duration 200 to 600 milliseconds, extended up to about 1,500 milliseconds by full D1 and D5 occupancy.

◦ Soma diameter 9 to 16 micrometres.

◦ Population fraction 0.05 to 0.2 percent of striatal neurons in health, up to about twice that after dopamine loss.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 30 to 60 milliseconds, long because of the high input resistance.

◦ Plateau 200 to 1,500 milliseconds.

◦ GABA synaptic decay 5 to 12 milliseconds.

◦ Phenotypic upregulation of tyrosine hydroxylase after denervation, days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In Parkinson's disease the population expands but cannot supply dopamine, so the striatum gains extra GABAergic braking at exactly the moment it needs less of it, which may worsen rather than relieve slowness of movement.

◦ Runaway plateaus, if the persistent sodium current is not repolarised, lock the cell in depolarisation block and silence its output entirely despite it being maximally depolarised.

◦ Because this cell is routinely miscounted as dopaminergic, any model that treats striatal tyrosine hydroxylase staining as dopamine supply will overestimate striatal dopamine after nigral loss.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make a striatal tyrosine hydroxylase interneuron latch into a plateau potential and to let dopamine set how long the latch holds.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative seventy five.
Create a number variable called dopamine occupancy with initial value one.
Create a number variable called base plateau duration with initial value four hundred.
Create a number variable called plateau remaining with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called plateau duration with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called refractory remaining with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called elapsed time with initial value zero.
Calculate the product of dopamine occupancy and one point five.
Calculate the sum of one and that result.
Set plateau duration to the product of base plateau duration and that result.
While elapsed time is less than one thousand five hundred, repeat the following steps.
    Set drive to zero.
    Check if elapsed time is less than sixty.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to forty five.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if plateau remaining is greater than zero.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to the sum of drive and thirty four.
        Set plateau remaining to the difference of plateau remaining and zero point five.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if refractory remaining is greater than zero.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set refractory remaining to the difference of refractory remaining and zero point five.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of negative seventy five and membrane voltage.
        Calculate the sum of that result and drive.
        Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of that result divided by eighty.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if both membrane voltage is greater than negative fifty five and plateau remaining is less than or equal to zero is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set plateau remaining to plateau duration.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative forty five.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and one.
        Set membrane voltage to negative sixty.
        Set refractory remaining to four.
    End the conditional block.
    Set elapsed time to the sum of elapsed time and zero point five.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

I chose Python because a plateau potential is a small state machine and Python keeps the states visible instead of burying them in numerical machinery.

# Striatal TH interneuron: a dopamine-tunable plateau potential.
DT = 0.5                # milliseconds per step
V_REST = -75.0          # this cell rests unusually negative
V_TH, V_RESET = -45.0, -60.0
TAU_M = 40.0            # long, because input resistance is about 1 gigaohm
TRIGGER = -55.0         # voltage that lights the plateau
PLATEAU_DRIVE = 34.0    # millivolts of self-sustaining depolarisation
PLATEAU_BASE_MS = 400.0 # plateau length with no dopamine on board
REFRACTORY_MS = 4.0

def simulate(d1_occupancy, stim_mv=45.0, stim_ms=60.0, total_ms=1500.0):
    """d1_occupancy runs 0.0 to 1.0 and only changes plateau DURATION."""
    duration = PLATEAU_BASE_MS * (1.0 + 1.5 * d1_occupancy)
    v, plateau_left, refr, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, 0.0, 0
    for n in range(int(total_ms / DT)):
        t = n * DT
        drive = stim_mv if t < stim_ms else 0.0
        if plateau_left > 0.0:                 # the latch is closed
            drive += PLATEAU_DRIVE
            plateau_left -= DT
        if refr > 0.0:
            refr -= DT
        else:
            v += ((V_REST - v) + drive) / TAU_M * DT
        if t < stim_ms and v > TRIGGER and plateau_left <= 0.0:
            plateau_left = duration            # latch closes once, on the input
        if v >= V_TH:
            spikes, v, refr = spikes + 1, V_RESET, REFRACTORY_MS
    return duration, spikes

for occupancy in (0.0, 0.5, 1.0):
    dur, n = simulate(occupancy)
    print(f"D1/D5 occupancy {occupancy:.1f}: plateau {dur:.0f} ms, {n} spikes")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the cell that stains positive for the dopamine-making enzyme and is not a dopamine cell.

Find a striatal interneuron with input resistance approaching a gigaohm, a resting potential near minus 75 millivolts, a plateau potential lasting most of a second that dopamine makes longer, GABA as its only output, and tyrosine hydroxylase but no dopamine transporter, and there is nothing else it can be.

Its population size is also a diagnostic in itself: if the striatal count of these cells has roughly doubled, the nigrostriatal dopamine system has already been damaged.

CHAPTER 74. GLOBUS PALLIDUS PROTOTYPIC NEURONS (Nonstop Braking Relay Neuron) (COG)

This neuron has never once been silent in your entire life; it fires about sixty times a second, awake, asleep and under anaesthetic, and the message is carried in when it stops.

The old name was an address joined to the empty word prototypic, which said only that this type was described first.

Nonstop names its defining electrical habit, a high and unusually regular background firing rate that never lets up, so downstream targets sit under permanent inhibition.

Braking names what that constant output achieves, holding movement in check until something lifts the pressure.

Relay names its position, since these cells make up roughly two-thirds of the external pallidum and are the main population feeding the subthalamic nucleus, passing the indirect route onward.

Neuron marks it as a projection cell rather than a local one.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is the dominant cell of the external globus pallidus (GPe), a pale, iron-rich slab of tissue wedged between the putamen and the internal segment of the pallidum.

Pale is literal: pallidus is Latin for pale, and the structure looks light because it is criss-crossed by bundles of myelinated fibres, myelin being the fatty white insulation wrapped around axons.

The prototypic neuron is inhibitory, releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main quieten-down messenger.

Its defining trick is autonomous pacemaking, meaning it generates its own action potentials, the brief electrical spikes that are a neuron's output, with no input at all.

Cut every connection to it in a slice of living tissue and it keeps firing at 20 to 60 spikes per second forever.

Its job is therefore not to fire but to pause, and its main target is the subthalamic nucleus, which it holds down continuously; a pause in this cell is a release of the subthalamic nucleus.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is large and either oval or polygonal, and only three to five thick primary dendrites leave it.

The dendrites are long, straight, and branch rarely, and they are aspiny or carry only a scattering of spines.

The most striking feature is the shape of the dendritic field: it is disc-like, a flat pancake rather than a sphere, and the plane of the disc is oriented perpendicular to the incoming striatopallidal fibres.

That geometry is functionally deliberate: a flat sheet held across the grain of the incoming cables intercepts the maximum number of different striatal axons, which is why one pallidal neuron can sample hundreds of striatal cells.

The axon leaves the cell body or a proximal dendrite, gives off local collaterals inside the pallidum, and then runs out as a thick myelinated cable.

SIZE:

Cell bodies measure roughly 40 by 23 micrometres in the largest class and 29 by 17 micrometres in a smaller class, so 20 to 40 micrometres across is the working range.

A micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre.

The dendritic disc is enormous relative to the cell body: roughly 1,000 by 1,000 micrometres across the face of the disc and only about 200 to 400 micrometres thick.

Total dendritic length per cell runs to several millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Prototypic neurons are themselves heterogeneous, and the useful divisions are molecular and by target.

• Parvalbumin-positive prototypic cells, the largest group, carrying the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin and the transcription factor Nkx2-1, fast-firing, projecting mainly to the subthalamic nucleus.

• Lhx6-positive, parvalbumin-negative prototypic cells, firing somewhat more slowly, biased towards the substantia nigra and the striatum.

• Npas1-positive prototypic cells, a minority within the Npas1 family, which is otherwise dominated by the arkypallidal type described next.

• A small population of cholinergic pallidal neurons that belong developmentally to the basal forebrain and project to the cortex, usually counted separately.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives in the external segment of the globus pallidus, on both sides of the brain.

The external globus pallidus is bounded laterally by the external medullary lamina and the putamen, and medially by the internal medullary lamina and the internal globus pallidus.

Prototypic cells are found throughout, but are relatively enriched in the medial and ventral portions, whereas arkypallidal cells favour the lateral border.

The lateral border with the putamen is a genuine interface and should be modelled as one: it is where the striatopallidal axon bundles enter, and pallidal dendrites lie flat across them.

Equivalent cells occupy the ventral pallidum beneath the anterior commissure, at the interface between the pallidum and the nucleus accumbens.

NUMBER:

I allocate about 650,000 prototypic neurons across both external pallidal segments, with a defensible range of 550,000 to 750,000.

The reasoning is explicit: the regional budget gives the whole globus pallidus about 1.5 million neurons, human stereology puts the pallidum at roughly 688,000 to 711,000 neurons per side which is consistent with that budget, the external segment holds roughly two thirds of pallidal neurons, and prototypic cells are about two thirds of the external segment.

Confidence is moderate for the total and lower for the prototypic fraction, because the prototypic and arkypallidal split has been established mainly in rodents and assumed to carry over to humans.

I am counting only external segment prototypic cells here; internal globus pallidus output neurons are a separate type and are not counted in my share.

That makes this type about 0.33 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the basal ganglia, and about 8 in every million of the brain's 86 billion neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential is unusually depolarised at around minus 55 millivolts, and the cell never truly rests there because it is always climbing towards threshold.

Autonomous firing is driven by a persistent sodium current, a sodium leak that does not switch off, together with the hyperpolarisation-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) current, which turns on when the cell is pushed downward and pulls it back up.

In an isolated slice the rate is 20 to 60 spikes per second; in the intact awake brain, prototypic cells discharge at 40 to 70 spikes per second in primates, with high regularity, interrupted by characteristic pauses.

Action potentials are narrow, 0.4 to 0.7 milliseconds, and are followed by a fast afterhyperpolarisation driven by large-conductance and small-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels.

Input resistance is modest, 60 to 200 megaohms, and the membrane time constant is short, 5 to 15 milliseconds, so this cell is fast and hard to push around.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The dominant input is GABA from indirect-pathway medium spiny neurons of the striatum, arriving on the soma and proximal dendrites through large boutons packed with vesicles.

Convergence is extreme: several hundred striatal neurons contact each pallidal cell, and the striatopallidal synapse is strong, reliable and strongly depressing during repetitive use.

Excitatory glutamate arrives from the subthalamic nucleus onto distal dendrites, closing a reciprocal loop, and from the thalamic parafascicular nucleus.

Local GABA arrives from neighbouring pallidal cells through axon collaterals, and from arkypallidal cells.

Outputs go to the subthalamic nucleus above all, and also to the internal globus pallidus, the substantia nigra pars reticulata, the thalamic reticular nucleus, the pedunculopontine nucleus, and back to striatal interneurons, especially parvalbumin basket cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The main axon is 1 to 3 micrometres in diameter and myelinated.

Conduction velocity is high for a subcortical inhibitory cell, roughly 2 to 8 metres per second, so a pallidal pause reaches the subthalamic nucleus within 1 to 3 milliseconds.

A single prototypic axon gives rise to several hundred to a few thousand terminals in the subthalamic nucleus, and it targets subthalamic cell bodies and proximal dendrites, the positions of maximum control.

Local collaterals within the pallidum are extensive and give each cell a strong say over its neighbours.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA, released at conventional fast synapses acting on GABA-A receptors, which are chloride channels that open in about a millisecond.

Parvalbumin-positive prototypic cells co-express the vesicular GABA transporter at high levels and sustain release at frequencies above 100 hertz without running out.

Some prototypic neurons co-release the peptide enkephalin, and a small distinct pallidal population releases acetylcholine, though that population is usually treated as basal forebrain rather than pallidal proper.

MYELINATION:

Heavy, and it is the reason the structure looks pale.

Prototypic axons are myelinated by oligodendrocytes with internodes, the insulated segments between gaps, of roughly 100 to 200 micrometres.

The myelin here is functionally essential rather than incidental: the whole point of this cell is that a pause arrives at the subthalamic nucleus fast enough to matter within a single beta-frequency cycle of about 50 milliseconds.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high, and among the highest per cell in the entire basal ganglia.

Firing 60 times a second continuously for a lifetime means the sodium-potassium pump runs flat out, and the pump is the single biggest consumer of adenosine triphosphate in the brain.

Mitochondria are dense in the soma and along the proximal dendrites, and the pallidum has a high capillary density to match.

The pallidum also accumulates more iron than any other brain region, and iron is needed for mitochondrial enzymes but catalyses damaging free-radical chemistry when it accumulates.

PLASTICITY:

Striatopallidal synapses show robust short-term depression and also long-term potentiation and depression that depend on dopamine D2 receptors.

The cell's own pacemaking is plastic: after dopamine is lost, prototypic neurons lose reliable autonomous firing, partly through maladaptive changes involving N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors and adenosine-triphosphate-sensitive potassium channels, and they begin to fire in bursts locked to beta rhythms.

Homeostatic scaling of the persistent sodium current lets these cells claw back a target firing rate over days after a perturbation.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here are genuinely unusual, in three specific ways.

First, oligodendrocyte density is exceptionally high because the pallidum is threaded with myelinated bundles, so a prototypic cell body sits in a sea of white matter rather than grey.

Second, pallidal microglia and astrocytes carry more ferritin, the iron storage protein, than glia almost anywhere else, and this is why the pallidum lights up on iron-sensitive magnetic resonance imaging and why the diseases called neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation strike here first.

Third, the pallidum is a preferential site of manganese deposition, so pallidal astrocytes are the first cells in the brain to swell in manganese poisoning and in liver failure, producing a parkinsonism that starts in this exact cell's neighbourhood.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the subthalamic nucleus loses its leash.

The external pallidum would stop being a brake and would become an empty relay, and the entire indirect pathway, the route by which the basal ganglia suppress unwanted movements, would have no output stage.

Concretely the region would lose its continuous, high-frequency, regular tonic tone, the steady hum against which every striatal pause is read; without that hum a striatal pause would carry no information, because there would be nothing to interrupt.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell is a clock, not an integrator, and the distinction is the point.

Its computation is phase advance and phase delay: an input does not decide whether it fires but when in the ongoing cycle it fires, so the correct model is an oscillator with a phase response curve rather than a leaky bucket filling towards threshold.

Dendritic computation is shaped by the disc geometry, which makes the cell approximately a two-dimensional integrator sampling across, rather than along, the striatal fibre bundles.

Back-propagating action potentials invade the long straight dendrites efficiently because those dendrites are thick and unbranched, so every spike floods the whole dendritic disc with calcium.

Prototypic cells are electrically coupled to each other by gap junctions in early life, and the coupling persists at low levels in adults, contributing to synchronisation.

They are also strongly subject to ephaptic effects, meaning the extracellular electric field generated by thousands of neighbours firing together nudges each cell's membrane directly through the extracellular fluid; in the tightly packed, myelin-bounded pallidum these fields are large enough to matter, and they are one plausible amplifier of parkinsonian beta synchrony.

Local axon collaterals give the population lateral inhibition and mutual desynchronisation, and losing that mutual inhibition is one route to pathological oscillation.

The cell instructs its own myelination through activity-dependent signalling to oligodendrocyte precursors, so its high firing rate is partly why the region is so heavily myelinated.

Housekeeping is dominated by mitochondrial turnover and by iron handling, and both are stressed by the sheer rate of firing.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ GABA from indirect-pathway striatal medium spiny neurons, 300 to 1,000 converging cells, unitary inhibitory postsynaptic currents 50 to 500 picoamperes at the soma, strongly depressing.

◦ Glutamate from subthalamic nucleus neurons onto distal dendrites, unitary excitatory postsynaptic potentials 0.2 to 1 millivolt, facilitating.

◦ Glutamate from the thalamic parafascicular nucleus.

◦ GABA from local pallidal collaterals and from arkypallidal neurons.

◦ Dopamine from substantia nigra pars compacta collaterals acting at D2 receptors, ambient 5 to 50 nanomolar.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA to subthalamic nucleus somata and proximal dendrites, the principal target.

◦ GABA to internal globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata.

◦ GABA to thalamic reticular nucleus and pedunculopontine nucleus.

◦ GABA to striatal parvalbumin interneurons.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential in millivolts.

◦ Persistent sodium current activation, 0 to 1.

◦ HCN current activation, 0 to 1.

◦ Calcium-activated potassium activation, 0 to 1.

◦ Intracellular calcium in micromolar.

◦ Striatopallidal synaptic depression variable, 0 to 1.

◦ Instantaneous oscillation phase, 0 to 2 pi, for network synchrony models.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Autonomous firing rate 40 to 70 spikes per second in vivo, 20 to 60 in isolated slice.

◦ Resting potential minus 58 to minus 52 millivolts.

◦ Spike threshold minus 47 to minus 43 millivolts.

◦ Input resistance 60 to 200 megaohms.

◦ Soma 20 to 40 micrometres; dendritic disc about 1,000 micrometres across and 200 to 400 micrometres thick.

◦ Axon diameter 1 to 3 micrometres, conduction velocity 2 to 8 metres per second.

◦ Population share about two thirds of external pallidal neurons.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 5 to 15 milliseconds.

◦ Interspike interval 14 to 25 milliseconds.

◦ GABA-A synaptic decay 5 to 10 milliseconds.

◦ Striatopallidal short-term depression recovery 200 to 800 milliseconds.

◦ HCN activation 100 to 500 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In Parkinson's disease these cells lose regular pacemaking and burst in synchrony at beta frequencies of 13 to 30 hertz, and the strength of that beta rhythm tracks how rigid and slow the patient is; suppressing it with deep brain stimulation improves movement.

◦ In Huntington's disease the external pallidum degenerates earlier and more severely than the internal segment, removing the brake on the subthalamic nucleus and contributing to involuntary writhing movements.

◦ In neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation and in manganese poisoning, iron and manganese loading of this exact neighbourhood kills these cells and produces parkinsonism plus dystonia.

◦ If the persistent sodium current fails, the cell falls silent, the subthalamic nucleus is released, and basal ganglia output rises indiscriminately.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run a prototypic pallidal neuron as an autonomous pacemaker and to make it pause when a barrage of striatal inhibition arrives.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative fifty five.
Create a number variable called gaba conductance with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called pacemaker drive with initial value sixteen.
Create a number variable called synaptic current with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called leak with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called net drive with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called pause window spikes with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called elapsed time with initial value zero.
While elapsed time is less than one thousand, repeat the following steps.
    Check if both elapsed time is greater than or equal to five hundred and elapsed time is less than five hundred and sixty is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the remainder of elapsed time divided by ten.
        Check if that result is less than zero point zero two five.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set gaba conductance to the sum of gaba conductance and zero point nine.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Set gaba conductance to the product of gaba conductance and zero point nine nine five eight.
    Calculate the difference of negative eighty and membrane voltage.
    Set synaptic current to the product of gaba conductance and that result.
    Calculate the difference of negative fifty five and membrane voltage.
    Set leak to that result.
    Calculate the sum of leak and pacemaker drive.
    Calculate the sum of that result and synaptic current.
    Set net drive to that result.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of net drive divided by four hundred and eighty.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to negative forty five.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to negative sixty.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and one.
        Check if both elapsed time is greater than or equal to five hundred and elapsed time is less than six hundred is true.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set pause window spikes to the sum of pause window spikes and one.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Set elapsed time to the sum of elapsed time and zero point zero two five.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
Display pause window spikes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

I chose C because a pallidal network model must step thousands of these cells at 25 microsecond resolution to resolve spike timing inside a beta cycle, and a tight compiled loop is the honest tool for that job.

/* Prototypic GPe neuron: autonomous pacemaker interrupted by a striatal barrage. */
#include <stdio.h>
#define DT        0.025   /* integration step, milliseconds */
#define TAU_M     12.0    /* membrane time constant, milliseconds */
#define V_REST   -55.0    /* depolarised rest: this cell is never at rest */
#define V_TH     -45.0
#define V_RESET  -60.0
#define I_AUTO     1.3    /* persistent sodium plus HCN drive, millivolts per ms */
#define E_GABA   -80.0    /* chloride reversal potential, millivolts */
#define TAU_GABA   6.0    /* striatal GABA decay, milliseconds */
int main(void) {
    double v = V_REST, g = 0.0;
    int spikes = 0, in_pause = 0;
    const long total = (long)(1000.0 / DT);
    const long every  = (long)(10.0 / DT);   /* 100 Hz striatal barrage */
    for (long n = 0; n < total; ++n) {
        double t = n * DT;
        if (t >= 500.0 && t < 560.0 && (n % every) == 0) g += 0.9;  /* MSN input */
        g -= g / TAU_GABA * DT;
        double dv = ((V_REST - v) + I_AUTO * TAU_M + g * (E_GABA - v)) / TAU_M;
        v += dv * DT;
        if (v >= V_TH) {
            v = V_RESET;
            ++spikes;
            if (t >= 500.0 && t < 600.0) ++in_pause;   /* 100 ms pause window */
        }
    }
    printf("tonic rate over the second: %d spikes/s\n", spikes);
    printf("spikes inside the 100 ms striatal pause window: %d\n", in_pause);
    printf("expected without a pause: about %d\n", (int)(spikes / 10.0));
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else in the basal ganglia is a large, parvalbumin-positive, myelinated, GABA-releasing cell with a flat disc of dendrites held perpendicular to the incoming striatal fibres, firing 40 to 70 times a second on its own with no input.

Sever every connection and it keeps going; that single test separates it from every striatal cell, all of which fall silent.

And it is the only cell whose signal is defined by absence: to read a prototypic neuron you do not watch its spikes, you watch its pauses.

CHAPTER 75. GLOBUS PALLIDUS ARKYPALLIDAL NEURONS (Backward-Reaching Cancel Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that shouts stop, and it is the only neuron in the pallidum that sends its entire output backwards, into the structure that fed it.

Arkypallidal is a coined Latin compound that tells a student nothing at all.

Backward-Reaching names the anatomy that makes this cell remarkable, because alone among pallidal cells it sends its axon back upstream into the striatum and sends nothing to the subthalamic nucleus, reversing the expected direction of flow.

Cancel names the job, since in rats performing a stop-signal task these cells respond earlier and more strongly to the stop cue than their neighbours, and their firing can shut down striatal activity already underway.

Neuron marks it as just over a quarter of all external pallidal cells, firing more slowly and less regularly than the braking relay cells beside it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It lives in the external globus pallidus alongside the prototypic neuron, and it is inhibitory, releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

Its name comes from the Greek arkhe, meaning beginning, because it projects back to the beginning of the circuit: the striatum.

That is its whole anatomy in one sentence, and it is remarkable, because the pallidum is supposed to be a downstream station and this cell reverses the arrow.

Functionally it delivers a broadcast stop signal.

When an animal is told to cancel a movement it has already begun to prepare, arkypallidal cells fire a burst about 20 milliseconds after the stop cue, at exactly the right moment to suppress the striatal activity that would otherwise have launched the action.

It is not an accelerator or a brake on a movement in progress; it is a cancel key pressed before the action commits.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is smaller and rounder than the prototypic neuron's, and the dendritic tree is bushier, with more branch points and a less flattened shape.

The dendrites are aspiny and spread more isotropically, meaning roughly equally in all directions rather than in a disc.

The axon is the astonishing part: it leaves the pallidum travelling laterally, enters the striatum, and there arborises into an enormous, sparse, wide-field plexus.

A single arkypallidal axon can carry tens of thousands of terminals spread across a large fraction of the striatum, which is why a few of these cells can inhibit an enormous number of targets at once.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly 15 to 25 micrometres across, distinctly smaller than the 20 to 40 micrometre prototypic cells.

Total dendritic length is around 3 to 5 millimetres, contained within a field of 500 to 800 micrometres.

The axonal field is by far the biggest thing about this cell: its striatal arborisation covers a volume of several cubic millimetres, and total axonal length per cell runs to tens of centimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Arkypallidal cells are more homogeneous than prototypic cells, but two useful divisions exist.

• Dorsal arkypallidal cells projecting to the dorsal striatum, the caudate and putamen, involved in motor and habit stopping.

• Ventral arkypallidal cells projecting to the nucleus accumbens, involved in stopping approach and reward-seeking behaviour.

• Molecularly they are defined by the transcription factors Npas1 and FoxP2, together with Lhx6 and the absence of parvalbumin, and FoxP2 is the single most reliable marker.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lives in the external globus pallidus, preferentially towards its lateral border, that is, the side facing the putamen.

That lateral position is not accidental and should be modelled as an interface: these cells sit right at the pallidostriatal border, closest to the structure they innervate.

They are relatively sparse in the medial and ventral external pallidum, where prototypic cells dominate.

Developmentally they come from the lateral ganglionic eminence, the same embryonic bulge that produces striatal neurons, whereas prototypic cells come largely from the medial ganglionic eminence, so this cell is in a real sense a striatal cell that migrated into the pallidum.

NUMBER:

I allocate about 250,000 arkypallidal neurons across both external pallidal segments, with a defensible range of 200,000 to 300,000.

The reasoning follows the same chain as before: the regional budget gives the whole pallidum about 1.5 million neurons, the external segment holds roughly two thirds of them, and arkypallidal cells are reported as just over one quarter of external pallidal neurons in rodent work.

Confidence is low to moderate, because the prototypic and arkypallidal distinction has been demonstrated principally in mice and rats and only inferred in humans, and no human stereological count of FoxP2-positive pallidal cells exists that I would rely on.

That makes this type about 0.125 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the basal ganglia, and about 3 in every million of the brain's 86 billion neurons.

Together my prototypic and arkypallidal allocations come to about 900,000, leaving room within the 1.5 million pallidal budget for the internal segment output neurons and the small cholinergic population, which are counted elsewhere.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Everything about this cell is slower and looser than its prototypic neighbour, and the contrast is the diagnostic.

Resting potential is more negative, around minus 65 to minus 58 millivolts, and autonomous firing is weaker.

In the intact brain arkypallidal cells discharge at roughly 3 to 15 spikes per second, against 40 to 70 for prototypic cells, and they fire irregularly rather than like a metronome.

Action potentials are broader, typically 0.8 to 1.2 milliseconds against 0.4 to 0.7, and are followed by a deep, slow afterhyperpolarisation.

Input resistance is higher, 150 to 400 megaohms, so these cells are easier to drive.

During the slow cortical oscillation of deep sleep and anaesthesia the two types are in antiphase: arkypallidal cells fire during the active component of the cortical wave, prototypic cells during the inactive component, and that single measurement separates them in a recording without any staining at all.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from striatal medium spiny neurons, from the subthalamic nucleus, from the cortex indirectly, and from local prototypic collaterals.

Crucially the arkypallidal cell receives stronger striatal drive and weaker subthalamic drive than the prototypic cell, which is part of why the two fire in antiphase.

Outputs go exclusively to the striatum, and this is the defining fact: arkypallidal cells make essentially no projection to the subthalamic nucleus, the internal pallidum or the substantia nigra.

Within the striatum they contact both direct-pathway and indirect-pathway medium spiny neurons, and they also contact striatal interneurons, so they suppress both the output cells and the local circuitry that would otherwise compensate.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thinner than the prototypic axon, roughly 0.5 to 1 micrometre, and lightly myelinated.

Conduction velocity is accordingly slower, about 1 to 3 metres per second, and the distance from pallidum to striatum is short, so the pallidostriatal delay is around 1 to 4 milliseconds.

Terminal density is low per unit volume but the total field is vast, so each individual striatal neuron receives only a few arkypallidal contacts while nearly every striatal neuron receives some.

That is the architecture of a broadcast: weak everywhere, simultaneous everywhere.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA, acting on GABA-A receptors.

Because the terminals are sparse and spread out, arkypallidal inhibition acts partly through spillover onto extrasynaptic GABA-A receptors, producing a tonic conductance that shifts the whole striatum's excitability rather than vetoing individual cells.

Many arkypallidal cells also express preproenkephalin, and the peptide enkephalin is co-released during high-frequency bursts.

MYELINATION:

Light and patchy.

The axon is myelinated in its proximal course through the pallidum and the internal capsule fibres, and largely loses myelin as it breaks up into its striatal plexus.

That mixed myelination means the conduction delay is dominated by the unmyelinated terminal branches, which is why the stop signal takes tens of milliseconds to become effective rather than a couple.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate at the cell body, because the firing rate is low.

Very high in the axon, because maintaining tens of centimetres of thin, largely unmyelinated axon with tens of thousands of terminals is expensive: axonal transport, mitochondrial supply and vesicle recycling all scale with terminal number.

This is a cell whose energy budget is dominated by its output cable rather than by its spiking, which is unusual and should be modelled that way.

PLASTICITY:

Striatal input onto arkypallidal cells shows short-term depression, and cortical training that improves stopping ability strengthens the effective stop signal.

In dopamine-depleted animals arkypallidal cells increase their firing and become more strongly entrained to cortical rhythms, which may contribute to the difficulty parkinsonian patients have in initiating movement: the cancel key is being pressed too often.

Structural remodelling of the vast striatal axon over weeks has been observed after dopamine loss, meaning this cell rewires the geometry of its broadcast.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

At the cell body the glial environment is the same iron-rich, oligodendrocyte-dense pallidal environment described for the prototypic neuron, and in that respect it is not special.

What is specific is the axon: this single cell has more of its membrane inside the striatum than inside the pallidum, so most of its glial support is provided by striatal astrocytes, not pallidal ones.

Those striatal astrocytes take up the GABA it spills through the transporters GAT-1 and GAT-3, and because arkypallidal transmission relies on spillover, astrocytic GABA uptake in the striatum directly sets the strength and duration of the stop signal.

That is a genuine, testable case of a glial cell being part of the computation rather than a bystander.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the striatum loses its emergency brake.

The basal ganglia would still be able to select actions and still be able to suppress the wrong ones slowly through the indirect pathway, but they would lose the ability to abort an action already being prepared.

Concretely the region would lose its only fast, global, simultaneous, all-of-striatum inhibition: every other inhibitory input to the striatum is local, but this one arrives everywhere at once.

The pallidum itself would lose its only backward-pointing output and would become, correctly and boringly, a pure relay.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The arkypallidal cell computes by broadcast timing, which no integrate-and-fire model captures.

Its influence depends on the coincidence between when its burst lands in the striatum and how far the developing motor plan has already progressed, so it implements a race, and the outcome is decided by a deadline rather than by a sum.

Because its terminals are sparse and it relies on GABA spillover, it performs volume transmission rather than point-to-point synaptic transmission, and the spatial spread of that transmission is set by astrocytic uptake and by the tortuosity of the extracellular space.

Extrasynaptic GABA-A receptors containing the delta subunit mediate a tonic chloride conductance in striatal medium spiny neurons, and shifting that tonic conductance changes the gain of the whole striatum, not the state of any one cell.

The cell also co-releases enkephalin, an opioid peptide that acts on mu and delta opioid receptors over seconds and micrometres, adding a slow second channel on top of the fast one.

Its enormous axon requires continuous local protein synthesis in the axon and terminals, because there is far too much membrane to supply from the soma alone, and axonal messenger ribonucleic acid transport is therefore part of its normal operation.

FoxP2, its defining transcription factor, is itself activity-regulated, so this cell's identity gene responds to how much it has been firing.

Gap-junction coupling among arkypallidal cells is weak, which fits their irregular, unsynchronised discharge.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ GABA from striatal medium spiny neurons, strong, the dominant input, with short-term depression.

◦ Glutamate from the subthalamic nucleus, weaker than onto prototypic cells.

◦ GABA from local prototypic collaterals.

◦ Cortical stop-related drive arriving indirectly by way of the subthalamic nucleus and the striatum, latency 10 to 20 milliseconds from cue.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA onto direct-pathway and indirect-pathway striatal medium spiny neurons across a wide field, few contacts per target.

◦ GABA onto striatal interneurons including parvalbumin and cholinergic cells.

◦ Tonic extrasynaptic GABA-A conductance in the striatum by spillover.

◦ Enkephalin by volume transmission during bursts.

◦ No projection to subthalamic nucleus, internal pallidum or substantia nigra.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential in millivolts.

◦ Slow afterhyperpolarisation conductance, 0 to 1.

◦ Burst flag and burst time remaining in milliseconds.

◦ Accumulated striatal tonic GABA conductance, in nanosiemens per target cell.

◦ Short-term depression variable on the striatal input, 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Baseline firing rate 3 to 15 spikes per second, irregular.

◦ Stop-evoked burst rate 60 to 120 spikes per second.

◦ Stop-cue to burst-onset latency 15 to 25 milliseconds.

◦ Burst duration 40 to 100 milliseconds.

◦ Resting potential minus 65 to minus 58 millivolts.

◦ Input resistance 150 to 400 megaohms.

◦ Spike width 0.8 to 1.2 milliseconds.

◦ Population share about one quarter of external pallidal neurons.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 15 to 30 milliseconds.

◦ Pallidostriatal conduction delay 1 to 4 milliseconds.

◦ Synaptic GABA-A decay 6 to 12 milliseconds; spillover tonic component 50 to 200 milliseconds.

◦ Slow afterhyperpolarisation 100 to 300 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ If this cell fails, stopping fails: the behavioural signature is a lengthened stop-signal reaction time, meaning the person needs more warning to abort an action, which is the laboratory measure of impulsivity.

◦ Weak arkypallidal signalling is a leading circuit hypothesis for impulse control disorders, including the gambling and compulsive behaviour that dopamine agonist drugs sometimes trigger in Parkinson's disease.

◦ Overactive arkypallidal signalling produces the opposite problem, a striatum that is constantly being told to cancel, which is one proposed contributor to freezing of gait and to difficulty initiating movement in parkinsonism.

◦ Because its effect depends on astrocytic GABA uptake in the striatum, anything that impairs striatal GAT-1 and GAT-3 will smear the stop signal in time and blunt it.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to race a rising striatal go signal against an arkypallidal stop burst and to report whether the action was launched or cancelled.
Create a number variable called go accumulator with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called go ramp per millisecond with initial value zero point zero zero eight five.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value one.
Create a number variable called stop cue time with initial value forty.
Create a number variable called stop latency with initial value eighteen.
Create a number variable called burst duration with initial value eighty.
Create a number variable called burst start with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called inhibition per millisecond with initial value zero point zero one eight.
Create a number variable called baseline inhibition with initial value zero point zero zero one eight.
Create a boolean variable called plan started with initial value false.
Create a text variable called outcome with initial value undecided.
Create a number variable called elapsed time with initial value zero.
Set burst start to the sum of stop cue time and stop latency.
While elapsed time is less than four hundred, repeat the following steps.
    Set go accumulator to the sum of go accumulator and go ramp per millisecond.
    Set go accumulator to the difference of go accumulator and baseline inhibition.
    Calculate the sum of burst start and burst duration.
    Check if both elapsed time is greater than or equal to burst start and elapsed time is less than that result is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set go accumulator to the difference of go accumulator and inhibition per millisecond.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if go accumulator is greater than zero point one five.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set plan started to true.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if both plan started is true and go accumulator is less than or equal to zero is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set outcome to cancelled.
        Break out of the current loop immediately.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if go accumulator is greater than or equal to threshold.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set outcome to moved.
        Break out of the current loop immediately.
    End the conditional block.
    Set elapsed time to the sum of elapsed time and one.
End the loop.
Display outcome to the console.
Display elapsed time to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

I chose Python because this is a timing race between two rates, not a stiff differential equation, and Python shows the race logic and the deadline plainly.

# Arkypallidal stop signal racing a striatal go ramp.
DT = 1.0                 # milliseconds per step
GO_RAMP = 0.0085         # striatal evidence accumulated per millisecond
THRESHOLD = 1.0          # go accumulator level that launches the movement
BASELINE_INHIB = 0.0018  # tonic arkypallidal drag, per millisecond
BURST_INHIB = 0.018      # drag during the stop burst, per millisecond
STOP_LATENCY = 18.0      # milliseconds from stop cue to burst onset
BURST_MS = 80.0          # milliseconds the arkypallidal burst lasts

def trial(stop_cue_ms, total_ms=400.0):
    """Returns the outcome and the time at which it was settled."""
    go, started = 0.0, False
    burst_start = None if stop_cue_ms is None else stop_cue_ms + STOP_LATENCY
    for n in range(int(total_ms / DT)):
        t = n * DT
        go += (GO_RAMP - BASELINE_INHIB) * DT
        if burst_start is not None and burst_start <= t < burst_start + BURST_MS:
            go -= BURST_INHIB * DT          # the broadcast stop signal lands
        if go > 0.15:
            started = True                  # a motor plan is now committed to
        if started and go <= 0.0:
            return ("cancelled", t)         # the plan collapsed before launch
        if go >= THRESHOLD:
            return ("moved", t)
    return ("timed out", total_ms)

print("no stop cue:        ", trial(None))
print("stop cue at 40 ms:  ", trial(40.0))
print("stop cue at 140 ms: ", trial(140.0))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron in the globus pallidus whose axon goes backwards, and it sends that axon nowhere except the striatum.

Stain a pallidal cell for FoxP2 and Npas1 and find no parvalbumin, record it firing at under 15 spikes per second irregularly, watch it fire on the active component of the cortical slow oscillation while its neighbours fire on the inactive one, and you have it.

And its behavioural fingerprint is unique in the entire basal ganglia: a burst about 20 milliseconds after a cue that means cancel, arriving across the whole striatum at once.

CHAPTER 76. SUBTHALAMIC NUCLEUS NEURONS (Sudden-Halt Excitatory Neuron) (COG)

Half a million cells the size of a lentil hold the only brake pedal in the basal ganglia, and cutting them makes a limb fly out of control.

The old label was purely an address, a nucleus name, and taught nothing.

Sudden-Halt names the moment it owns, since it receives a direct shortcut from frontal cortex that bypasses the striatum entirely and can therefore raise system-wide suppression faster than any other route, aborting a movement already in flight.

Excitatory marks the fact that makes this cell unique in its neighbourhood, because it is the only excitatory node in a system otherwise built entirely from inhibition, and its glutamate projection is the sole excitatory connection reaching the basal ganglia output stations.

Neuron marks it as the cell of the nucleus that is the standard target of deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The subthalamic nucleus is a small lens-shaped structure sitting just under the thalamus, the brain's great relay station, at the top of the midbrain.

Almost all of its cells are projection neurons that release glutamate, the brain's main excitatory chemical, which makes it the one excitatory nucleus inside a system otherwise built from inhibition.

Its job is to raise the brain's threshold for acting.

When the cortex is torn between two possible movements, or when a planned movement must be cancelled at the last instant, the subthalamic nucleus receives a direct message from the frontal cortex, floods the output nuclei of the basal ganglia with excitation, and those output nuclei clamp down on the thalamus so that nothing moves.

Neuroscientists call this the hyperdirect pathway, and it is the fastest route from cortex to basal ganglia output, arriving before the striatum has finished thinking.

It is also the nucleus that surgeons target with deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease, which makes it the most electrically interrogated cell population in the human brain.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The typical cell has a polygonal or spindle-shaped body with five to eight thick primary dendrites that radiate outward and then branch sparingly.

The dendrites are long, straight and sparsely spined, and they lie flattened along the long axis of the nucleus, so a single cell samples a slab of tissue shaped like the nucleus itself.

The dendritic tree is deliberately oversized relative to the nucleus, so each cell reads a large fraction of everything arriving.

The axon leaves the cell body, and in most cells it splits early into branches heading for several different targets at once.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 20 to 35 micrometres across in humans, making these medium-to-large neurons.

The dendritic field spans roughly 500 to 1,200 micrometres along the long axis of the nucleus and less across it.

The whole human subthalamic nucleus is only about 150 cubic millimetres, roughly the size of a lentil, measuring about 9 by 4 by 3 millimetres.

That tiny volume is why deep brain stimulation demands sub-millimetre surgical accuracy.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There is no clean neurochemical split of the kind seen in the striatum, but three overlapping divisions are well supported.

• A dorsolateral sensorimotor territory, which receives input from primary motor and premotor cortex and is the standard deep brain stimulation target.

• A ventromedial associative territory, connected to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and involved in choosing between options.

• A medial limbic territory, connected to the anterior cingulate and orbitofrontal cortex and to the ventral pallidum, involved in motivation and impulse control.

A small minority of cells, perhaps 5 to 10 percent, are local interneurons releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical, although in primates this population is smaller than in rodents and some workers doubt it exists at all.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It sits in the subthalamus, wedged between the internal capsule laterally, the zona incerta and thalamus dorsally, and the substantia nigra ventrally.

Its ventral border is a direct interface with the substantia nigra pars reticulata and its lateral border is a direct interface with the great white-matter cable of the internal capsule, which is why stimulation that spreads a millimetre too far causes muscle pulling of the face and hand.

Fibres of the lenticular fasciculus and the ansa lenticularis, the output cables of the globus pallidus, pass immediately above it.

The nucleus is crossed by the medial forebrain bundle and lies close to the red nucleus and the third nerve fibres, which is why misplaced stimulation can cause double vision.

NUMBER:

The human subthalamic nucleus contains roughly 500 thousand neurons in total across both sides, which is the figure this book budgets.

Published stereological counts, which estimate cell numbers by systematic sampling of tissue sections, cluster around 240 thousand to 300 thousand per side, giving 480 thousand to 600 thousand in total.

Confidence is good, because the nucleus has sharp borders and has been counted repeatedly.

That is about 0.25 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the basal ganglia and about 0.0006 percent of the 86 billion neurons of the whole nervous system.

For scale, the subthalamic nucleus has roughly one neuron for every 220 neurons in the striatum that it must help override.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These are autonomous pacemakers, meaning they fire regularly with no input at all, at about 5 to 20 spikes per second in an isolated slice and 10 to 30 in the living brain.

Pacemaking is driven by a persistent sodium current and a slow calcium-activated potassium current that together produce a steady sawtooth of depolarisation.

Cutting off all synaptic input does not silence them, and that is the single most important fact about this nucleus for anyone building a simulation.

They also produce rebound bursts: a period of inhibition from the globus pallidus de-inactivates T-type calcium channels, and when the inhibition lifts the cell fires a rapid volley far above its baseline rate.

This rebound property, combined with the reciprocal wiring between the subthalamic nucleus and the external globus pallidus, is the engine that generates pathological rhythms in Parkinson's disease.

Human recordings during surgery show that subthalamic cells are multistable, able to sit in more than one persistent firing state for the same input.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input arrives directly from the frontal cortex, chiefly primary motor, supplementary motor and prefrontal areas, and from the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus, especially the centromedian and parafascicular nuclei.

Inhibitory input arrives overwhelmingly from the external globus pallidus, and these gamma-aminobutyric acid synapses land close to the cell body where they have maximum authority.

Modulatory input arrives from the pedunculopontine nucleus, which supplies acetylcholine and glutamate, and from dopamine axons of the substantia nigra pars compacta.

Outputs excite the internal globus pallidus, the external globus pallidus, the substantia nigra pars reticulata, the pedunculopontine nucleus and, more weakly, the striatum.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, about 0.5 to 1.5 micrometres in diameter, and branches early so that a single cell contacts several targets at once.

Most subthalamic cells send collaterals to both segments of the globus pallidus and to the substantia nigra pars reticulata simultaneously, so one spike is broadcast to the whole output stage of the basal ganglia.

Conduction distances are short, a few millimetres, and conduction times from cortex to subthalamic nucleus are around 3 to 5 milliseconds, which is what makes the hyperdirect pathway fast.

Terminal boutons are small and are placed on the dendrites of pallidal and nigral cells.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The projection cells release glutamate, packaged by the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT2, and act on both AMPA receptors for fast excitation and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors for slower calcium-permeable excitation.

They also drive metabotropic glutamate receptors on their targets, producing effects lasting seconds.

The cells themselves carry gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors for pallidal inhibition, gamma-aminobutyric acid type B receptors for slow inhibition, dopamine D1, D2 and D5 receptors, and serotonin and acetylcholine receptors.

There is no peptide co-transmitter of established importance here, which is unusual and makes this cell chemically simple compared with its neighbours.

MYELINATION:

Subthalamic axons are thinly myelinated, with oligodendrocytes wrapping the projection fibres to the pallidum and nigra.

Because the distances are short, myelination buys only a modest speed gain, and conduction velocities are on the order of 1 to 5 metres per second.

The clinically important myelin is not the cell's own but the heavily myelinated internal capsule immediately lateral to it, whose fibres are far easier to excite with an implanted electrode than the subthalamic cells themselves.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Continuous pacemaking at 10 to 30 spikes per second with no rest makes this an expensive cell.

Every spike must be paid for by the sodium-potassium pump, and the persistent sodium current leaks sodium in even between spikes, so the pump never stops.

The nucleus has a high density of mitochondria and high cytochrome oxidase activity, a standard marker of sustained energy use.

In Parkinson's disease the nucleus becomes overactive, and its metabolic rate rises further, which is one reason its overactivity is thought to be self-damaging over decades.

PLASTICITY:

Cortex-to-subthalamic synapses show long-term potentiation and long-term depression, the strengthening and weakening of connections, and both depend on dopamine.

Loss of dopamine in Parkinson's disease shifts the balance toward strengthened cortical drive, which helps lock the nucleus into pathological beta-band rhythms of 13 to 35 cycles per second.

Deep brain stimulation itself induces lasting change: patients often keep some benefit for minutes to hours after the stimulator is switched off, which cannot be explained by instantaneous electrical effects alone.

The pallidal-to-subthalamic synapse is also plastic and is remodelled after dopamine loss, with a documented proliferation of inhibitory terminals.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here do something unusual and clinically important: they respond directly to deep brain stimulation with waves of calcium and release adenosine triphosphate, which is broken down to adenosine, which then damps excitatory transmission.

Part of the therapeutic effect of high-frequency stimulation is therefore glial rather than neuronal.

The nucleus is rich in iron, and its glia handle a heavy iron load, which makes it visible on susceptibility-weighted magnetic resonance imaging and gives surgeons a direct target.

Microglia in the nucleus become activated in parkinsonian states, and the chronically overactive nucleus sits in a mildly inflamed environment.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the subthalamic nucleus and the basal ganglia lose the ability to say no.

The clinical proof is hemiballismus, in which a stroke destroying one subthalamic nucleus causes violent, uncontrollable flinging movements of the opposite arm and leg, because the output nuclei are no longer excited enough to keep unwanted movements suppressed.

Without it the system also loses its pause during conflict, so decisions are made too fast and impulsively, which is exactly the side effect seen in some patients after subthalamic deep brain stimulation.

Flavour lost: urgency, restraint and the capacity to hold everything still while the brain makes up its mind.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Autonomous pacemaking means the cell is a self-running oscillator whose baseline must be modelled explicitly rather than emerging from input.

Rebound bursting after inhibition gives the pallido-subthalamic loop a natural resonance, and the loop's delay of about 5 to 10 milliseconds each way sets the beta frequency at which parkinsonian brains lock up.

Dendritic calcium electrogenesis lets distal dendrites generate their own regenerative events, so cortical inputs far from the cell body are not simply attenuated.

Multistability, documented in human recordings during surgery, means the same synaptic input can leave the cell in two different persistent firing states depending on history.

Gap-junction coupling has been reported between subthalamic cells and may help synchronise the nucleus.

Ephaptic effects, in which the electric field of one cell influences its neighbours without any synapse, are plausible in such a small dense nucleus and are the presumed mechanism by which an implanted electrode entrains thousands of cells at once.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Cortical glutamate via the hyperdirect pathway, latency 3 to 5 milliseconds, event rate 0 to 100 hertz.

◦ Thalamic glutamate from centromedian and parafascicular nuclei, 0 to 40 hertz.

◦ External globus pallidus gamma-aminobutyric acid, 30 to 80 hertz baseline, perisomatic, conductance 1 to 10 nanosiemens.

◦ Dopamine, 5 to 100 nanomolar, acting mainly to reduce excitability.

◦ Externally applied electrical stimulation, 60 to 185 hertz, 1 to 5 milliamperes, pulse width 60 to 90 microseconds.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Glutamate onto internal globus pallidus, external globus pallidus, substantia nigra pars reticulata and pedunculopontine nucleus.

◦ Firing rate 10 to 30 hertz at baseline, 100 to 400 hertz transiently during a rebound burst.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ Adaptation variable representing calcium-activated potassium drive.

◦ T-type calcium channel availability, 0 to 1.

◦ Recent inhibition history over the last 200 milliseconds.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Membrane capacitance about 40 picofarads.

◦ Leak conductance about 2 nanosiemens, resting voltage about minus 55 to minus 60 millivolts.

◦ Spike threshold about minus 45 millivolts.

◦ Intrinsic pacemaker drive sufficient to fire at 10 to 30 hertz with no input.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane time constant about 15 to 20 milliseconds.

◦ Adaptation time constant about 60 milliseconds.

◦ T-type de-inactivation about 100 milliseconds.

◦ Pallido-subthalamic loop delay about 5 to 10 milliseconds each way, setting a resonance near 20 hertz.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Destruction of the nucleus causes hemiballismus, violent involuntary flinging of the opposite limbs.

◦ Overactivity plus beta-band synchrony at 13 to 35 hertz produces the rigidity and slowness of Parkinson's disease, and the strength of that rhythm tracks symptom severity closely enough to be used as a feedback signal for closed-loop stimulation.

◦ Stimulation of the limbic territory can produce impulsivity, hypomania or depression.

◦ Current spread into the neighbouring internal capsule causes muscle contraction and slurred speech.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a subthalamic neuron that paces itself, is silenced by pallidal inhibition, and fires a rebound burst when that inhibition is released.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called rebound count with initial value 0.
While step is less than 40000, repeat the following steps.
    Create a number variable called drive with initial value 90.
    Check if both step is greater than 10000 and step is less than 14000 is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to -100.
    End the conditional block.
    Create a number variable called leak with initial value 0.
    Calculate the difference of voltage and -55.
    Set leak to the product of that result and -2.
    Calculate the sum of leak and drive.
    Create a number variable called net with initial value 0.
    Set net to the difference of that result and adaptation.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the quotient of the product of net and 0.05 divided by 40.
    Check if voltage is greater than or equal to 20.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to -55.
        Calculate the sum of adaptation and 20.
        Set adaptation to that result.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to that result.
        Check if both step is greater than 14000 and step is less than 15200 is true.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Calculate the sum of rebound count and 1.
            Set rebound count to that result.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of voltage and -55.
    Create a number variable called adapt target with initial value 0.
    Set adapt target to the product of that result and 4.
    Set adaptation to the sum of adaptation and the quotient of the product of the difference of adapt target and adaptation and 0.05 divided by 60.
    Calculate the sum of step and 1.
    Set step to that result.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
Display rebound count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because realistic subthalamic models are run inside pallido-subthalamic network loops with tens of thousands of cells and millions of time steps, where raw speed decides whether the experiment finishes.

#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>

int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.05;      /* ms */
    const double C = 40.0;       /* pF  */
    const double gL = 2.0;       /* nS  */
    const double EL = -55.0;     /* mV  */
    const double VT = -45.0;     /* mV, spike-initiation voltage */
    const double DT = 2.0;       /* mV, spike sharpness */
    const double a = 4.0;        /* nS, subthreshold adaptation */
    const double b = 20.0;       /* pA, spike-triggered adaptation */
    const double tw = 60.0;      /* ms, adaptation time constant */
    double v = -60.0, w = 0.0;
    int spikes = 0, rebound = 0;

    for (int i = 0; i < 40000; i++) {      /* 2000 ms */
        double t = i * dt;
        double I = 90.0;                   /* intrinsic pacemaker drive, pA */
        if (t > 500.0 && t < 700.0) I = -100.0;  /* pallidal GABA brake */
        double dv = (-gL * (v - EL)
                     + gL * DT * exp((v - VT) / DT)
                     - w + I) / C;
        v += dt * dv;
        if (v >= 20.0) {                   /* spike */
            v = EL; w += b; spikes++;
            if (t > 700.0 && t < 760.0) rebound++;  /* post-inhibition volley */
        }
        w += dt * (a * (v - EL) - w) / tw;
    }
    printf("total spikes in 2 s: %d\n", spikes);
    printf("spikes in the 60 ms rebound window: %d\n", rebound);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only large excitatory nucleus inside the basal ganglia, it never stops firing even when every input is cut, and it answers a pause with a volley instead of silence.

If a cell in the depths of the human brain fires steadily at 10 to 30 hertz, is quieted by pallidal inhibition and then bursts on release, sits in a lentil-sized iron-rich nucleus above the substantia nigra, and its destruction throws the opposite arm into violent flinging, it is a subthalamic neuron.

CHAPTER 77. SUBSTANTIA NIGRA PARS RETICULATA NEURONS (Standing-Brake Release Neuron) (COG)

Right now, as you read this line, a quarter of a million cells are firing about seventy times a second purely to stop your eyes from jumping somewhere else.

The old name is a Latin address, meaning the netlike part of the black substance, and it describes pigment rather than purpose.

Standing names the resting condition of this cell, because it is not silent at rest but fires continuously at roughly sixty spikes per second in the awake primate, driven by its own intrinsic sodium and Kv3-type potassium currents rather than by incoming excitation.

Brake names what that constant firing does, since the cell is inhibitory and its targets, chiefly the superior colliculus and the motor thalamus, are held clamped shut by it by default.

Release names the moment the cell earns its keep, because when a movement is finally permitted these neurons pause, and the sudden removal of inhibition lets the collicular burst cells fire and the saccade or limb movement go.

Neuron marks it as the output cell that teaches the counterintuitive central fact of the basal ganglia, that movement is produced by stopping a cell rather than by starting one.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The substantia nigra, Latin for black substance, is a dark stripe in the midbrain with two very different halves.

The pars compacta is the dark half full of dopamine cells, and the pars reticulata, meaning the netlike part, is the pale half beneath it, threaded with fibres.

Pars reticulata cells are the exit door of the basal ganglia.

They release gamma-aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical, and they do it continuously and at high speed, so their targets are held under a permanent brake.

Movement, in this system, is not produced by switching something on: it is produced by these cells briefly falling silent, which lifts the brake and lets a target circuit run.

Neuroscientists call this disinhibition, and it is the central trick of the basal ganglia.

The clearest example is the eye: every time you flick your gaze to a new object, a group of pars reticulata cells pauses for about 100 milliseconds, and only then can the superior colliculus, the midbrain's eye-movement map, fire the saccade.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is medium-to-large, fusiform or polygonal, with three to five long, thick primary dendrites.

The dendrites are smooth and almost spine-free, and they radiate in a flattened disc lying in the plane of the nucleus.

Crucially, many dendrites climb upward into the pars compacta, where they are bathed in dopamine released from the dendrites of the dopamine cells above.

The axon leaves the cell body and usually splits into two or three main branches within a few hundred micrometres, each heading for a different target.

The cell contains parvalbumin, a calcium-binding protein typical of fast-firing neurons, and it lacks the pigment neuromelanin, which is why the pars reticulata looks pale next to the pars compacta.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are about 20 to 35 micrometres across in humans.

Dendrites extend 500 to 1,000 micrometres and are among the longest smooth dendrites in the midbrain.

The whole human pars reticulata occupies roughly 200 to 400 cubic millimetres per side, a thin curved sheet a few millimetres thick.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The population is more uniform than most, but it divides usefully by target and by position.

• Cells projecting to the motor thalamus, chiefly the ventral anterior and ventral lateral nuclei, controlling limb and trunk movement.

• Cells projecting to the superior colliculus, controlling eye movements and orienting.

• Cells projecting to the mediodorsal thalamus, feeding prefrontal cortex and therefore cognition rather than movement.

• Cells projecting to the pedunculopontine nucleus and the medullary reticular formation, controlling posture, gait and licking or chewing.

• A lateral group receiving direct glutamate input, shown in monkeys to serve reactive inhibition, the emergency stop.

Most cells send branches to more than one of these, so the subtypes are tendencies rather than sealed classes.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It occupies the ventral two thirds of the substantia nigra in the midbrain tegmentum, directly beneath the pars compacta and directly above the cerebral peduncle, the massive fibre bundle carrying cortex to spinal cord.

Its dorsal boundary with the pars compacta is a genuine interface, because reticulata dendrites and compacta dendrites intermingle there and exchange signals without synapses.

Laterally it abuts the cerebral peduncle and medially it approaches the red nucleus and the third nerve fibres.

The pars lateralis, a small lateral extension, projects preferentially to the superior colliculus.

Functionally it is the twin of the internal segment of the globus pallidus, and the two together are described as one output stage split across two places.

NUMBER:

Stereological counting gives about 288 thousand neurons in the human substantia nigra pars reticulata, with an uncertainty of roughly plus or minus 32 thousand.

Confidence is moderate, resting largely on one careful comparative study, and it is not always clear in the literature whether such figures refer to one side or both, so treat 250 thousand to 350 thousand as the working range.

That is about 0.15 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the basal ganglia and about 0.0003 percent of the 86 billion neurons of the whole nervous system.

Notably, humans have proportionally fewer of these cells than rats do, so the human basal ganglia lean more heavily on the internal globus pallidus for output.

Roughly 380 striatal neurons converge on every one of these cells, which is the funnel that makes action selection possible.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These are among the fastest sustained firers in the brain, discharging spontaneously at a median of about 68 spikes per second in primates and commonly quoted at 30 to 100 hertz.

They are autonomous pacemakers, driven by a persistent sodium current, and they keep firing when every synapse is blocked.

Action potentials are narrow, under 1 millisecond wide, and the afterhyperpolarisation that follows each spike is brief, which is what permits such high rates without exhaustion.

They show almost no spike-frequency adaptation, meaning they do not slow down during a long train, because a brake that fades would be useless.

Their firing rate is modulated by hydrogen peroxide acting on ATP-sensitive potassium channels, a direct link between the tissue's metabolic state and the strength of the brake.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inhibitory input arrives from the direct-pathway medium spiny neurons of the striatum, which land on distal dendrites in large numbers, and from the external globus pallidus, which lands closer to the cell body.

Excitatory input arrives from the subthalamic nucleus, from the pedunculopontine nucleus, and in the lateral region directly from cortex.

Dopamine reaches these cells from the dendrites of the pars compacta above, acting on D1 receptors on striatal terminals and D1 or D5 receptors on the cells themselves.

Outputs are inhibitory synapses onto the ventral anterior, ventral lateral and mediodorsal thalamic nuclei, the intermediate layers of the superior colliculus, the pedunculopontine nucleus and the reticular formation.

One important subtlety: nigral input to the thalamus is not always purely inhibitory in its effect, because in some thalamic targets it produces rebound excitation, so the sign of the output depends on the target.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin to medium, roughly 0.5 to 2 micrometres, and they branch to multiple targets from a single cell.

The projection to the thalamus travels through the fields of Forel and joins the thalamic fasciculus; the projection to the superior colliculus runs a short course dorsally.

Terminals are large, form multiple release sites, and cluster around the cell bodies and proximal dendrites of their targets, giving them powerful, reliable control.

Conduction is fast enough that a pause in the nigra appears in the colliculus within a few milliseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid is the transmitter, loaded into vesicles by the vesicular GABA transporter and acting on gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors for fast chloride-mediated inhibition.

Because the release is tonic and heavy, target cells also experience a standing background of receptor activation rather than isolated events.

The cells carry gamma-aminobutyric acid type A and type B receptors, AMPA and N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate receptors, dopamine D1 and D5 receptors, and ATP-sensitive potassium channels.

There is no significant peptide co-transmitter.

MYELINATION:

Axons are myelinated, thinly to moderately, by oligodendrocytes, and the nucleus sits among heavily myelinated fibre bundles which is partly why it appears netlike.

Myelination matters here because the brake must be lifted and reapplied with millisecond precision across a distance of one to two centimetres.

Conduction velocities are on the order of 2 to 10 metres per second.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Firing 70 times a second, every second, for a lifetime is a very large standing energy bill.

These cells sit near the top of the brain's per-cell energy consumption, and they are packed with mitochondria.

Their sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide and ATP-sensitive potassium channels means their firing rate is directly reported to, and directly modulated by, their own energy state.

Unlike their dopamine neighbours, they do not carry the extra oxidative burden of dopamine metabolism, which is part of why they survive in Parkinson's disease while the cells above them die.

PLASTICITY:

Striatal-to-nigral synapses show long-term potentiation and depression, and their strength is set by dopamine.

After dopamine loss, the number of inhibitory terminals onto pars reticulata cells increases, a documented structural proliferation that changes the gain of the whole output stage.

Short-term plasticity is prominent: striatal terminals depress strongly during a burst, so the brake is lifted most effectively by a fast, brief striatal volley rather than a slow steady one.

The cells' intrinsic excitability is also plastic and shifts in models of epilepsy and dystonia.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here manage an unusually heavy glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid recycling load because of the sheer traffic, and they buffer the extracellular potassium that 70 hertz firing pours out.

Astrocytic calcium responses in the nigra are directly triggered by subthalamic stimulation, so the glia participate in the loop rather than merely servicing it.

Astrocyte-derived hydrogen peroxide is a genuine signal here, not just a waste product, tuning the firing rate through ATP-sensitive potassium channels.

Microglia are relatively quiescent in the healthy pars reticulata but become strongly activated in parkinsonian states, partly because of debris from the dying cells above.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the midbrain loses its default of stillness.

Thalamic and collicular circuits, no longer held down, would fire whenever any input arrived, so the eyes would drift and jump uncontrollably and posture would collapse into continuous involuntary movement.

Experimentally, injecting a drug that silences the pars reticulata produces exactly this: uncontrollable eye movements and involuntary limb movements.

The flavour lost is restraint with a hair trigger, the ability to be absolutely still and then release in a single tenth of a second.

The pars reticulata is also the brain's seizure gate, and without it the midbrain loses a powerful natural anticonvulsant circuit.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Tonic pacemaking means the informative signal is the pause, not the spike, so any simulation must treat rate decreases as the carrier of information.

Ephaptic and field effects are plausible given the dense, synchronously firing population.

Gap-junction coupling among reticulata cells has been reported and supports local synchrony.

Metabolic sensing through hydrogen peroxide and ATP-sensitive potassium channels means firing rate is coupled directly to the cell's own energy status, an unusual and computationally important feedback.

Dendrites reaching up into the pars compacta receive dopamine released from dendrites rather than axon terminals, which is a form of volume transmission between two cell types across a boundary.

Target-dependent output sign, in which the same inhibitory synapse produces suppression in one thalamic nucleus and rebound excitation in another, means the cell's effective output cannot be computed without knowing the receiving cell.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Striatal direct-pathway gamma-aminobutyric acid on distal dendrites, event rate 0 to 40 hertz per input, thousands of inputs converging.

◦ External globus pallidus gamma-aminobutyric acid, perisomatic, 30 to 80 hertz.

◦ Subthalamic glutamate, 10 to 30 hertz baseline, rising sharply during a stop signal.

◦ Dendritic dopamine from the pars compacta above, 5 to 500 nanomolar.

◦ Hydrogen peroxide from local metabolism, modulating ATP-sensitive potassium channels.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid onto ventral anterior, ventral lateral and mediodorsal thalamus, superior colliculus intermediate layers, pedunculopontine nucleus and reticular formation.

◦ Baseline rate 60 to 80 hertz; the behaviourally relevant signal is a pause to near zero lasting 50 to 200 milliseconds.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ Synaptic conductance from striatum and from subthalamic nucleus.

◦ Short-term depression level of striatal terminals, 0 to 1.

◦ Local hydrogen peroxide concentration.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Intrinsic pacemaker rate about 65 hertz with all input removed.

◦ Membrane time constant about 10 milliseconds.

◦ Spike width under 1 millisecond, refractory period about 2 milliseconds.

◦ Adaptation close to zero, deliberately.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Interspike interval about 15 milliseconds.

◦ Pause duration 50 to 200 milliseconds.

◦ Short-term depression recovery about 300 to 800 milliseconds.

◦ Dopamine modulation seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In Parkinson's disease these cells become overactive and their firing becomes bursty and synchronised, so the brake is jammed on and movement becomes slow and small.

◦ Silencing them experimentally causes involuntary movements and uncontrollable saccades.

◦ Loss of their tonic output removes a natural seizure gate and lowers the threshold for generalised seizures.

◦ Abnormal patterning here contributes to dystonia, in which opposing muscles contract at once.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a substantia nigra pars reticulata neuron whose steady high-rate firing holds a target circuit shut, and whose brief pause opens it.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called pause spikes with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gate open steps with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called steps since last spike with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 20000, repeat the following steps.
    Create a number variable called striatal inhibition with initial value 0.
    Check if both step is greater than or equal to 6000 and step is less than 7000 is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set striatal inhibition to -40.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of voltage and -60.
    Create a number variable called restoring with initial value 0.
    Set restoring to the product of that result and -1.
    Calculate the sum of restoring and 18.5.
    Create a number variable called net with initial value 0.
    Set net to the sum of that result and striatal inhibition.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the quotient of the product of net and 0.1 divided by 10.
    Calculate the sum of steps since last spike and 1.
    Set steps since last spike to that result.
    Check if voltage is greater than or equal to -45.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to -58.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to that result.
        Set steps since last spike to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if steps since last spike is greater than 300.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of gate open steps and 1.
        Set gate open steps to that result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of step and 1.
    Set step to that result.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
Display gate open steps to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Julia is chosen because this cell is a high-rate integrator whose science lives in the exact timing of a pause, and Julia gives compiled speed for long fine-grained runs while still reading like arithmetic.

using Printf

function nigral_gate()
    dt      = 0.1      # ms per step
    tau     = 10.0     # ms membrane time constant
    v_rest  = -60.0    # mV
    v_th    = -45.0    # mV spike threshold
    v_reset = -58.0    # mV reset after a spike
    drive   = 18.5     # mV of intrinsic pacemaker drive, tuned for about 65 Hz
    v = v_rest
    spikes = 0
    pause_spikes = 0
    for i in 1:20000                       # 2000 ms of simulated time
        t = i * dt
        # a 100 ms burst from direct-pathway striatal neurons
        inhib = (600.0 <= t < 700.0) ? -40.0 : 0.0
        v += dt * (-(v - v_rest) + drive + inhib) / tau
        if v >= v_th                       # spike, then reset
            v = v_reset
            spikes += 1
            if 600.0 <= t < 700.0
                pause_spikes += 1
            end
        end
    end
    @printf("mean firing rate: %.1f Hz\n", spikes / 2.0)
    @printf("spikes during the 100 ms striatal input: %d\n", pause_spikes)
    @printf("gate state during that window: %s\n", pause_spikes == 0 ? "OPEN" : "shut")
end

nigral_gate()

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is a pale, parvalbumin-rich, neuromelanin-free cell in the midbrain that fires around 70 times a second without pause, without adaptation, and without needing any input at all.

If a cell's meaningful message is a silence rather than a spike, if its dendrites climb into a layer of dopamine cells and drink dopamine that was never released from an axon, and if switching it off makes the eyes jump uncontrollably, it is a pars reticulata neuron.

CHAPTER 78. SUBSTANTIA NIGRA PARS COMPACTA NEURONS (Movement-Vigor Supplying Neuron) (COG)

Each of these cells grows an axon four and a half metres long, keeps it naked, and pays for that extravagance with its life.

The old name is a Latin address meaning the compact part of the black substance, describing the pigment neuromelanin rather than any function.

Movement-Vigor names the specific quantity this cell carries, since its transient activity precedes movement and scales with how fast, how large and how long the coming action will be, so it sets the amplitude of behaviour rather than choosing which behaviour occurs.

Supplying names the mode of delivery, a slow pacemaker discharge of a few spikes per second that keeps a background level of dopamine present, punctuated by brief high-frequency bursts.

Neuron marks it as one of only about three hundred and eighty-two thousand such cells per human brain, roughly half of which must die before the classic motor signs of Parkinson disease appear.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are the dopamine cells of the midbrain, the ones whose death causes Parkinson's disease.

Dopamine is a chemical messenger, and these cells manufacture it, carry it enormous distances, and spray it over the striatum, the input gateway of the basal ganglia.

Their job is not to tell the striatum what to do; it is to tell the striatum how surprised to be.

When something better than expected happens, they fire a brief burst; when something worse than expected happens, they fall silent for a moment.

This difference between what happened and what was expected is called a reward prediction error, and it is the teaching signal that makes habits form and actions get chosen.

They do a second job at the same time: a background level of dopamine sets how vigorously and how quickly a movement is executed, which is why losing them makes movement small and slow rather than impossible.

They are dark to the naked eye because they accumulate neuromelanin, a black-brown pigment made from oxidised dopamine, which is why the nucleus is called the black substance.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is large and fusiform or polygonal, packed with pigment granules that grow more numerous with every decade of life.

Three to six long dendrites leave the cell body, and one or two of them plunge downward into the pars reticulata below, sometimes travelling more than half a millimetre into it.

Those descending dendrites are not just receivers: they release dopamine themselves, from vesicles in the dendrite, which is a very unusual arrangement.

The axon is the extraordinary part.

It emerges, often from a dendrite rather than the cell body, travels up through the medial forebrain bundle, and then explodes into an arbour of astonishing size within the striatum.

SIZE:

The cell body is 25 to 45 micrometres across, among the larger neurons in the midbrain.

Dendrites span 400 to 1,000 micrometres.

The axon is the record holder: reconstructions and scaling estimates put the total axonal length of a single human pars compacta dopamine neuron at about 4.5 metres, all of it packed inside a striatum a few centimetres wide.

Each cell forms an estimated 1 million to 2.4 million release sites.

To picture it, imagine one cell whose body is a fifth of a millimetre wide growing a wire long enough to cross a room, then folding that wire into a space the size of a walnut.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Ventral tier cells, which sit lower in the pars compacta, are calbindin-poor, project to the sensorimotor putamen, and are the population that dies first and hardest in Parkinson's disease.

• Dorsal tier cells, which are calbindin-rich, project more to associative and limbic striatum, and are relatively spared.

• Lateral cells, in which the calcium channel subtype Cav1.3 acts as a linear amplifier of firing rate across the cell's entire working range.

• A minority co-express the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT2 and release glutamate as well as dopamine, and glutamate-releasing neurons are genuinely intermixed with dopamine neurons in the human midbrain.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They form the dorsal band of the substantia nigra in the midbrain, corresponding to cell group A9, sitting directly above the pars reticulata and below the medial lemniscus and red nucleus.

Their descending dendrites cross into the pars reticulata, making the compacta-to-reticulata border an active chemical interface rather than a wall.

Medially they merge without a sharp border into the ventral tegmental area, cell group A10, and dorsolaterally into the retrorubral field, cell group A8.

Their axons run in the medial forebrain bundle and terminate mainly in the putamen and caudate nucleus, with sparser projections to the subthalamic nucleus, globus pallidus and thalamus.

NUMBER:

This book budgets about 600 thousand pars compacta dopamine neurons at birth, counting both sides.

Published human stereological counts vary widely, from roughly 200 thousand to 400 thousand per side in adults, with one careful estimate of about 382 thousand plus or minus 20 thousand per hemisphere.

Confidence is moderate: the counts are real but they disagree, partly because the nucleus has fuzzy borders and partly because the number falls throughout life at roughly 5 to 10 percent per decade.

That is about 0.3 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the basal ganglia and about 0.0007 percent of the 86 billion neurons of the whole nervous system.

It is the most consequential rounding error in neuroscience: fewer than one cell in a hundred thousand, and their loss defines one of the most common neurodegenerative diseases in the world.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They are autonomous pacemakers, firing slowly and regularly at 1 to 5 spikes per second with no input at all.

Pacemaking is unusual because it is driven substantially by L-type calcium channels of the Cav1.3 subtype, which open at unusually negative voltages and let calcium in on every cycle.

Action potentials are broad, over 2 milliseconds, with a long afterhyperpolarisation, and they are followed by a slow ramp back to threshold.

On top of the pacemaker sits burst firing, in which glutamate acting on N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors switches the cell into a volley of 2 to 6 spikes at 15 to 30 hertz.

They also show pauses, when inhibitory input silences them for 100 to 400 milliseconds, and the pause is the signal for a worse-than-expected outcome.

A distinctive sag in voltage during hyperpolarisation, produced by the hyperpolarisation-activated current, is used by electrophysiologists as a fingerprint.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input arrives from the subthalamic nucleus, the pedunculopontine and laterodorsal tegmental nuclei, and the superior colliculus, which delivers the fast visual surprise signal.

Inhibitory input arrives from the striatum, the globus pallidus, the substantia nigra pars reticulata and, importantly, from the rostromedial tegmental nucleus, a small structure that acts as the brake for disappointment.

Outputs are dense axonal release sites throughout the striatum, only a minority of which are classical synapses; most dopamine is released into the extracellular space.

Dendritic release into the pars reticulata provides local feedback within the nigra itself.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is exceptionally thin, roughly 0.1 to 0.5 micrometres, and largely unmyelinated once it enters the striatum.

Its total length of about 4.5 metres per cell means a single neuron must maintain a membrane surface area and a transport system out of all proportion to its cell body.

Conduction is slow, around 0.5 metres per second, so dopamine arrives tens of milliseconds after the spike.

Because release sites are mostly non-synaptic, dopamine acts by volume transmission, diffusing several micrometres and reaching thousands of targets from one release point.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Dopamine is made from tyrosine by tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme, then by aromatic amino acid decarboxylase, and is loaded into vesicles by the vesicular monoamine transporter VMAT2.

It acts on D1-family receptors, which raise cyclic adenosine monophosphate and excite, and D2-family receptors, which lower it and inhibit.

The cell carries D2 autoreceptors on itself, so dopamine shuts down its own producer, a negative feedback loop that limits bursting.

Dopamine is cleared by the dopamine transporter DAT and broken down by monoamine oxidase and catechol-O-methyltransferase.

A subset co-releases glutamate, and many co-release gamma-aminobutyric acid that they take up from outside rather than synthesise conventionally.

MYELINATION:

The axon is unmyelinated or only very thinly myelinated near its origin, and it is definitively unmyelinated once it arborises in the striatum.

This is not an oversight but a consequence of geometry: an arbour of 4.5 metres with over a million branch points could not physically be myelinated.

The cost is severe, because an unmyelinated axon must run sodium and potassium currents along its entire length, and the energy bill is thought to be the single largest contributor to this cell's vulnerability.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

This is plausibly the most metabolically stressed neuron in the human brain.

It pays for continuous pacemaking, for calcium entry on every cycle through Cav1.3 channels, for a 4.5-metre unmyelinated axon, for over a million release sites, and for the manufacture and containment of dopamine, which oxidises spontaneously into damaging quinones.

Its mitochondria run near capacity, its basal oxidative stress is high, and the resulting oxidised dopamine is packed away as neuromelanin, which chelates iron and is protective until the load exceeds its buffering capacity.

Blocking Cav1.3 channels reduces the calcium burden, which is why the blood-pressure drug isradipine was tested as a neuroprotective agent in Parkinson's disease.

PLASTICITY:

Their own inputs are plastic: glutamate synapses onto these cells undergo long-term potentiation, and a single dose of a drug of abuse can strengthen them measurably for days.

Their output is the plasticity signal for everyone else, because dopamine gates long-term potentiation and depression at cortex-to-striatum synapses.

Firing pattern itself is plastic, and surviving cells after partial lesion recover their full firing range through changes in Kv4.3 potassium channels, a compensation that helps explain why symptoms appear only after most cells are gone.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in the substantia nigra are relatively sparse compared with the striatum, and they carry unusually low levels of the antioxidant glutathione, leaving these cells poorly defended against the oxidative stress they generate.

Microglia, by contrast, are denser in the substantia nigra than almost anywhere else in the brain, which makes this a hair-trigger inflammatory environment and helps explain why the region degenerates when microglia are provoked.

Neuromelanin released from dying cells is itself a potent microglial activator, creating a self-amplifying loop of degeneration.

Oligodendrocyte support is minimal in the striatal arbour, because there is no myelin there to maintain.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the striatum keeps its wiring but loses its opinion about outcomes.

Movements still occur, but they shrink, slow and lose vigour, because the background dopamine that sets movement gain is gone.

Learning from reward stops, so nothing new becomes a habit and nothing old gets revised.

The direct and indirect pathways of the striatum, normally held in balance by D1 excitation and D2 inhibition, fall out of balance, and the whole basal ganglia loop begins to oscillate at beta frequencies of 13 to 35 hertz.

The flavour lost is motivation itself: not the ability to move, but the reason to.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Volume transmission dominates, since most release sites are not synapses and dopamine acts as a diffusing field over micrometres and seconds.

Dendritic release means the cell secretes transmitter from its input structures into the pars reticulata below, feeding back on the output stage of the basal ganglia directly.

Autoreceptor self-inhibition through D2 receptors gives the cell a built-in governor.

Back-propagating action potentials invade the dendrites and trigger the calcium entry needed for dendritic release.

Its calcium-driven pacemaker creates a permanent oxidative load, coupling electrical activity directly to cellular ageing.

Neuromelanin accumulation is a lifelong structural change that converts a metabolic by-product into an iron-chelating store, and eventually into an immune trigger.

Alpha-synuclein, a protein that these cells express heavily, misfolds and spreads from cell to cell, so this neuron's failure mode is transmissible along its own connections.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Subthalamic and pedunculopontine glutamate, driving bursts through N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, 0 to 60 hertz.

◦ Superior colliculus glutamate, latency about 70 to 100 milliseconds after a visual event.

◦ Rostromedial tegmental and striatal gamma-aminobutyric acid, producing pauses.

◦ Dopamine acting on the cell's own D2 autoreceptors, 5 to 500 nanomolar.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Dopamine into the caudate nucleus and putamen, tonic level 5 to 50 nanomolar, phasic transients 100 to 1,000 nanomolar lasting a few hundred milliseconds.

◦ Dendritic dopamine into the substantia nigra pars reticulata.

◦ Glutamate from the VGLUT2-positive minority.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ Intracellular calcium concentration in micromolar.

◦ Vesicular dopamine stock, 0 to 1.

◦ Learned value estimate for the current cue, if modelling reward prediction error.

◦ Cumulative oxidative damage, for long-timescale models.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Baseline firing 1 to 5 hertz, burst rate 15 to 30 hertz, pause floor 0 hertz.

◦ Total axon length about 4.5 metres, release sites 1 to 2.4 million.

◦ Learning rate for value updating, typically 0.05 to 0.3 in models.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Interspike interval 200 to 1,000 milliseconds.

◦ Burst duration 100 to 200 milliseconds; pause duration 100 to 400 milliseconds.

◦ Dopamine clearance by the transporter, 100 to 500 milliseconds in dorsal striatum.

◦ Neuromelanin accumulation, decades.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Progressive death produces Parkinson's disease, with motor symptoms appearing only after roughly 40 to 60 percent of these cells and a larger fraction of their striatal terminals are lost.

◦ Alpha-synuclein misfolds into Lewy bodies inside surviving cells and spreads between them.

◦ Excess dopamine replacement therapy overshoots and causes levodopa-induced dyskinesia, involuntary writhing movements.

◦ Iron overload and neuromelanin loss are both measurable in the living human nigra with 7 tesla magnetic resonance imaging.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a substantia nigra pars compacta dopamine neuron that keeps a running prediction of reward, bursts when the outcome is better than predicted, and pauses when it is worse.
Create a number variable called predicted value with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called learning rate with initial value 0.15.
Create a number variable called baseline rate with initial value 4.
Create a number variable called burst gain with initial value 16.
Create a number variable called trial with initial value 1.
Create a list variable called rate history with initial value empty list.
While trial is less than or equal to 20, repeat the following steps.
    Create a number variable called reward with initial value 0.
    Check if trial is less than or equal to 15.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set reward to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Create a number variable called prediction error with initial value 0.
    Calculate the difference of reward and predicted value.
    Set prediction error to that result.
    Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 0.
    Calculate the product of burst gain and prediction error.
    Set firing rate to the sum of baseline rate and that result.
    Check if firing rate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Add firing rate to the end of rate history.
    Calculate the product of learning rate and prediction error.
    Set predicted value to the sum of predicted value and that result.
    Display firing rate to the console.
    Calculate the sum of trial and 1.
    Set trial to that result.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in rate history.
Display that number to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the reward prediction error rule and the spiking output are both short, the arithmetic is exactly what the biology does, and every reinforcement-learning toolkit a simulation team will reach for is already written in it.

import random

random.seed(7)

BASE_RATE  = 4.0      # spikes per second when nothing surprising happens
BURST_GAIN = 16.0     # extra spikes per second per unit of positive surprise
ALPHA      = 0.15     # how fast the cell learns to expect the reward
WINDOW_MS  = 200      # the response window after the cue

value = 0.0           # the cell's running prediction of reward

for trial in range(1, 21):
    reward = 1.0 if trial <= 15 else 0.0     # reward is withdrawn after trial 15
    prediction = value
    rpe = reward - prediction                # the reward prediction error
    rate = BASE_RATE + BURST_GAIN * rpe
    if rate < 0.0:
        rate = 0.0                           # a cell cannot fire less than silence
    # Poisson spiking over the response window, one millisecond bins
    spikes = sum(1 for _ in range(WINDOW_MS) if random.random() < rate / 1000.0)
    value += ALPHA * rpe                     # learn from the surprise
    label = "burst" if rate > BASE_RATE + 1 else ("pause" if rate < BASE_RATE - 1 else "tonic")
    print("trial %2d  reward %.0f  predicted %.2f  error %+.2f  %5.1f Hz  %d spikes  %s"
          % (trial, reward, prediction, rpe, rate, spikes, label))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell whose death you can see with the naked eye at autopsy, because the black stripe in the midbrain fades to grey.

If a neuron is pigmented with neuromelanin, paces itself at a few hertz using calcium channels, grows a four-and-a-half-metre unmyelinated axon into the striatum, releases transmitter from its dendrites as well as its axon, and encodes the difference between what happened and what was expected, it is a substantia nigra pars compacta dopamine neuron.

CHAPTER 79. VENTRAL TEGMENTAL AREA NEURONS (Reward-Pursuit Driving Neuron) (COG)

Every drug that humans have ever become addicted to, from opium to nicotine to cocaine, ends up doing the same thing to the same few hundred thousand cells sitting in the middle of your midbrain.

Ventral tegmental area is an address, naming a patch of midbrain floor and nothing about the work done there.

Reward-Pursuit names the class of events these cells report on and narrows it correctly, because their signal governs the effort spent chasing a prize far more than the pleasure felt on receiving it, the distinction experimenters draw between wanting and liking.

Driving names the action, since a brief burst of firing when a cue predicts something better than expected sets alight the approach behaviour that follows, while a pause when the outcome is worse than expected damps it.

Neuron marks it as one cell among about six hundred and ninety thousand in the human ventral tegmental area, of which fewer than one in five are dopaminergic, the rest being inhibitory and glutamate-releasing cells that shape the same output.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The ventral tegmental area is a small, loosely bordered patch of the midbrain that sits just inside and above the substantia nigra.

It is the origin of two famous pathways: the mesolimbic pathway, which runs to the nucleus accumbens and the amygdala and hippocampus, and the mesocortical pathway, which runs to the prefrontal cortex.

Its dopamine cells do for motivation and emotion roughly what their nigral cousins do for movement.

They signal that something is better or worse than expected, they signal salience, meaning how much an event matters whether it is good or bad, and they set how hard an animal is willing to work.

But the ventral tegmental area is not simply a dopamine nucleus, and this is the single most common mistake made about it.

Only around 60 percent of its cells make dopamine; roughly a third make gamma-aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical, and a small but powerful minority make glutamate, the main excitatory chemical.

The interplay among these three, inside one nucleus, is what makes the region a decision point for reward rather than a simple transmitter tap.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Dopamine cells here are medium-sized, fusiform or multipolar, with three to six moderately branched dendrites and, unlike their nigral cousins, comparatively little neuromelanin pigment when young.

Local gamma-aminobutyric acid cells are smaller and rounder with denser, shorter dendritic trees, and they fire much faster.

Glutamate cells are small and are concentrated in the medial and rostral parts of the nucleus.

There is no crisp cytoarchitectural boundary anywhere around the ventral tegmental area; it fades into the substantia nigra laterally and into the periaqueductal grey and raphe medially.

Many cells carry more than one transmitter machine, with vesicles for glutamate and for gamma-aminobutyric acid kept in separate pools inside a single axon terminal.

SIZE:

Dopamine cell bodies are 15 to 30 micrometres across, slightly smaller on average than nigral dopamine cells.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid cell bodies are 10 to 20 micrometres.

Dendritic fields span 300 to 800 micrometres.

The axonal arbour of a ventral tegmental dopamine neuron is large but smaller than the nigral record holder, with total lengths estimated in the tens of centimetres to a metre or more, and a mesocortical cell contacts a far sparser field than a mesolimbic one.

The whole human ventral tegmental area is only a few tens of cubic millimetres per side.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Dopamine cells projecting to the nucleus accumbens medial shell, which respond most strongly to reward and to drugs of abuse.

• Dopamine cells projecting to the nucleus accumbens lateral shell and core, which respond to reward-predicting cues and drive approach.

• Dopamine cells projecting to the prefrontal cortex, which are less sensitive to autoreceptor feedback, fire faster, and respond strongly to stress and to aversive events.

• Dopamine cells projecting to the basolateral amygdala and to the ventral hippocampus, involved in emotional memory.

• Local and projecting gamma-aminobutyric acid neurons, which inhibit dopamine cells and also project all the way to the nucleus accumbens themselves.

• Glutamate neurons expressing the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT2, which co-release gamma-aminobutyric acid and promote positive reinforcement in their own right.

Anatomically the nucleus is also divided into named subnuclei: the parabrachial pigmented nucleus, the paranigral nucleus, the interfascicular nucleus, and the rostral and caudal linear nuclei.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It occupies the ventromedial midbrain tegmentum, corresponding to cell group A10, bounded laterally by the substantia nigra, ventrally by the interpeduncular nucleus, dorsally by the red nucleus, and medially by the midline raphe.

The lateral border with the substantia nigra pars compacta is a true interface with no anatomical wall, and cells straddle it.

Just caudal to it lies the rostromedial tegmental nucleus, a small inhibitory structure that acts as the ventral tegmental area's off switch for disappointment.

Its axons leave in the medial forebrain bundle, passing through the lateral hypothalamus on the way to the ventral striatum and cortex.

NUMBER:

This book budgets about 450 thousand ventral tegmental area neurons in total, both sides combined.

Applying the standard composition gives roughly 270 thousand dopamine cells, about 150 thousand gamma-aminobutyric acid cells, and perhaps 20 thousand glutamate cells, with heavy overlap because many cells carry two transmitters.

Confidence is low to moderate: unbiased counts in humans are scarce, and the best primate anchor is a macaque study reporting about 110 thousand dopamine neurons in cell group A10 per hemisphere, which scales to a similar human total.

That is about 0.23 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the basal ganglia and about 0.0005 percent of the 86 billion neurons of the whole nervous system.

Fewer cells than live in a small town run the entire reward economy of a human life.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Dopamine cells are slow, broad-spiking pacemakers firing at 1 to 8 hertz in a regular or irregular single-spike pattern.

They switch into burst mode, firing 2 to 6 spikes at 15 to 30 hertz, when glutamate activates N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, and bursts release far more dopamine per spike than tonic firing does.

They show the hyperpolarisation-activated current sag, though less consistently than nigral cells, so sag alone is an unreliable identifier here.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid cells are fast, narrow-spiking, and fire tonically at 10 to 40 hertz, providing the constant inhibitory tone that dopamine cells must overcome.

Glutamate cells are electrically heterogeneous and do not fall into a single class.

The critical circuit fact is disinhibition: reduce the gamma-aminobutyric acid cells' firing and the dopamine cells burst, and this is exactly how opioids work.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input arrives from the prefrontal cortex, the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus, the pedunculopontine nucleus, the lateral hypothalamus including orexin neurons, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and the subthalamic nucleus.

Inhibitory input arrives from the nucleus accumbens, the ventral pallidum, the lateral habenula by way of the rostromedial tegmental nucleus, and from local gamma-aminobutyric acid cells inside the nucleus itself.

Outputs go to the nucleus accumbens core and shell, the olfactory tubercle, the prefrontal and cingulate cortex, the amygdala, the hippocampus and the lateral habenula.

Local gamma-aminobutyric acid cells synapse directly on dopamine cell bodies and proximal dendrites, the position of maximum authority.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Dopamine axons are thin, roughly 0.1 to 0.5 micrometres, mostly unmyelinated, and slow, conducting at well under 1 metre per second.

Mesolimbic axons branch densely within the nucleus accumbens; mesocortical axons run much further and branch far more sparsely in cortex.

Most release sites are not classical synapses, so dopamine escapes into the extracellular space and acts by volume transmission.

Co-releasing terminals keep glutamate vesicles and gamma-aminobutyric acid vesicles in physically separate pools inside the same bouton, so one terminal can send two opposite messages.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Dopamine, made by tyrosine hydroxylase and packaged by the vesicular monoamine transporter VMAT2, acting on D1-family and D2-family receptors.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid, from both local interneurons and long-range projection cells.

Glutamate, packaged by VGLUT2, released by a distinct population and also co-released by some dopamine cells.

Neurotensin and cholecystokinin are common peptide co-transmitters in the dopamine cells here, which distinguishes them chemically from their nigral cousins.

Mu-opioid receptors sit on the gamma-aminobutyric acid cells, and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors sit on the dopamine cells, which is why morphine and nicotine both raise accumbens dopamine by different routes.

MYELINATION:

Ventral tegmental dopamine axons are largely unmyelinated, like their nigral counterparts and for the same reason: enormous branching is incompatible with a myelin sheath.

Some of the long mesocortical fibres running in the medial forebrain bundle carry thin myelin over their unbranched stretch.

Slow, uninsulated conduction is acceptable because dopamine's message is a concentration change lasting hundreds of milliseconds to seconds, not a millisecond-precise pulse.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, for the same reasons as the nigral cells: sustained pacemaking, a large unmyelinated arbour, and the oxidative chemistry of dopamine itself.

The burden is measurably lighter than in the substantia nigra pars compacta, because these cells rely less on Cav1.3 calcium channels for pacemaking, they express more of the calcium-buffering protein calbindin, and their arbours are smaller.

That difference in metabolic style is the best current explanation for a striking clinical fact: in Parkinson's disease the nigral cells die while the ventral tegmental cells largely survive.

PLASTICITY:

A single exposure to cocaine, morphine, nicotine, alcohol or amphetamine strengthens the glutamate synapses onto these dopamine cells for days, a phenomenon that is one of the foundations of addiction research.

The mechanism involves the insertion of calcium-permeable AMPA receptors into the synapse, which changes the rules of subsequent learning.

Stress produces the opposite pattern in mesocortical cells, and chronic stress reshapes their firing into a burst-heavy pattern implicated in depression.

Endocannabinoids, retrograde messengers made by the dopamine cell and sent backwards across the synapse, suppress incoming inhibition and are a major local plasticity mechanism here.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here express high levels of the enzyme that degrades dopamine and help set the size of dopamine transients in the target regions.

Microglial density in the ventral tegmental area is lower than in the substantia nigra, and microglial activation here is more strongly driven by systemic inflammation than by local debris, which is one route by which illness produces the loss of motivation called sickness behaviour.

Astrocytes in this nucleus release adenosine triphosphate and adenosine that modulate dopamine cell firing, and alcohol acts partly through this glial pathway.

Oligodendrocyte involvement is limited because most of the arbour is unmyelinated.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the ventral striatum still receives all its cortical and limbic information but has no way to know whether any of it matters.

Reward stops teaching, cues stop attracting, and effort stops being worth spending, which in a person looks like profound apathy and anhedonia, the inability to feel pleasure.

Delete only the gamma-aminobutyric acid cells and the opposite happens: dopamine release becomes unrestrained and every stimulus acquires exaggerated significance, which is the leading circuit account of psychosis.

The flavour the region would lose is wanting.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Co-transmission is the defining feature: one terminal can release dopamine and glutamate, or glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid, from separate vesicle pools, so the sign of the output depends on which receptors the target expresses.

Volume transmission means dopamine acts as a slowly changing chemical field rather than a wire signal.

Somatodendritic dopamine release feeds back onto D2 autoreceptors, giving local self-inhibition.

Retrograde endocannabinoid signalling lets the cell turn down its own inhibitory inputs on demand.

Gap-junction coupling between dopamine cells has been reported and may synchronise small clusters.

Local disinhibition, in which drugs silence gamma-aminobutyric acid cells and thereby release dopamine cells, is a circuit-level computation that cannot be captured by modelling the dopamine cell alone, and any simulation must include at least the two-cell motif.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Prefrontal cortex glutamate, 0 to 40 hertz, driving bursts through N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors.

◦ Laterodorsal tegmental and pedunculopontine acetylcholine and glutamate, gating the switch from tonic to burst mode.

◦ Rostromedial tegmental and accumbens gamma-aminobutyric acid, producing pauses of 100 to 400 milliseconds.

◦ Local gamma-aminobutyric acid interneuron tone, 10 to 40 hertz, perisomatic.

◦ Orexin from the lateral hypothalamus, linking arousal and appetite to reward.

◦ Pharmacological inputs: mu-opioid agonists acting on the gamma-aminobutyric acid cells, nicotine acting on the dopamine cells.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Dopamine into the nucleus accumbens core and shell, tonic 5 to 50 nanomolar, phasic transients up to several hundred nanomolar.

◦ Dopamine into prefrontal cortex, amygdala and hippocampus.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid and glutamate from the non-dopamine populations to the same targets.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage of the dopamine cell and of the local gamma-aminobutyric acid cell.

◦ N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor activation level, setting burst probability.

◦ Vesicular dopamine stock, 0 to 1.

◦ Extracellular dopamine concentration in each target.

◦ Endocannabinoid level, controlling incoming inhibition.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Dopamine cell tonic rate 1 to 8 hertz, burst rate 15 to 30 hertz.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid cell tonic rate 10 to 40 hertz.

◦ Population composition about 60 percent dopamine, about 30 to 35 percent gamma-aminobutyric acid, about 2 to 5 percent glutamate.

◦ Dopamine uptake in the accumbens is slower than in the dorsal striatum, so transients last longer.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Interspike interval 125 to 1,000 milliseconds.

◦ Burst duration 100 to 200 milliseconds.

◦ Accumbens dopamine transient decay about 200 to 600 milliseconds.

◦ Drug-induced synaptic strengthening lasts 5 to 10 days.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Chronic drug exposure locks the glutamate inputs into a strengthened state, producing craving and relapse long after the drug is gone.

◦ Excess mesolimbic dopamine signalling is the leading circuit account of the hallucinations and delusions of schizophrenia, and every effective antipsychotic blocks D2 receptors in this pathway.

◦ Reduced activity in the mesolimbic pathway produces anhedonia and lack of motivation in depression.

◦ Unlike the nigral cells, these largely survive Parkinson's disease, so late non-motor symptoms depend on their relative sparing.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a ventral tegmental area dopamine neuron that is held down by a local inhibitory neuron and bursts when an opioid drug silences that inhibitory neuron.
Create a number variable called dopamine rate with initial value 4.
Create a number variable called inhibitory rate with initial value 25.
Create a number variable called accumbens dopamine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called peak dopamine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 4000, repeat the following steps.
    Create a number variable called opioid present with initial value 0.
    Check if both step is greater than or equal to 1000 and step is less than 3000 is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set opioid present to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Create a number variable called inhibitory target with initial value 25.
    Check if opioid present is equal to 1.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set inhibitory target to 2.5.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of inhibitory target and inhibitory rate.
    Set inhibitory rate to the sum of inhibitory rate and the quotient of that result divided by 30.
    Calculate the difference of 25 and inhibitory rate.
    Create a number variable called disinhibition with initial value 0.
    Set disinhibition to the product of that result and 0.35.
    Create a number variable called dopamine target with initial value 0.
    Set dopamine target to the sum of 4 and disinhibition.
    Calculate the difference of dopamine target and dopamine rate.
    Set dopamine rate to the sum of dopamine rate and the quotient of that result divided by 50.
    Calculate the product of dopamine rate and 0.05.
    Create a number variable called release with initial value 0.
    Set release to that result.
    Calculate the quotient of accumbens dopamine divided by 200.
    Set accumbens dopamine to the sum of accumbens dopamine and the difference of release and that result.
    Check if accumbens dopamine is greater than peak dopamine.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set peak dopamine to accumbens dopamine.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of step and 1.
    Set step to that result.
End the loop.
Display dopamine rate to the console.
Display peak dopamine to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because the essential lesson here is a two-cell circuit rather than a single membrane, and JavaScript runs in any browser with no build step, so a simulation team can put disinhibition on screen as a live demonstration.

// Ventral tegmental area: a dopamine cell held down by a local GABA cell.
// An opioid silences the GABA cell, and the dopamine cell is released.

const dt = 1.0;          // milliseconds per step
const STEPS = 4000;      // 4 seconds of simulated time
const TAU_DA = 50.0;     // ms, how fast the dopamine cell changes rate
const TAU_GABA = 30.0;   // ms, how fast the GABA cell changes rate

let daRate = 4.0;        // Hz, tonic pacemaker rate of the dopamine cell
let gabaRate = 25.0;     // Hz, local inhibitory tone
let dopamine = 40.0;     // nanomolar in the nucleus accumbens
let peak = dopamine;

for (let i = 0; i < STEPS; i++) {
  const t = i * dt;
  const opioid = (t >= 1000.0 && t < 3000.0) ? 1.0 : 0.0;   // morphine on board
  const gabaTarget = 25.0 * (1.0 - 0.9 * opioid);           // mu receptors hush it
  gabaRate += dt * (gabaTarget - gabaRate) / TAU_GABA;

  // less inhibition means more dopamine firing: this is disinhibition
  let daTarget = 4.0 + 0.35 * (25.0 - gabaRate);
  if (daTarget < 0.0) daTarget = 0.0;
  daRate += dt * (daTarget - daRate) / TAU_DA;

  // release scales with firing rate; the transporter clears with tau 200 ms
  dopamine += dt * (0.05 * daRate - dopamine / 200.0) * 10.0;
  if (dopamine > peak) peak = dopamine;
}

console.log("GABA cell rate at the end:", gabaRate.toFixed(1), "Hz");
console.log("dopamine cell rate at the end:", daRate.toFixed(1), "Hz");
console.log("peak accumbens dopamine:", peak.toFixed(1), "nM");

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only place in the brain where a single nucleus contains dopamine, gamma-aminobutyric acid and glutamate neurons in roughly a sixty, thirty-five and five percent mix, with individual terminals holding two different transmitters in separate vesicle pools.

If a midbrain cell is a slow broad-spiking pacemaker that bursts when its local inhibitory neighbour is silenced by an opioid, projects to the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex, carries neurotensin or cholecystokinin, and survives Parkinson's disease while its lateral neighbour dies, it is a ventral tegmental area neuron.

CHAPTER 80. NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS MEDIUM SPINY NEURONS (Motivation-To-Action Converting Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that decides whether something is worth wanting, and it spends most of its life refusing to fire.

The old name is an address joined to a shape description, naming the nucleus and the spines but not the transformation performed.

Motivation-To-Action names the transformation itself, which is the classic description of the accumbens as the place where limbic drive becomes motor output.

Converting names the work in between, since value-laden input from the amygdala, hippocampus and prefrontal cortex arrives on the dense dendritic spines together with dopamine from the midbrain, and what leaves is an inhibitory command to the ventral pallidum and midbrain that biases whether an approach is actually made.

Neuron marks it as the cell making up more than ninety-five percent of all neurons in the nucleus accumbens, so that naming it names the structure.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The nucleus accumbens is the ventral part of the striatum, sitting where the caudate nucleus and putamen merge underneath the front of the brain.

Its main cell is the medium spiny neuron, so called because it is medium-sized and its dendrites are carpeted with spines, tiny mushroom-shaped knobs that each receive one excitatory contact.

Roughly nine out of ten accumbens neurons are of this type.

Its job is to sit at the exact point where information about the world, about memory, about emotion and about value all arrive at once, and to fire only when enough of them agree.

Emotion arrives from the amygdala, context from the hippocampus, plans from the prefrontal cortex, alerting signals from the thalamus, and the price tag from dopamine cells of the ventral tegmental area.

The output is a decision about whether to approach, avoid, or expend effort, delivered as inhibition to the ventral pallidum and the midbrain.

This is the cell on which addictive drugs leave their longest-lasting structural marks.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is round or ovoid with a thin rim of cytoplasm, and it looks almost featureless until the dendrites are stained.

Seven to ten primary dendrites radiate outward, branching two or three times to produce a roughly spherical tree.

Beyond the first 20 to 30 micrometres the dendrites are densely covered with spines, at a density of one to two spines per micrometre, giving a single cell somewhere between 5,000 and 15,000 spines.

Each spine is a separate chemical compartment and can be strengthened or weakened independently, which is what makes this cell a learning machine rather than a switch.

Accumbens spiny neurons have slightly smaller and less densely spined dendritic trees than their dorsal striatal counterparts, and the shell subdivision has the smallest of all.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 12 to 20 micrometres across.

Dendritic trees span 300 to 500 micrometres, so the cell listens within a sphere about a third of a millimetre wide.

The local axon collateral field roughly matches the dendritic field.

The main axon travels 1 to 3 centimetres to reach the ventral pallidum or the midbrain.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• D1 receptor-expressing medium spiny neurons, which carry the excitatory dopamine receptor, also carry the peptides substance P and dynorphin, and project to the ventral pallidum, the ventral tegmental area and the substantia nigra, forming the direct-like pathway.

• D2 receptor-expressing medium spiny neurons, which carry the inhibitory dopamine receptor, also carry enkephalin and the adenosine A2A receptor, and project only to the ventral pallidum, forming the indirect-like pathway.

• Core neurons, in the region wrapped around the anterior commissure, resembling dorsal striatal cells and driving cue-triggered approach and effort.

• Shell neurons, in the surrounding rim, resembling extended amygdala cells, controlling hedonic reactions and the reinstatement of drug seeking.

A minority of accumbens spiny neurons carry both D1 and D2 receptors, so the two-pathway picture is a strong simplification rather than a law.

Older simple accounts assign reward to D1 cells and aversion to D2 cells, but careful stimulation experiments show both populations can drive both, depending on the pattern and duration of activity.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The nucleus accumbens lies in the basal forebrain, ventral to the caudate nucleus and medial to the putamen, immediately below and around the anterior commissure, which is the landmark separating core from shell.

It is continuous above with the caudate and putamen and continuous below with the olfactory tubercle, so it is best understood as one end of a gradient rather than a separate organ.

The medial shell borders the septum and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and this shell-to-extended-amygdala interface is where reward circuitry meets stress circuitry.

Laterally the shell abuts the ventral pallidum, its principal target.

NUMBER:

The human nucleus accumbens has a volume of roughly 470 cubic millimetres per side, which is about 5 percent of the striatum.

Applying that fraction to the striatum's roughly 110 million neurons gives about 5 million accumbens neurons in total across both sides, of which about 90 to 95 percent are medium spiny neurons, so roughly 4.5 to 4.7 million cells of this type.

Confidence is low, because this is a volume-scaled estimate rather than a direct human count, and the defensible range is 3 million to 8 million.

That is about 2.4 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons of the basal ganglia and about 0.005 percent of the 86 billion neurons of the whole nervous system.

The split between D1-type and D2-type cells is close to even, with a modest excess of mixed and D1 cells in the shell.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The defining feature is the down state, a deeply hyperpolarised resting voltage near minus 80 to minus 90 millivolts, held there by inward-rectifying potassium channels of the Kir2 family that clamp the membrane hard.

In this state the cell has a low input resistance, so ordinary inputs barely move it, and it is effectively deaf.

When many excitatory inputs arrive together the cell jumps into the up state, a plateau near minus 55 millivolts, from which spiking becomes possible.

Even in the up state, firing is sparse, typically under 1 to 5 hertz, and the cell never fires spontaneously.

A slowly inactivating A-type potassium current adds a long delay between the arrival of input and the first spike, of the order of tens to hundreds of milliseconds, which further enforces the need for sustained agreement among inputs.

Accumbens cells sit slightly more depolarised and are somewhat more excitable than dorsal striatal cells, and D2 cells are more excitable than D1 cells.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory glutamate inputs arrive from the prefrontal cortex, especially prelimbic and infralimbic regions, the basolateral amygdala, the ventral hippocampus by way of the subiculum, and the paraventricular and midline thalamic nuclei.

These sources target the two cell types unevenly, and inputs to the core are broadly scattered while inputs to the shell are concentrated.

Dopamine arrives from the ventral tegmental area, mostly at non-synaptic release sites near the necks of spines, so it modulates rather than drives.

Local inhibition arrives from fast-spiking parvalbumin interneurons, from low-threshold-spiking interneurons, and from the axon collaterals of neighbouring spiny neurons.

Acetylcholine arrives from local giant cholinergic interneurons whose pauses are timed to reward events.

Outputs are inhibitory synapses on the ventral pallidum, and for D1 cells also on the ventral tegmental area, the substantia nigra, the lateral hypothalamus and the pedunculopontine nucleus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, 0.3 to 1 micrometre, and emits a rich local collateral network before leaving the nucleus.

Those local collaterals provide lateral inhibition, letting an active cell suppress its neighbours, although the effect is weaker than classical winner-take-all models assumed.

The main axon runs in the medial forebrain bundle to the ventral pallidum and midbrain, a distance of one to three centimetres.

Terminals are numerous and form conventional inhibitory synapses, with peptide co-release requiring higher firing rates than gamma-aminobutyric acid release.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid is the fast transmitter, acting on gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors in the targets.

D1 cells co-release substance P, which acts on neurokinin receptors, and dynorphin, which acts on kappa-opioid receptors and produces dysphoria.

D2 cells co-release enkephalin, which acts on delta and mu-opioid receptors and is broadly pleasurable.

So the two cell types deliver not only opposite circuit signs but opposite chemical moods, and both effects only appear during vigorous firing.

MYELINATION:

The long axons to the ventral pallidum and midbrain are thinly myelinated by oligodendrocytes.

Local axon collaterals inside the nucleus are unmyelinated.

Myelination here is functionally modest, since conduction over one to three centimetres at a few metres per second takes only a few milliseconds, which is fast enough for a system whose decisions unfold over hundreds of milliseconds.

Notably, chronic social stress and chronic cocaine both change myelin gene expression in this region, so the insulation itself is part of the disease process.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Baseline cost is low, because the cell rests deeply hyperpolarised and fires rarely, and it spends most of the day silent.

The expensive part is the spine population: 5,000 to 15,000 spines each maintaining receptors, scaffolding proteins and local protein synthesis machinery.

Costs spike during learning, when spines are built, and after drug exposure, when spine density rises measurably within days.

PLASTICITY:

This is one of the most plastic cells in the adult brain, and its plasticity is where addiction physically lives.

Cocaine increases dendritic spine density on both D1 and D2 accumbens spiny neurons, a structural change visible under a microscope and lasting weeks.

The transcription factor delta-FosB accumulates in D1 cells with repeated drug exposure and stays elevated for weeks, reprogramming gene expression and increasing the reward value of the drug.

Long-term depression at prefrontal-to-accumbens synapses is lost after chronic cocaine, and restoring it reduces relapse in animals.

Calcium-permeable AMPA receptors are inserted into these synapses during prolonged withdrawal and drive craving that grows rather than fades with time.

Scaffolding proteins including glutamate receptor-interacting protein 1 and A-kinase anchoring protein 150 control these changes differently in D1 and D2 cells.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here do something with unusual clinical importance: they supply the glutamate that occupies extrasynaptic receptors, through the cystine-glutamate exchanger, and chronic cocaine collapses this system.

Astrocytes in the accumbens also physically retract from synapses after drug exposure, so glutamate spills further and reaches receptors it should not.

Restoring the cystine-glutamate exchanger with the drug N-acetylcysteine reduces relapse in animals and has been tested in people, making this one of the few places where a glial fix is a candidate therapy.

Microglia in the accumbens respond to alcohol and opioids and release cytokines that alter these neurons' excitability.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the ventral forebrain still receives every emotional, contextual and cognitive signal but has nothing that combines them into a verdict.

The limbic system would be all input and no output, capable of feeling but not of translating feeling into effort.

Because the cell only fires on convergence, its removal specifically destroys the brain's ability to require agreement before acting, so the region would lose its scepticism.

Concretely, motivation to pursue a distant reward would disappear, cues would stop triggering approach, and the transition from liking something to working for it would be severed.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The up and down state transition is a genuine two-state nonlinearity, not a threshold, and no leaky integrator reproduces it.

Individual spines perform local computation, with their own calcium dynamics, their own protein synthesis and their own strength.

Dendrites generate local calcium spikes and plateau potentials that can be triggered by clustered inputs without the cell body knowing.

Back-propagating action potentials from the cell body sweep into the dendrites and mark recently active spines for change.

Gene transcription is a first-class part of the cell's behaviour here, with delta-FosB acting on a timescale of weeks, so a serious simulation of addiction must model transcription as a state variable.

Local protein synthesis inside dendrites supports lasting spine changes without instruction from the cell body.

Retrograde endocannabinoid signalling from this cell suppresses its own incoming excitation and is required for long-term depression.

Metabolic coupling to astrocytes through the cystine-glutamate exchanger makes the surrounding glutamate tone part of the cell's own computation.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Prefrontal cortex glutamate, 0 to 20 hertz per fibre, thousands of fibres, AMPA and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors.

◦ Basolateral amygdala glutamate, 0 to 20 hertz, carrying emotional value.

◦ Ventral hippocampal glutamate, 0 to 15 hertz, carrying context and driving the up state most effectively.

◦ Paraventricular thalamic glutamate, 0 to 15 hertz, carrying salience and arousal.

◦ Dopamine, 5 to 50 nanomolar tonic and up to several hundred nanomolar phasic, acting on D1 or D2 receptors.

◦ Local gamma-aminobutyric acid from fast-spiking interneurons and neighbouring spiny neurons.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid onto the ventral pallidum from both cell types.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid onto the ventral tegmental area, substantia nigra, lateral hypothalamus and pedunculopontine nucleus from D1 cells.

◦ Substance P and dynorphin from D1 cells, enkephalin from D2 cells, released only above about 10 hertz.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts, with an explicit up or down state flag.

◦ Total excitatory conductance in nanosiemens.

◦ A-type potassium current inactivation, 0 to 1.

◦ Per-spine weight vector, 5,000 to 15,000 entries.

◦ Delta-FosB level, a slow variable with a timescale of weeks.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Down state voltage minus 80 to minus 90 millivolts; up state plateau about minus 55 millivolts; threshold about minus 45 millivolts.

◦ Input resistance 40 to 100 megaohms in the down state, higher in the up state.

◦ Spine count 5,000 to 15,000; spine density 1 to 2 per micrometre.

◦ Firing rate 0 hertz at rest, under 5 hertz when active.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane time constant 10 to 20 milliseconds.

◦ Up state duration 200 to 1,000 milliseconds.

◦ Delay to first spike 50 to 300 milliseconds because of the A-type potassium current.

◦ Dopamine transient decay 200 to 600 milliseconds.

◦ Delta-FosB accumulation and decay, weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Chronic drugs of abuse add spines, load D1 cells with delta-FosB, abolish long-term depression and insert calcium-permeable AMPA receptors, producing craving that intensifies during abstinence.

◦ Astrocytic cystine-glutamate exchange collapses, extrasynaptic glutamate falls and relapse becomes easier to trigger.

◦ Reduced activity in this cell population is associated with anhedonia in depression, and deep brain stimulation of the nucleus accumbens has been trialled for treatment-resistant depression and for obsessive-compulsive disorder.

◦ Excess D2-pathway activity contributes to aversion and avoidance.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate a nucleus accumbens medium spiny neuron that stays in a deep down state until several named glutamate inputs arrive together, then enters an up state and fires sparsely.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -85.
Create a number variable called excitation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called up state steps with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 4000, repeat the following steps.
    Create a number variable called active sources with initial value 0.
    Check if both step is greater than or equal to 1000 and step is less than 3000 is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set active sources to 4.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set active sources to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of active sources and 0.4.
    Set excitation to the sum of excitation and that result.
    Calculate the quotient of excitation divided by 20.
    Set excitation to the difference of excitation and that result.
    Create a number variable called rectifier with initial value 1.
    Check if voltage is less than -70.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set rectifier to 2.5.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of voltage and -85.
    Create a number variable called leak with initial value 0.
    Set leak to the product of that result and rectifier.
    Calculate the product of excitation and 12.
    Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
    Set drive to the difference of that result and leak.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the quotient of drive divided by 24.
    Check if voltage is greater than -70.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of up state steps and 1.
        Set up state steps to that result.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if voltage is greater than or equal to -45.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set spike count to that result.
        Set voltage to -70.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of step and 1.
    Set step to that result.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
Display up state steps to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Go is chosen because a realistic ventral striatum needs millions of these cells stepped together, and Go gives compiled speed and easy parallelism with a standard library that needs no external packages.

package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"math/rand"
)

func main() {
	const dt = 0.5      // ms per step
	const steps = 4000  // 2000 ms of simulated time
	const vDown = -85.0 // mV, the down state the rectifier clamps to
	const vTh = -45.0   // mV, spike threshold
	const tau = 12.0    // ms, membrane time constant
	const tauSyn = 10.0 // ms, glutamate conductance decay
	const weight = 32.0 // mV of drive per unit of conductance

	rng := rand.New(rand.NewSource(3))
	v, gExc := vDown, 0.0
	spikes, upSteps := 0, 0

	for i := 0; i < steps; i++ {
		t := float64(i) * dt
		p := 0.002 // quiet background rate per source per step
		if t >= 500.0 && t < 1500.0 {
			p = 0.020 // cortex, amygdala, hippocampus and thalamus all fire
		}
		for s := 0; s < 4; s++ { // four named glutamate sources
			if rng.Float64() < p {
				gExc += 1.0
			}
		}
		gExc -= dt * gExc / tauSyn
		g := 1.0
		if v < -70.0 {
			g = 2.5 // the inward rectifier grips hard in the down state
		}
		v += dt * (-g*(v-vDown) + weight*gExc) / tau
		if v > -70.0 {
			upSteps++
		}
		if v >= vTh {
			spikes++
			v = -70.0
		}
	}
	fmt.Printf("spikes: %d\n", spikes)
	fmt.Printf("time spent in the up state: %.0f ms\n", float64(upSteps)*dt)
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is a spine-covered cell that sits at minus 85 millivolts refusing to answer, that needs the cortex, the amygdala, the hippocampus and the thalamus to agree before it will speak, and that is physically remodelled by every addictive drug.

If a neuron in the basal forebrain shows a two-state membrane with a long delay to its first spike, carries either substance P and dynorphin or enkephalin and the adenosine A2A receptor, projects to the ventral pallidum, and grows new dendritic spines after cocaine, it is a nucleus accumbens medium spiny neuron.

CHAPTER 81. BOTH-PATHWAY QUIETING NEURON (COG) (PUC)

You reach for a mug, see the steam, and your hand freezes in mid air.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is an inhibitory cell of the external globus pallidus (GPe), a pale wedge deep in the brain.

Its axon runs backwards into the striatum, the movement system's input station, where a go team competes with a no go team.

This construct takes no side and hushes both teams at once.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The spindle shaped cell body carries three to five smooth dendrites, the antennae that gather signals, splayed into a flat disc.

Almost its whole axon lies in the striatum as a net.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 25 micrometres long, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre.

Rat tracing gives tens of millimetres of striatal axon.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Territorial variants matter: dorsolateral for limbs, dorsomedial for rules, ventral for motivation.

A molecular split separates cells carrying the FoxP2 gene switch from a fringe carrying Npas1 alone.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in the external globus pallidus, enriched along its edges.

Name the interfaces: the pallidostriatal border with putamen and caudate, the internal capsule edge, the lamina between external and internal pallidum, and the ventral pallidum seam.

Terminals fill both striatal compartments, striosome and matrix.

NUMBER:

Arkypallidal cells are a quarter of GPe neurons in rodents, so against a human pallidal budget of 1.5 million, halved for those ignoring pathway identity, the estimate is 150,000 to 220,000.

Confidence is low, since older human counts of the whole pallidum run nearer 700,000.

That is 0.09 percent of the 200 million basal ganglia neurons and 0.0002 percent of all 86 billion.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

In the rat it fires under 2 spikes per second and irregularly, while its neighbours fire above 10 regularly.

A deep afterhyperpolarisation, the voltage dip after each spike, restrains it until a stop cue drives a burst of 50 to 100 spikes per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) from indirect pathway striatal cells, glutamate from the subthalamic nucleus, and sparse cortical input.

It contacts both pathways and striatal interneurons with only a few boutons each.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, near half a micrometre, and its oddity is direction, since pallidal axons normally run onward while this one turns back.

Travel takes 1 to 3 milliseconds in a rat.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The fast transmitter is GABA, read by GABA type A receptors, chloride channels that open within a millisecond.

It also makes preproenkephalin, parent of the opioid peptide enkephalin, which damps glutamate release for seconds.

MYELINATION:

Myelin is the fatty sheath that speeds conduction, and this axon carries only a thin one, since a centimetre of travel needs no speed.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Nearly silent at rest, its baseline bill is modest.

The cost sits in thousands of bare terminal branches that leak sodium and must be pumped clean using adenosine triphosphate, the cell's energy currency.

PLASTICITY:

Striatal inputs onto it strengthen when dopamine is lost, which is why this brake grows overbearing in Parkinson's disease.

Its terminals fade within a burst, so the cancel signal is brief and not repeatable.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing exotic is documented for the glia here, and saying so plainly is honest.

The neighbourhood differs: the pallidum is among the most iron rich grey matter in the body, so its astrocytes, the star shaped housekeepers, carry a heavy oxidative load.

Striatal astrocytes clear the released GABA and set how far it spreads.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and the striatum keeps its go and no go contest but loses its emergency brake.

An action already committed could never be aborted, so the region loses last moment reversibility.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

GABA spilling from its scattered synapses reaches receptors outside the synapse, a volume transmission in which the messenger diffuses instead of being aimed.

The enkephalin it co releases lasts seconds, and endocannabinoids sent backwards by the receiving cell tune its own inputs.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Subthalamic glutamate 0 to 60 spikes per second, 2 to 4 milliseconds after a stop cue, plus indirect pathway GABA 0 to 20.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA to both striatal pathways at equal weight, plus enkephalin above 40 spikes per second.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, afterhyperpolarisation level, vesicle pool fraction.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 60 millivolts, threshold minus 45, baseline 1, burst 70 spikes per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 12 milliseconds, afterhyperpolarisation 25, burst 50 to 150 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Too weak and stopping fails, lengthening stop signal reaction time past its normal 200 to 250 milliseconds.

◦ Too strong and movement stalls, feeding the 13 to 35 hertz beta waves of Parkinson's disease.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire a cancel burst and send it equally to both striatal pathways.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called recovery with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called output_rate with initial value 1.
For each step in simulation_clock, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of stop_input and striatal_inhibition.
    Set drive to the result.
    Calculate the difference of drive and recovery.
    Set drive to the result.
    Check if drive is greater than 15.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set output_rate to 70.
        Set recovery to 40.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set output_rate to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set go_pathway_inhibition to output_rate.
    Set no_go_pathway_inhibition to output_rate.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because simulation toolkits speak it and need no build step.

DT, TAU_M, TAU_AHP = 0.5, 12.0, 25.0              # milliseconds
V_REST, V_THRESH, V_RESET = -60.0, -45.0, -70.0   # millivolts
AHP_STEP, R_IN = 6.0, 0.35

def run(stop, go, n):
    v, ahp, out = V_REST, 0.0, []
    for i in range(n):
        drive = stop[i] - go[i]
        v += (V_REST - v - ahp + R_IN * drive) * (DT / TAU_M)
        ahp -= ahp * (DT / TAU_AHP)
        if v >= V_THRESH:
            v, ahp = V_RESET, ahp + AHP_STEP
            out.append(i * DT)
    return out

n = 600
stop = [120.0 if 200 <= i < 400 else 0.0 for i in range(n)]
go = [20.0] * n
print("cancel spikes at ms:", [round(t, 1) for t in run(stop, go, n)])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the one basal ganglia cell whose axon runs backwards into the striatum and inhibits both rival teams equally.

Nearly silent, then one hard burst, FoxP2 and enkephalin positive but parvalbumin negative.

CHAPTER 82. DASHED-HOPE DAMPING NEURON (COG) (PUC)

The machine swallows your coin and gives nothing, and a midbrain cell has already pushed your dopamine below zero.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is a small inhibitory neuron in the ventral tegmental area, the midbrain cluster supplying dopamine to the reward system.

It holds a running estimate of how much reward you expect and presses that estimate, as inhibition, onto the dopamine neurons.

A kept promise cancels out, but a broken one leaves only inhibition, so dopamine dips below baseline.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The small multipolar cell body carries three to five sparsely branched dendrites.

Its axon stays home, weaving a basket around neighbouring dopamine cell bodies, where inhibition has most veto power.

SIZE:

The cell body is 10 to 18 micrometres across, smaller than the dopamine neurons it governs.

Its local axon carries hundreds to a few thousand release sites.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• A local form whose axon never leaves the ventral tegmental area.

• A dual form also projecting to accumbens or lateral habenula.

• A co releasing form carrying vesicular glutamate transporter type 2.

• A mu opioid receptor rich form, which opioids switch off.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It occupies the ventral tegmental subnuclei: parabrachial pigmented, paranigral, parainterfascicular, interfascicular and rostral linear, with equivalents in medial substantia nigra.

Two interfaces matter: the border with the rostromedial tegmental nucleus, where habenular disappointment arrives, and the seam with substantia nigra.

NUMBER:

Inhibitory cells are 23 to 35 percent of ventral tegmental neurons in rodents, which against the human budget of 450,000 gives 100,000 to 160,000.

Perhaps a third show the expectation ramp, so the estimate is 40,000 to 70,000, with low confidence: no human count exists.

That is 0.03 percent of the 200 million basal ganglia neurons and 0.00006 percent of all 86 billion.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

It fires faster than its dopamine neighbours, tens of spikes per second against their 1 to 8.

Its signature is a ramp that climbs after a promising cue and stays high through the wait.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from the lateral habenula, directly and through the rostromedial tegmental nucleus, and from prefrontal cortex and accumbens.

Outputs land on GABA type A receptors on dopamine cell bodies and on neighbouring inhibitory cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The local axon is thin and bare, so inhibition arrives in about a millisecond.

Slowness is a feature: the subtraction must arrive with the reward news, not before.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter is gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), made by glutamic acid decarboxylase.

It carries mu opioid receptors that shut it down and nicotinic receptors that excite it then go numb.

MYELINATION:

The local axon is unmyelinated, normal for a short range inhibitory cell, keeping inhibition graded and cheap.

Speed is irrelevant here.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Tonic firing at tens of spikes per second gives a steady, moderate bill.

Its target is far dearer, since one human dopamine neuron is estimated to carry over four metres of bare axon.

PLASTICITY:

The expectation is learned, so the ramp grows as a cue becomes trusted and shrinks during extinction.

Chronic opioid or nicotine exposure reweights its inputs, one route by which addiction distorts what counts as disappointment.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here genuinely differ from glia elsewhere.

Midbrain astrocytes set a strong background of GABA around dopamine neurons, so they partly decide how much of this cell's output counts.

This patch also carries among the highest microglial densities in the rodent brain.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the region becomes an optimist who cannot be disappointed.

Dopamine would greet every reward as fresh news, and learning would add but never prune.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

It holds persistent activity, a value kept alive in its own firing rate across seconds, which is memory rather than an instant transform.

Its conductance sits on the dopamine cell body exactly where it subtracts from excitation instead of scaling it, and endocannabinoids sent back by that cell tune its terminals.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Habenular glutamate 0 to 40 spikes per second carrying omission, cortical glutamate 0 to 30 carrying timing.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA onto dopamine cell bodies, scaled to expected value, 0 to 60 spikes per second.

• STATE.

◦ Expected value from 0 to 1, ramp amplitude, milliseconds since the cue.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Baseline 20 spikes per second, gain 30 per unit expected, learning rate 0.15.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Inhibition decays over 5 to 20 milliseconds, the ramp holds seconds, the dip 200 to 500 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Overactive, and every outcome reads as a letdown, the low dopamine joylessness of depression.

◦ Underactive, as when opioids silence it, and dopamine escapes restraint, the root of opioid reward.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to hold an estimate of expected reward, subtract it at the outcome, and update it from the error left over.
Create a number variable called expected_value with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called damping_output with initial value 20.
Create a number variable called prediction_error with initial value 0.
For each received_reward in reward_list, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of expected_value and 30.
    Set damping_output to the result.
    Calculate the difference of received_reward and expected_value.
    Set prediction_error to the result.
    Check if prediction_error is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Display "hope dashed" to the console.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of prediction_error and 0.15.
    Set expected_value to the sum of expected_value and the result.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because a simulator runs this for every dopamine cell on every trial.

#include <stdio.h>
#define ALPHA 0.15   /* learning rate */
#define BASE 20.0    /* baseline spikes per second */
#define GAIN 30.0    /* gain per unit expected */

int main(void) {
    const double got[8] = {1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1};  /* trial 6 breaks the promise */
    double expected = 0.0;
    int t;
    for (t = 0; t < 8; t++) {
        double ramp = BASE + GAIN * expected;
        double error = got[t] - expected;   /* subtraction, not division */
        printf("trial %d ramp %5.1f dopamine %+.3f%s\n",
               t + 1, ramp, error, error < 0 ? " hope dashed" : "");
        expected += ALPHA * error;
        if (expected < 0) expected = 0;
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the cell that gets busier the more you expect, busiest just before you find out.

Narrow spikes beside broad slow dopamine neurons, silenced by opioids.


PART SIX: THALAMUS AND DIENCEPHALON

CHAPTER 83. THALAMOCORTICAL RELAY NEURONS, ALSO CALLED PROJECTION OR PRINCIPAL NEURONS (Relay-Station Gateway Neuron) (COG)

Almost nothing you have ever seen, heard or touched reached your conscious mind without passing through one of these cells first.

The word relay suggests a passive wire, which is the misconception this name is built to correct.

Relay-Station keeps the familiar term but marks it as a place where something happens, since every one of these cells sends its single long axon up into the cerebral cortex and, with the sole exception of smell, every sense and every signal from the cerebellum and basal ganglia must ride one of these axons to reach conscious cortex.

Gateway names the work, because the cell is a gate with two settings, a tonic mode that reports faithfully and a burst mode driven by low-threshold calcium channels that fires packets of spikes above two hundred and fifty hertz, and the setting is chosen by arousal rather than by the incoming message.

Neuron rather than cell because the defining fact is the long-distance axon.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The thalamus is a pair of egg-shaped grey masses buried at the centre of the brain, and this is its output cell.

It takes signals from the senses, the cerebellum or the basal ganglia and sends an edited copy to the cerebral cortex, the folded outer sheet where perception is assembled.

The word relay undersells it, because the cell decides when a message goes, in what format, and whether it goes at all.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A round cell body sprouts five to ten thick dendrites, the branching input fibres, which radiate outward like the spokes of an opened umbrella and end in bushy tufts.

Those tufts sit inside glomeruli, sealed pockets where a sensory terminal, an inhibitory dendrite and the relay dendrite meet inside a single astrocyte wrapping.

SIZE:

Cell bodies measure 15 to 35 micrometres across, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre.

The dendritic tree spans 200 to 400 micrometres while the single axon runs 30 to 70 millimetres to the cortex, so the cell is around two thousand times longer than it is wide.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

In the visual thalamus there are large magnocellular cells tuned to motion, smaller parvocellular cells tuned to colour and fine detail, and tiny koniocellular cells between the layers.

Across the whole thalamus the deepest division is between core and matrix cells, treated as the two entries that follow.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Every dorsal thalamic nucleus holds them: the lateral geniculate nucleus for vision, the medial geniculate for hearing, the ventral posterior lateral and ventral posterior medial nuclei for touch, the ventral lateral and ventral anterior nuclei for movement, the anterior nuclei and mediodorsal nucleus for memory and emotion, the pulvinar and lateral posterior nucleus for attention, and the intralaminar and midline nuclei for arousal.

Two interfaces must be modelled explicitly: the external medullary lamina, where the outgoing axon crosses the thalamic reticular nucleus and leaves a branch behind, and the internal capsule, the fibre highway shared with cortical axons running the other way.

NUMBER:

A defensible figure is about 25 million relay neurons across both hemispheres, roughly 70 to 75 per cent of dorsal thalamic neurons and close to 0.03 per cent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the human nervous system.

Confidence is moderate, since whole-thalamus counts are extrapolated from a few nuclei; published unbiased counts for one human lateral geniculate nucleus range from about 2.0 million to about 3.5 million, so the working figure of 1.7 million per side is a conservative lower bound.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting at minus 65 to minus 75 millivolts, the cell has two completely different ways of talking.

In tonic mode it fires evenly spaced spikes whose rate is a faithful running report of input strength.

In burst mode, after roughly 100 milliseconds of hyperpolarisation, low-threshold calcium channels of the CaV3.1 family lift the cell into a hump carrying two to seven tightly packed spikes, while a hyperpolarisation-activated current through HCN channels slowly pulls it back up and paces sleep rhythms.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Driver inputs from the retina, the touch pathway, the cerebellum or cortical layer 5 form fewer than one synapse in ten yet supply most of the message, landing near the cell body in huge terminals with many release sites.

Modulator inputs from cortical layer 6, the reticular nucleus, brainstem cholinergic cells and local interneurons supply the great majority of synapses but only adjust the gain, and cortical feedback outnumbers driver synapses five to ten times over.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

One myelinated axon, one to three micrometres thick, gives a collateral to the reticular nucleus and then fans into a cortical terminal arbour whose width defines the cell's footprint.

A flash of light reaches the primary visual cortex about two milliseconds after leaving the geniculate cell.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the brain's main excitatory chemical, packaged by the vesicular glutamate transporter type 2, acting on fast AMPA receptors, named for alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid, on slower NMDA receptors, named for N-methyl-D-aspartate, and on metabotropic glutamate receptors that depolarise for seconds.

MYELINATION:

Heavy myelin, meaning fatty insulating sleeves made by oligodendrocytes, makes these axons a large share of the internal capsule, the optic radiation and the corona radiata.

That is why a small stroke deep in the white matter can silence an entire limb without touching the cortex.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The thalamus is among the most expensive tissue in the brain per gram, because relay cells fire continuously in waking and every spike costs pumping paid for with adenosine triphosphate, the cell's energy currency.

PLASTICITY:

Spontaneous retinal waves before birth sort these cells into eye-specific layers and prune dozens of weak driver inputs down to one or two strong ones.

In adults the driver synapse is stable but the map is not, which is why amputees develop reorganised thalamic maps and phantom sensations.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Thalamic astrocytes do something unusual: they wrap a whole glomerulus in a glial capsule, sealing three cells into a private chemical room so transmitter cannot leak to the dendrite next door.

They also carry high densities of the glutamate transporter GLT-1, clearing transmitter within milliseconds so the relay stays crisp rather than smeared.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell alone and the thalamus becomes a sealed room: the inhibitory shell and the interneurons keep humming, but nothing leaves for the cortex.

Vision, hearing, touch, taste, limb position sense and the cerebellar contribution to movement would vanish together while the cortex itself stayed anatomically intact.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Low-threshold calcium channels reach out into the dendrites, so a well-timed inhibitory input on one branch can arm a local burst without hyperpolarising the whole cell.

Spikes run backwards into the dendrites, telling recently active synapses that the cell fired and licensing changes in their strength.

Metabotropic receptors driven by cortical feedback add depolarisations lasting one to five seconds, the cell's firing drives the local blood flow that brain scanners detect, and its activity instructs oligodendrocytes to myelinate it more heavily.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: driver spike train from one named subcortical or layer 5 source, 0 to 200 spikes per second; layer 6 feedback, 0 to 30 per second; inhibition from reticular and local cells, 0 to 100 per second; acetylcholine arousal level, 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: glutamatergic spikes to named cortical layers and to the reticular nucleus by collateral, each tagged tonic or burst.

• STATE: membrane voltage; calcium channel inactivation, 0 to 1; hyperpolarisation-activated current activation; driver resource pool; slow metabotropic depolarisation.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 65 to minus 75 millivolts; threshold about minus 50 millivolts; driver strength 3 to 8 millivolts; burst size 2 to 7 spikes.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; calcium de-inactivation 80 to 150 milliseconds; metabotropic depolarisation 1 to 5 seconds; resource recovery about 120 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: locked in burst mode the thalamus and cortex produce three-per-second spike and wave discharges and an absence seizure; starved of driver input after amputation the cell bursts spontaneously and produces central pain.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a thalamocortical relay neuron answers its input in tonic mode or in burst mode.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called channel readiness with initial value 0.05.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called the cell is hyperpolarised with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called the cell has fired with initial value false.
Create a list variable called output spikes with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 8000 times.
    Set drive to the sum of the driver input and the modulator input.
    Check if membrane voltage is less than -70.
    Set the cell is hyperpolarised to the result of that check.
    If the cell is hyperpolarised is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set channel readiness to the sum of channel readiness and 0.002.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set channel readiness to the difference of channel readiness and 0.001.
    End the conditional block.
    If channel readiness is greater than 0.25 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to the sum of drive and 6.
    End the conditional block.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and drive.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -50.
    Set the cell has fired to the result of that check.
    If the cell has fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current time to the end of output spikes.
        Set membrane voltage to -65.
        Set channel readiness to the product of channel readiness and 0.6.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in output spikes.
Display that total to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

import math
# Python chosen because this is pure arithmetic that runs with no installed
# libraries, so a simulation agent can drop it straight into a test bed.
DT = 0.1          # time step, milliseconds
V_REST = -65.0    # resting potential, millivolts
V_THRESH = -50.0  # spike threshold, millivolts
TAU_M = 16.0      # membrane time constant, milliseconds
TAU_H = 100.0     # calcium channel recovery, milliseconds
G_T = 1.6         # strength of the low threshold calcium current

def step(v, h, drive):
    # h is the fraction of T-type calcium channels ready to open, 0 to 1.
    h_inf = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 80.0) / 4.0))
    h = h + DT * (h_inf - h) / TAU_H
    gate = 1.0 if v > -60.0 else 0.0          # channels open only above -60 mV
    i_t = G_T * gate * h * (0.0 - v) / 60.0   # low threshold calcium current
    v = v + DT * ((V_REST - v) / TAU_M + drive + i_t)
    spike = v >= V_THRESH
    if spike:
        v, h = V_REST, h * 0.6                # firing inactivates the channels
    return v, h, spike

v, h = V_REST, 0.05
for i in range(8000):                         # 800 milliseconds
    t = i * DT
    v, h, spike = step(v, h, -1.2 if t < 400.0 else 1.1)
    if spike:
        print("%.1f ms spike, readiness %.2f, mode %s"
              % (t, h, "burst" if h > 0.25 else "tonic"))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell that carries a subcortical message out of the thalamus to the cortex while dropping a branch into the inhibitory shell on the way.

And it is the clearest case in the brain of a neuron that changes its entire message format, from faithful report to compressed alarm, purely because of how deeply it was inhibited a tenth of a second ago.

CHAPTER 84. CORE RELAY NEURONS (Pinpoint Sensory-Map Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that keeps the map of your fingertip in register with the map of your fingertip in the cortex, to within a fraction of a millimetre.

Core is a position word borrowed from anatomy and carries no functional meaning on its own.

Pinpoint names the precision, because this cell sends a tight, focused axon terminal field into a small patch of cortex rather than spraying widely.

Sensory-Map names what that precision is for, since these cells are concentrated in the first-stop sensory and motor nuclei and deliver an orderly point-for-point copy of the body surface, the retina or the cochlea, their terminals landing chiefly in layer four and lower layer three, precisely where cortex assembles fine detail.

Neuron marks it as a thalamic projection cell, and the name is built to be read against its partner, the Wide-Spreading Synchrony Neuron, so that the single dimension separating the pair, focus against spread, is visible in the two names.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Core relay neurons are the precise, point-to-point half of the thalamic output.

Each carries one narrow slice of the sensory world, or one narrow slice of a motor command, to a small and exactly matching patch of cortex.

They are why a pinprick on your thumb feels like it is on your thumb and not vaguely somewhere on your hand.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Compact cells with tight bushy dendritic tufts held close to the cell body, which keeps the driver synapse electrically near the spike-generating zone and therefore fast.

They stain strongly for parvalbumin, a calcium-binding protein that lets a cell fire fast without calcium overload, and their cortical axon ends as a dense cylinder of terminals rather than a spreading spray.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 12 to 30 micrometres across, magnocellular members at the large end and parvocellular at the small end.

The cortical terminal patch is only 0.3 to 1.0 millimetres wide, roughly one cortical column.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

In vision the core splits into fast, colour-blind magnocellular cells and slower, colour-sensitive parvocellular cells.

In touch it is a single dense population representing skin and deep tissue, and in the motor thalamus it is a cerebellar-driven population representing limb dynamics.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They concentrate in the primary relay nuclei: the magnocellular and parvocellular layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus, the ventral division of the medial geniculate nucleus, the ventral posterior lateral and ventral posterior medial nuclei, and the cerebellar-receiving part of the ventral lateral nucleus.

The interface that matters is the seam between the core of a nucleus and its calbindin-rich shell, because there a core cell and a matrix cell can sit a hundred micrometres apart and yet project to cortical layers separated by three millimetres of depth.

NUMBER:

About 10 million across both hemispheres is a reasonable estimate, roughly 40 per cent of thalamic relay neurons and about 0.012 per cent of the human nervous system.

Confidence is low to moderate, and recent reanalysis argues core and matrix are ends of a continuum rather than clean boxes, so treat 40 per cent as a working figure.

These are a subset of the relay population counted in the previous entry, not an addition to it.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Short and reliable response latencies, maximum rates above 200 spikes per second, and sharply defined receptive fields, meaning the small patch of world each cell reports on.

They can burst like any relay cell, but in waking, brainstem arousal holds them depolarised and in faithful tonic mode.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

One or a very few driver terminals dominate, so the cell is close to a copy of a single retinal ganglion cell or a single touch fibre.

Those synapses depress steeply, losing roughly half their strength per spike in a fast train and recovering over about a tenth of a second, which turns the cell into a detector of change rather than of steady level.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thick, fast, and deliberately narrow at its cortical end, terminating mainly in layer 4 and lower layer 3, the input layers.

A collateral enters the matching sector of the thalamic reticular nucleus, which is how inhibition is aimed back at the same place on the map.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, packaged by the vesicular glutamate transporter type 2 and released from large terminals with many release sites, so one presynaptic spike gives a large and reliable response.

MYELINATION:

Thick sheaths give short and, crucially, uniform conduction times, so signals from different parts of a sensory surface arrive together and the map is not smeared in time.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high and sustained throughout waking, and the parvalbumin these cells carry is itself part of the answer to the calcium load that continuous fast firing creates.

PLASTICITY:

The map is refined by activity around birth and then locked down hard, which is why a critical period exists for treating a squint or a cataract in a child.

In adults the map still shifts after amputation or nerve injury, but slowly and imperfectly.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes around core glomeruli are unusually rich in glutamate transporters and in glutamine synthetase, because the driver synapse dumps glutamate fast and any spillover to the neighbouring cell would blur the map.

Perineuronal nets, lattices of sugar and protein built with glial help, encase many of these parvalbumin cells, stabilising their connections and helping close the critical period.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete only the core cells and the thalamus still lights the cortex up and still supports a sense that something is happening, but all precision is gone.

Vision becomes a wash of brightness without form, and a person can tell they have been touched but not where.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The steep depression of the driver synapse is a computation in itself, converting a maintained stimulus into a report of its onset.

Dendritic calcium channels let a brief inhibitory pause arm a burst, and in a core cell that burst acts as a wake-up call that something has appeared after quiet, a signal the cortex detects far more reliably than single spikes.

These cells also drive their own oxygen supply, producing the activation blob a brain scanner shows over primary sensory cortex.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: one dominant driver train, 0 to 300 spikes per second, carrying a topographic address; layer 6 feedback from the matched cortical column; inhibition from the matched reticular sector.

• OUTPUTS: glutamatergic spikes onto a cortical patch 0.3 to 1.0 millimetres wide centred on that address, in layers 4 and lower 3.

• STATE: membrane voltage; driver resource pool, 0 to 1; calcium channel readiness; adaptation current.

• PARAMETERS: topographic address in millimetres; terminal spread 0.2 to 0.4 millimetres; driver amplitude 3 to 8 millivolts; depression factor about 0.55 per spike.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 16 milliseconds; depression recovery about 120 milliseconds; conduction delay 1 to 3 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: focal loss in a small thalamic stroke gives a sharply bounded island of numbness or blindness with the rest of perception intact, and degradation of this population is one proposed contributor to reduced visual acuity and contrast sensitivity in schizophrenia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the cortical footprint of one core relay neuron across a train of driver spikes, including the depression of its driver synapse.
Create a number variable called resources with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called centre with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called amplitude with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called distance with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called cortical columns with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called deposited drive with initial value empty list.
For each position in the cortical sheet, perform the following operations.
    Add position to the end of cortical columns.
End the loop.
For each spike time in the driver spike train, perform the following operations.
    Set amplitude to the product of resources and 6.
    For each column in cortical columns, perform the following operations.
        Set distance to the difference of column and centre.
        Set distance to the product of distance and distance.
        Add the product of amplitude and the falling weight for distance to the end of deposited drive.
    End the loop.
    Display amplitude to the console.
    Set resources to the product of resources and 0.55.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in deposited drive.
Display that total to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

import math
# Python chosen because a topographic footprint is a short map over positions and
# the standard library alone keeps the arithmetic auditable.
DRIVER_WEIGHT = 6.0      # millivolts at full resources: a driver, not a modulator
DEPRESS = 0.55           # fraction of resources surviving each driver spike
RECOVER_MS = 120.0       # resource recovery time constant, milliseconds
SIGMA = 0.25             # cortical spread, millimetres
CENTRE = 1.0             # this cell's topographic address, millimetres
COLUMNS = [i * 0.1 for i in range(0, 21)]    # 0.0 to 2.0 mm of cortical sheet

def deposit(amplitude):
    out = []
    for x in COLUMNS:
        d = x - CENTRE
        out.append(amplitude * math.exp(-(d * d) / (2.0 * SIGMA * SIGMA)))
    return out

resources, last_t = 1.0, 0.0
for t in [0.0, 10.0, 20.0, 30.0, 300.0]:     # four fast spikes, then a late one
    resources = 1.0 - (1.0 - resources) * math.exp(-(t - last_t) / RECOVER_MS)
    amp = DRIVER_WEIGHT * resources
    field = deposit(amp)
    peak = max(field)
    width = sum(1 for v in field if v > 0.1 * peak) * 0.1
    print("t=%6.1f ms  EPSP=%5.2f mV  layer 4 patch=%.1f mm" % (t, amp, width))
    resources = resources * DEPRESS
    last_t = t

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is parvalbumin-positive, calbindin-negative, and its axon ends as a tight cylinder in layer 4 rather than a spray in layer 1.

Inject dye into one core cell and the cortex shows a single small disc of label whose position you could have predicted from where the cell body sat, and that predictability is the entire point of the cell.

CHAPTER 85. MATRIX RELAY NEURONS (Wide-Spreading Synchrony Neuron) (COG)

If core cells are wires, these are floodlights, and they may be much of the reason there is anyone home to see the light.

Matrix is a histological staining term and describes the background a cell was seen against rather than anything it does.

Wide-Spreading names the anatomy, because unlike its pinpoint partner this cell scatters its axon terminals thinly across large stretches of cortex and often across more than one cortical area, ignoring the sharp boundaries the maps obey.

Synchrony names the consequence, since those terminals arrive in layer one, where they meet the far-flung tips of pyramidal cell dendrites drawn from a huge cortical territory, so a single such cell nudges millions of cortical cells towards firing at the same instant.

Neuron marks it as a thalamic projection cell scattered evenly through nearly every thalamic nucleus rather than confined to the sensory ones, and that shared timing is the current best account of how separately processed features are bound into one experience.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Matrix relay neurons are the diffuse half of the thalamic output, spraying their signal thinly across many cortical columns and often across the borders between whole cortical areas.

Their job is not to say what is out there but to set the state of the cortex, raising or lowering the readiness of large expanses of tissue to respond at all.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The dendritic tree is looser and wider than a core cell's, and the cell stains for calbindin, another calcium-binding protein, making it calbindin-positive and parvalbumin-negative.

Its cortical axon branches repeatedly and ends in long horizontal strings of terminals lying just beneath the surface of the brain.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 10 to 25 micrometres across, slightly smaller on average than core cells.

The striking measurement is the terminal field: one matrix axon can spread over 2 to 10 millimetres of cortical surface, ten to thirty times a core cell's patch.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Three flavours are worth modelling separately: intralaminar cells that broadcast arousal and salience, midline cells that reach limbic cortex and the striatum, and the calbindin-rich shell cells of sensory nuclei, of which the koniocellular cells of the visual thalamus are best studied.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They occur in every thalamic nucleus, which is the point of the name, but dominate the intralaminar nuclei including the centromedian, parafascicular and central lateral nuclei, the midline nuclei including the paraventricular and reuniens nuclei, the posterior nucleus, much of the pulvinar, and the shell around each sensory core.

The interface to name is the internal medullary lamina, the fibre sheet that splits the thalamus into anterior, medial and lateral groups, because the intralaminar nuclei are embedded inside it and therefore sit at the crossroads of every thalamic pathway.

NUMBER:

About 15 million across both hemispheres is a working estimate, roughly 60 per cent of the relay population and about 0.017 per cent of the human nervous system.

Confidence is low to moderate, and recent work argues core and matrix describe a continuum rather than two boxes, so this split is a modelling convenience supported by chemistry rather than a census; like core cells these are a subset of the relay neurons already counted.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They fire at lower average rates than core cells, adapt more, and burst more readily, which suits a cell whose message is a state signal rather than a detailed report.

Their firing rises before core cell firing as a person wakes, consistent with preparing the cortex rather than informing it.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are weaker and more convergent than a core cell's, and include the brainstem reticular formation, the basal forebrain, the deep cerebellar nuclei, the spinothalamic pain pathway and the internal segment of the globus pallidus.

Their terminals land in cortical layer 1 on the apical dendrites, meaning the topmost branches, of pyramidal cells whose bodies lie in layers 2, 3 and 5, and that geometry is the source of their power: a small nudge at the top of a pyramidal cell decides whether input arriving at the bottom triggers a burst.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thinner, slower and far more branched than a core axon, sometimes sending collaterals to the striatum as well as the cortex, which is a defining feature of the centromedian and parafascicular cells.

Arrival times across the terminal field are spread over several milliseconds, which is fine for a state signal and useless for a map.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate again, but released with a modulator's profile: small individual responses that facilitate and build when spikes arrive in trains, rather than one large reliable event.

MYELINATION:

Thin and patchy, and some of the finest branches are bare, which fits a signal that needs to be widespread rather than fast.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate at the cell body but high in total, because maintaining tens of millimetres of thin, poorly insulated axon and tens of thousands of terminals is expensive per spike delivered.

PLASTICITY:

Matrix projections mature last and stay more modifiable in adulthood than core projections.

They are the target of central thalamic deep brain stimulation, which can lift a severely brain-injured patient into greater responsiveness, the clearest human evidence that this population sets cortical state.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Cortical layer 1, where these axons end, is unusually astrocyte-rich and neuron-poor, and its astrocytes wrap matrix terminals loosely instead of sealing them.

That looseness is deliberate: it permits volume transmission, meaning chemical signalling that spreads to many nearby targets rather than staying in one synaptic cleft, which is exactly what a floodlight needs.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove matrix cells and the thalamus becomes a set of private telephone lines with no switchboard operator and no house lights.

Detail would still reach the cortex, but the cortex would lose its shared rhythms, its ability to swing as a whole between sleep and waking, and much of what binds separate features into one conscious scene; damage to the paramedian thalamus in humans does cause coma out of all proportion to the tissue lost.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The defining trick happens in the target: a matrix input to the apical tuft can convert a single cortical spike into a burst by triggering a calcium spike in the pyramidal cell's upper dendrite, a mechanism central to several theories of conscious perception.

Volume transmission from layer 1, slow metabotropic signalling lasting seconds, collaterals reaching cortex and striatum at once, and a role in generating the slow oscillations of deep sleep and the alpha rhythm of quiet waking all mark this cell as a broadcast device rather than a channel.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: weak convergent drivers from spinothalamic, cerebellar and pallidal sources, 0 to 60 spikes per second; brainstem and basal forebrain arousal as a scalar 0 to 1; layer 5 and layer 6 cortical feedback; reticular inhibition.

• OUTPUTS: glutamatergic spikes into cortical layer 1 across a field 2 to 10 millimetres wide spanning several named areas, plus striatal collaterals for intralaminar members.

• STATE: membrane voltage; calcium channel readiness; a slow depolarising envelope representing accumulated layer 1 drive; synaptic facilitation level.

• PARAMETERS: 2 to 6 terminal fields; spread 1.5 to 3.0 millimetres per field; 0.2 to 0.5 millivolts added at the apical tuft per spike.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds; layer 1 envelope 100 to 300 milliseconds; facilitation 20 to 100 milliseconds; conduction delay 3 to 10 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: silencing the intralaminar and midline population produces coma, the vegetative state or the minimally conscious state, while overactivity in the same population helps generalise an absence seizure across the whole cortex at once.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to spread one matrix relay neuron's output across several cortical areas and build the slow layer one depolarising envelope that results.
Create a number variable called envelope with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gain per spike with initial value 0.35.
Create a number variable called sampled drive with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called a spike arrives now with initial value false.
Create a list variable called terminal field centres with initial value empty list.
Add 2.5 to the end of terminal field centres.
Add 7.5 to the end of terminal field centres.
Add 12.5 to the end of terminal field centres.
Add 17.5 to the end of terminal field centres.
Repeat the following steps exactly 1200 times.
    Set envelope to the difference of envelope and the product of envelope and 0.0067.
    If a spike arrives now is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set envelope to the sum of envelope and gain per spike.
    End the conditional block.
    Set sampled drive to 0.
    For each centre in terminal field centres, perform the following operations.
        Set sampled drive to the sum of sampled drive and the spread weight from centre to the sampled column.
    End the loop.
    Set sampled drive to the product of sampled drive and envelope.
    Display sampled drive to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

import math
# Python chosen because a spatial spread plus a slow envelope is clearest as two
# explicit loops a reader can check by eye, with no library to hide behind.
SIGMA = 2.5            # standard deviation of one layer 1 arbour, millimetres
AREAS = 4              # cortical areas contacted by this single axon
TAU = 150.0            # build up and decay of layer 1 depolarisation, ms
GAIN = 0.35            # millivolts added at the apical tuft per matrix spike
centres = [2.5, 7.5, 12.5, 17.5]
positions = [i * 0.5 for i in range(0, 41)]   # 0 to 20 mm of cortical sheet

def layer1_weight(x):
    total = 0.0
    for c in centres:
        total += math.exp(-((x - c) ** 2) / (2.0 * SIGMA * SIGMA))
    return total / AREAS

envelope = 0.0
volley = set(range(200, 700, 25))             # a 40 Hz volley for half a second
for t in range(0, 1200):                      # milliseconds
    envelope += -envelope / TAU
    if t in volley:
        envelope += GAIN
    if t % 200 == 0:
        covered = sum(1 for x in positions if layer1_weight(x) > 0.2) * 0.5
        print("t=%4d ms  drive at 10 mm = %.3f mV  sheet covered = %.1f mm"
              % (t, layer1_weight(10.0) * envelope, covered))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is calbindin-positive, parvalbumin-negative, and its axon ignores the tidy boundaries of the cortical map, ending in layer 1 across territory belonging to several different areas.

No other thalamic cell touches the very top of the cortex over centimetres of tissue, and no other can be stimulated to pull a person from unresponsiveness toward awareness.

CHAPTER 86. THALAMIC LOCAL INTERNEURONS (Local Sharpening Inhibitor Neuron) (COG)

Here is a cell that does most of its talking with its dendrites, and it is far more common in your thalamus than in a mouse's.

The old label says only that the cell is small and stays where it is, which describes two negatives and no work.

Local names the reach, because unlike every other cell in this family it sends nothing to the cortex and never leaves the nucleus it was born in.

Sharpening names the purpose and rests on a genuinely strange piece of anatomy, since most of its output leaves not from an axon but from swellings on its dendrites, arranged in threes so that one incoming sensory fibre excites both the outgoing cortex-bound cell and this cell's dendrite at the same spot, and the dendrite then instantly damps its neighbour.

Inhibitor names the chemistry, since it releases gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main inhibitory messenger, and the result is contrast rather than silence.

Neuron marks it as a cell far more abundant in humans and other primates, reaching around a quarter to a third of neurons in some nuclei against roughly a tenth in the mouse visual thalamus.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Thalamic local interneurons are small inhibitory cells that never leave the nucleus they are born into.

They release gamma-aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical, usually shortened to GABA, onto relay neurons, sharpening what the relay reports by suppressing weak and off-target signals so the strongest one wins.

Their strangest feature is having two output systems: a conventional axon, and separate release sites sitting on their own dendrites.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small pear-shaped cell body carries two to four very fine dendrites studded with swellings called F2 terminals, which receive and release at the same spot, so one piece of dendrite is both ear and mouth.

Each F2 terminal sits in a glomerulus in a three-cornered arrangement called a triad: an incoming sensory terminal contacts both the relay dendrite and the interneuron dendrite, and the interneuron dendrite then contacts the relay dendrite a fraction of a micrometre away.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 8 to 15 micrometres across, among the smallest neurons in the diencephalon.

Dendrites are often under half a micrometre thick and reach 200 to 500 micrometres, and it is that thinness which electrically isolates one triad from the next.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two electrical classes are described in the visual thalamus, differing in how much hyperpolarisation-activated current they carry and therefore in how they respond to sustained inhibition.

Cells also differ in the balance of dendritic against axonal output, and individual interneurons can be tuned to distinct visual features rather than forming a uniform blanket of inhibition.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They occur throughout the human dorsal thalamus, densest in the lateral geniculate nucleus, the medial geniculate nucleus, the pulvinar and the mediodorsal nucleus.

The interface to name is the glomerulus itself, an astrocyte-sealed pocket at the junction between an arriving subcortical axon and a relay dendrite, since that pocket is where this cell does its work.

NUMBER:

About 8 million across both hemispheres is defensible, based on reports that up to 25 to 30 per cent of primate thalamic neurons are local GABAergic interneurons against only a few per cent in rodents outside the visual nucleus, giving about 0.009 per cent of the human nervous system.

Confidence is moderate for the visual thalamus and low elsewhere; the honest bound is 15 to 30 per cent of thalamic neurons, and this expansion is one of the genuine differences between a human thalamus and a rodent one.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They rest more depolarised than relay cells and fire narrow, fast spikes at high rates.

The important property is that the thin dendrites are electrically leaky, so input at one F2 terminal produces a local calcium rise and local GABA release there without necessarily depolarising the cell body, giving the cell two thresholds: a low local one per site and a higher global one for a whole-cell spike.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from the same driver axons that excite relay cells, from layer 6 cortical feedback, from brainstem cholinergic and noradrenergic fibres, and from the reticular nucleus.

Output goes almost entirely to relay cells, dendritic F2 output inside the triad and axonal output onto relay cell bodies more widely, and the two have measurably different kinetics: slow prolonged inhibitory currents from the dendrite, fast brief ones from the axon.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, short, unmyelinated and confined within the nucleus, usually branching within a few hundred micrometres of the cell body, and in some cells hard to find at all.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA, acting on fast GABA-A receptors for phasic inhibition, on extrasynaptic GABA-A receptors for a steady tonic background, and on GABA-B receptors that hyperpolarise the relay cell for hundreds of milliseconds and thereby arm its burst mechanism.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none, which is appropriate for a cell whose job is local and slow rather than long-range and fast; the dendrites, being output structures, are necessarily bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest in total because the cell is tiny, but locally intense, since every F2 terminal maintains its own vesicle pool, calcium handling and mitochondria far out on a dendrite too thin to move material quickly.

PLASTICITY:

Acetylcholine from the brainstem reduces dendritic release minute by minute during alert waking, letting more sensory detail through to the cortex.

Over longer periods the number and strength of triadic contacts is adjusted as the sensory map is refined in development.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocyte wrapping a glomerulus does something no astrocyte elsewhere does: it holds a three-cell computation inside a sealed chamber, keeping the interneuron's GABA and the driver's glutamate where they belong and away from the relay dendrite next door.

Thalamic astrocytes also supply the glutamine from which this cell rebuilds its GABA, so glial metabolism sits directly inside the loop of inhibitory transmission here.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take these cells away and the thalamus keeps relaying but loses its editor.

Signals would reach the cortex with contrast flattened, onsets blunted and surrounds unsuppressed, so a face would arrive as a blur of undifferentiated luminance, and the thalamus would depend entirely on the reticular shell, which can dim a whole nucleus but cannot sharpen one point inside it.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell breaks the standard model more thoroughly than almost any other, computing and releasing transmitter at dozens of semi-independent dendritic sites without firing an action potential at all.

Glutamate acting on metabotropic receptors on the F2 terminal can trigger dendritic release directly, so the driver axon commands its own local inhibition; add tonic inhibition through extrasynaptic receptors, GABA-B arming of relay bursts, local protein synthesis to maintain distant release sites, and strong cholinergic gating, and a faithful simulation must model each dendritic compartment separately.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: driver spike trains shared with the relay cell, addressed per dendritic site, 0 to 300 spikes per second; layer 6 cortical feedback; acetylcholine level 0 to 1, which suppresses dendritic release.

• OUTPUTS: local GABA at each triad onto the matched relay dendrite, and global GABA from the axon onto many relay cell bodies.

• STATE: per-site calcium; per-site vesicle pool; somatic membrane voltage; whole-cell adaptation.

• PARAMETERS: 5 to 50 dendritic release sites per cell; local release threshold; local amplitude 0.2 to 1.0 millivolts at the relay dendrite; dendritic to axonal output ratio.

• TIME CONSTANTS: dendritic calcium decay 20 to 40 milliseconds; fast inhibitory current 5 to 15 milliseconds; slow dendritic current 30 to 80 milliseconds; GABA-B inhibition 150 to 400 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: reduced thalamic GABAergic markers reported in schizophrenia are proposed to degrade sensory gating and let irrelevant input through; in absence epilepsy excessive tonic inhibition deepens relay hyperpolarisation and promotes the synchronous bursting that drives the seizure.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide, separately for each dendritic release site of one thalamic interneuron, whether it releases locally, and separately whether the whole cell fires.
Create a number variable called soma level with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called site total with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called the site has released with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called the cell has fired with initial value false.
Create a list variable called site calcium with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 6 times.
    Add 0 to the end of site calcium.
End the loop.
Repeat the following steps exactly 200 times.
    Set site total to 0.
    For each site in site calcium, perform the following operations.
        Set site to the product of site and 0.98.
        If a driver spike arrives at this site is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set site to the sum of site and 0.3.
        End the conditional block.
        Check if site is greater than or equal to 0.55.
        Set the site has released to the result of that check.
        If the site has released is true, then perform the following actions.
            Display the local release event to the console.
            Set site to the difference of site and 0.15.
        End the conditional block.
        Set site total to the sum of site total and site.
    End the loop.
    Set soma level to the sum of soma level and the product of site total and 0.05.
    Check if soma level is greater than or equal to 0.9.
    Set the cell has fired to the result of that check.
    If the cell has fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Display the whole cell spike event to the console.
        Set soma level to 0.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python chosen because this cell's trick is bookkeeping across semi-independent
# compartments, which reads most clearly as plain nested loops and no libraries.
DT = 0.5                 # milliseconds per step
N_TRIADS = 6             # dendrodendritic release sites on this one cell
LOCAL_THRESHOLD = 0.55   # local calcium needed for dendritic GABA release
SOMA_THRESHOLD = 0.90    # summed input needed for a whole cell action potential
CA_DECAY = 25.0          # dendritic calcium decay time constant, milliseconds
GAIN = 0.30              # calcium added by one driver spike at one triad
drive = {0: [0.0, 4.0, 8.0, 12.0, 16.0, 20.0], 1: [0.0, 6.0, 12.0, 18.0],
         3: [30.0], 5: [60.0]}

calcium = [0.0] * N_TRIADS
soma = 0.0
for step in range(0, 200):
    t = step * DT
    releases = 0
    for i in range(N_TRIADS):
        calcium[i] += DT * (-calcium[i] / CA_DECAY)
        if i in drive and t in drive[i]:
            calcium[i] += GAIN
        if calcium[i] >= LOCAL_THRESHOLD:
            releases += 1
            calcium[i] -= 0.15               # cost of the local vesicle pool
    soma += DT * (-soma / 10.0) + sum(calcium) * DT * 0.10
    spike = soma >= SOMA_THRESHOLD
    if spike:
        soma = 0.0
    if releases > 0 or spike:
        print("t=%5.1f ms  local releases=%d  whole cell spike=%s"
              % (t, releases, spike))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the cell whose dendrite is simultaneously an input and an output, wired into a three-cornered triad inside a glial capsule.

Find a thin process that receives a giant sensory terminal on one face and releases GABA from the other a fraction of a micrometre later, and you have found a thalamic interneuron and nothing else.

CHAPTER 87. THALAMIC RETICULAR NUCLEUS NEURONS (Attention-Gating Shutter Neuron) (COG)

Every message leaving the thalamus for the cortex passes through a thin shell of inhibitory cells that taps it on the shoulder on the way out.

The old label was a street address, naming a netlike shell of cells and telling a student nothing.

Attention names the choice being made, since these cells receive branch collaterals from both the traffic passing up to cortex and the far larger traffic coming back down, and the prefrontal cortex has its own direct line in, letting it darken the channels carrying what does not matter.

Gating names the selection, because shutting most channels is exactly what leaves one illuminated.

Shutter names the action, because this cell is inhibitory and, uniquely, sends its output nowhere but back into the thalamus it wraps, so its only job is to close channels.

Neuron marks it as the cell that also shapes sleep spindles, around eighty-two percent of those in the ventral part firing in stereotyped high-frequency bursts that generate the spindle rhythm.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The thalamic reticular nucleus is a sheet of neurons only a few cells thick, wrapped around the outside of the thalamus like the skin of an onion.

Every cell in it is inhibitory, releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical, usually shortened to GABA, and none sends an axon to the cortex.

They listen to the traffic passing through and decide which thalamic channels get turned down, which makes them the physical machinery of attention and the pacemaker of the sleep spindle.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cells are flattened and elongated, lying with their long axis in the plane of the sheet so their dendrites stay inside it, which is why the nucleus behaves as a two-dimensional map rather than a lump.

Dendrites are long, sparsely branched, loaded with low-threshold calcium channels, and carry dendrite-to-dendrite release sites through which one reticular cell inhibits its neighbour directly.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 15 to 30 micrometres across, with a strikingly flat dendritic arbour reaching 500 to 1000 micrometres within the sheet but only 100 to 200 micrometres across it.

In a human the whole nucleus is a shell a fraction of a millimetre thick spread over a structure the size of half a walnut.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The sheet divides into sectors named for the nucleus each guards: visual, auditory, somatosensory, motor, limbic, gustatory and visceral, with the somatosensory sector split into inner, intermediate and outer tiers where it has been examined closely.

A separate molecular division exists between somatostatin-expressing and calbindin-expressing cells, which differ in how strongly they burst.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It occupies the external medullary lamina, the fibre sheet lying between the dorsal thalamus and the internal capsule, wrapping the front, side and underside of the thalamus.

Two interfaces are essential: the boundary with the internal capsule, through which every thalamocortical and corticothalamic axon must pass and where each drops a collateral into the sheet, and the caudal continuation into the zona incerta and perigeniculate nucleus, where the reticular map hands over to neighbouring inhibitory territory.

NUMBER:

A few hundred thousand neurons per side, so roughly 400,000 to 1,000,000 in total, or about 0.0007 per cent of the human nervous system.

Confidence is low, because unbiased human counts are scarce and the sheet is thin and hard to delimit; the structural point is the ratio, since this handful of cells governs the traffic of some 25 million relay neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The signature is a burst whose spikes speed up and then slow down again, an accelerando followed by a decelerando, unlike the simply decelerating burst of a relay cell.

It is generated by low-threshold calcium channels of the CaV3.3 type, shown experimentally to be the major pacemaker of the sleep spindle, the brief 11 to 15 cycles per second wave of light sleep, and terminated by calcium-activated potassium channels of the SK2 type that set the interval to the next burst.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation arrives from both directions at once, from collaterals of thalamocortical axons heading out and corticothalamic axons heading in, with layer 6 supplying most of the drive and a sparse but powerful layer 5 input letting one cortical area steer a distant sector.

Output goes almost entirely back onto relay neurons in the matching sector, plus inhibition of neighbouring reticular cells, and the cells are electrically coupled to each other by gap junctions made of the protein connexin 36, so a group can synchronise with no chemical transmission at all.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Short, thin and lightly myelinated, running inward from the sheet over a territory broader than one relay cell's receptive field but confined to the matching sector.

That geometry means inhibition is aimed rather than blanket: the sheet can dim one sensory channel while leaving its neighbour at full brightness.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA, acting on fast GABA-A receptors for millisecond inhibition and on GABA-B receptors for inhibition lasting hundreds of milliseconds.

The slow component matters enormously, because that prolonged hyperpolarisation recharges the relay cell's calcium channels and licenses the rebound burst that keeps a spindle running.

MYELINATION:

Light and incomplete, since these axons are short and stay inside the thalamus, giving conduction delays of about one millisecond from sheet to relay cell.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High for the cell's size, because parvalbumin-positive fast-spiking neurons are among the most energy-hungry in the brain, and this population is unusually vulnerable to oxidative stress, meaning chemical damage from reactive oxygen produced during energy metabolism.

PLASTICITY:

Spindle density is a stable individual trait that tracks learning ability and rises after learning, so this population's output is itself shaped by experience.

Slower structural change also occurs: developmental oxidative stress reduces low-threshold calcium channel function in these cells in mouse models relevant to schizophrenia.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The distinctive glial feature is the perineuronal net, a dense lattice of sugar and protein laid down around parvalbumin cells with glial help, which buffers the local ion environment and shields these fast-firing cells from oxidative damage.

Thinning of those nets around reticular cells is among the changes reported in post-mortem tissue from people with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, linking a glial structure directly to a psychiatric symptom.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the reticular sheet and the thalamus becomes a switchboard with every line permanently open.

There would be no sleep spindles, no selective damping of ignored senses, and no way for one cortical area to quieten a channel another area is using, so what is lost is selectivity itself: the capacity to be interested in one thing rather than everything.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Gap junction coupling lets a patch of the sheet oscillate as one unit, while dendrite-to-dendrite inhibition between neighbours creates lateral competition, so the sheet computes a winner-take-all decision about which channel to suppress.

Each burst is a calcium event that triggers calcium-dependent gene transcription and reshapes the cell's own excitability over hours, and the cell is half of a closed loop, inhibiting the relay cell which rebounds and excites it back, so the spindle is a property of the circuit rather than of any single membrane.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: excitatory collaterals from thalamocortical axons, 0 to 200 spikes per second; layer 6 feedback, 0 to 30 per second; sparse layer 5 input; inhibition from neighbours and from the basal forebrain; gap junction current from coupled cells.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto relay neurons in the matched sector through fast and slow receptors, plus dendritic GABA onto neighbouring reticular cells.

• STATE: membrane voltage; CaV3.3 inactivation 0 to 1; internal calcium; SK2 potassium conductance; refractory timer.

• PARAMETERS: burst length 5 to 15 spikes; intra-burst rate rising to 300 to 500 spikes per second then falling; rest about minus 60 millivolts; coupling conductance to neighbours.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds; calcium de-inactivation 70 to 120 milliseconds; calcium-activated potassium 100 to 200 milliseconds; spindle period 70 to 90 milliseconds; spindle envelope 0.5 to 3 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: reduced spindle density is one of the most reproducible physiological findings in schizophrenia and tracks impaired sleep-dependent memory; runaway synchrony here converts a normal spindle into the three-per-second spike and wave discharge of an absence seizure.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to generate a sleep spindle from one reticular neuron and its partner relay neuron and to count the reticular bursts.
Create a number variable called reticular voltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called reticular readiness with initial value 0.3.
Create a number variable called relay voltage with initial value -62.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called the reticular cell has fired with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called the relay cell has fired with initial value false.
Create a list variable called burst times with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 15000 times.
    Set reticular voltage to the sum of reticular voltage and the product of reticular readiness and 2.4.
    Set relay voltage to the difference of relay voltage and the product of inhibition and 9.
    Check if reticular voltage is greater than -45.
    Set the reticular cell has fired to the result of that check.
    If the reticular cell has fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current time to the end of burst times.
        Set reticular voltage to -63.
        Set reticular readiness to the product of reticular readiness and 0.55.
        Set inhibition to the sum of inhibition and 0.03.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if relay voltage is greater than -48.
    Set the relay cell has fired to the result of that check.
    If the relay cell has fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set relay voltage to -64.
        Set reticular readiness to the sum of reticular readiness and 0.02.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in burst times.
Display that total to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* One reticular cell and one relay cell wired into the loop that makes a sleep
   spindle.  C chosen because a spindle needs tens of thousands of very short
   time steps, and C makes the per-step cost explicit for anyone scaling this
   circuit to millions of cells.  Compile with:  cc spindle.c -lm  */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#define DT 0.1        /* milliseconds per step */
#define STEPS 15000   /* 1.5 seconds of simulated time */

int main(void) {
    double vr = -60.0, hr = 0.30, gGlu = 0.0, refR = 0.0;  /* reticular cell */
    double vt = -62.0, ht = 0.50, gGab = 0.0, refT = 0.0;  /* relay cell */
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i < STEPS; i++) {
        double t = i * DT;
        double cortex = (t > 300.0 && t < 1000.0) ? 0.60 : 0.0;
        /* low threshold calcium current, only if channels have recovered */
        double iTr = 2.4 * hr * (vr > -65.0 ? 1.0 : 0.0) * (10.0 - vr) / 70.0;
        double iTt = 2.0 * ht * (vt > -65.0 ? 1.0 : 0.0) * (10.0 - vt) / 70.0;
        int rs, ts;
        vr += DT * ((-60.0 - vr) / 20.0 + gGlu * (0.0 - vr) + iTr + cortex);
        vt += DT * ((-62.0 - vt) / 16.0 + gGab * (-85.0 - vt) + iTt + 1.40);
        hr += DT * ((1.0 / (1.0 + exp((vr + 78.0) / 5.0)) - hr) / 90.0);
        ht += DT * ((1.0 / (1.0 + exp((vt + 78.0) / 5.0)) - ht) / 100.0);
        rs = (vr > -45.0 && refR <= 0.0);
        ts = (vt > -48.0 && refT <= 0.0);
        if (rs) { vr = -63.0; hr *= 0.55; refR = 2.0; }
        if (ts) { vt = -64.0; ht *= 0.60; refT = 2.0; }
        refR -= DT; refT -= DT;
        gGab += DT * (-gGab / 10.0) + (rs ? 0.030 : 0.0);  /* onto the relay cell */
        gGlu += DT * (-gGlu / 6.0) + (ts ? 0.120 : 0.0);   /* back to the shell */
        if (rs) printf("%7.1f ms reticular spike, readiness %.2f\n", t, hr);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only large neuron group in the thalamus that is entirely inhibitory, entirely parvalbumin-positive, and sends nothing at all to the cortex despite sitting directly in the path of every fibre going there.

Record a cell whose burst accelerates then decelerates, riding an 11 to 15 cycles per second rhythm in light sleep, and you are listening to the reticular sheet.

CHAPTER 88. HABENULAR NEURONS (Setback-Signalling Aversion Neuron) (COG)

Two clusters of cells the size of rice grains, perched on the roof of the thalamus, decide whether the world has just let you down.

Habenula is Latin for little rein, an address describing a small stalk beside the pineal gland.

Setback names the trigger, because the lateral half of this small structure carries cells that do the exact opposite of dopamine cells, firing hardest when a promised reward fails to arrive and falling silent when the outcome beats expectation, which is the textbook inverted reward prediction error.

Signalling names the work, since the message is not stored here but sent onward, largely through a small midbrain relay that converts the excitation into a shutdown of dopamine.

Aversion names the faculty that unites the structure's two halves, because the medial half uses acetylcholine on a separate line to the interpeduncular nucleus, and that line carries the sickening side of nicotine and the anxiety of withdrawal from it.

Neuron marks it as the cell registering that something went wrong, without pretending the two halves do the same job.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The habenula belongs to the epithalamus, the small structure sitting above and behind the thalamus, and it has two halves with different jobs.

The lateral habenula is the brain's disappointment detector, firing hardest when something good was expected and did not arrive, and using that signal to switch off the dopamine and serotonin systems that carry reward and mood.

The medial habenula is an aversion and nicotine hub, running a private line to the midbrain that sets how unpleasant too much nicotine feels and how fear memories are expressed.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Medial habenular cells are small, tightly packed and remarkably uniform, with short bipolar dendrites, giving the nucleus a dense dark look under the microscope.

Lateral habenular cells are larger and more varied, with spiny radiating dendrites, and both halves send their axons into one conspicuous bundle, the fasciculus retroflexus, which drops almost vertically into the midbrain.

SIZE:

Medial habenular cell bodies are 8 to 14 micrometres across, among the smallest in the diencephalon, while lateral habenular cells are 12 to 25 micrometres.

The whole complex occupies roughly 30 to 33 cubic millimetres per side in post-mortem human measurement, about the volume of a small pea.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Four subtypes are worth modelling: dorsal medial cells using substance P and tachykinin signalling to influence mood, ventral medial cells co-releasing acetylcholine and glutamate, lateral division cells of the lateral habenula driving the aversion pathway, and medial division cells targeting the serotonin system.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The complex sits on the dorsomedial surface of the posterior thalamus, forming the habenular trigone, joined across the midline by the habenular commissure and attached by a stalk to the pineal gland.

Three interfaces must be named: the stria medullaris thalami, the input bundle running along the top edge of the thalamus from the basal forebrain and the internal segment of the globus pallidus; the fasciculus retroflexus, the output bundle to the midbrain; and the wall of the third ventricle, which the medial habenula abuts, placing it at the boundary between brain tissue and cerebrospinal fluid and exposing it to blood-borne and fluid-borne signals most of the brain is shielded from.

NUMBER:

Post-mortem stereology in control men gives about 644,000 medial habenular neurons, with a standard deviation near 131,000, which is a directly measured figure.

The lateral habenula occupies roughly six times the volume at lower packing density, so the whole complex plausibly holds 1.5 to 2.5 million neurons, about 0.002 per cent of the human nervous system; confidence is high for the medial figure and low for the lateral one, which is derived from volume and estimated density rather than counted.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Medial habenular cells are spontaneous pacemakers, ticking along at 2 to 10 spikes per second with no input at all, so they provide a constant background tone rather than an event report.

Lateral habenular cells idle slowly and switch into powerful bursts when disappointed, and the burst rather than the single spike is the message: bursts need NMDA receptors, named for N-methyl-D-aspartate, together with low-threshold calcium channels, and require the cell to be hyperpolarised first.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from the internal segment of the globus pallidus carrying reward-prediction information, from the lateral hypothalamus, the basal forebrain, the medial prefrontal cortex and, for the medial habenula, the septum.

Lateral habenular output goes to the rostromedial tegmental nucleus, a small inhibitory hub that then shuts off the dopamine cells of the ventral tegmental area, and directly to the dorsal raphe nucleus, the main source of serotonin, while medial habenular output goes almost exclusively to the interpeduncular nucleus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The fasciculus retroflexus is compact, myelinated and topographically ordered, with medial fibres forming the core of the bundle and lateral fibres its shell.

That concentration is also a liability, since this small bundle is among the first structures damaged by chronic stimulant exposure in animal models.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Lateral habenular cells are glutamatergic and many release both glutamate and GABA from the same terminals, with the balance shifting toward glutamate in depression.

Ventral medial cells co-release acetylcholine and glutamate onto the same targets on completely different timescales, glutamate in milliseconds and acetylcholine over seconds, and nicotinic receptors containing the alpha5 and beta4 subunits are so concentrated in this pathway that variants in their genes are among the strongest known genetic risks for heavy smoking.

MYELINATION:

The output bundle is well myelinated, giving reliable low-jitter delivery to the midbrain, while dendrites and local branches inside the nuclei are bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate overall, but the medial habenula's continuous pacemaking imposes a steady unrelenting cost, and its position against the third ventricle gives it an unusual reliance on the cerebrospinal fluid as well as the blood supply.

PLASTICITY:

Chronic stress strengthens the excitatory input to lateral habenular cells and increases bursting, which is one of the clearest cellular accounts of how adversity becomes low mood.

The change is reversible: a single dose of ketamine blocks the NMDA receptors that generate the bursts and lifts mood within hours, the most striking demonstration in modern psychiatry that a mood state can hang on the firing pattern of one small population.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here do something found nowhere else: they carry unusually high levels of the potassium channel Kir4.1, and in animal models of depression that channel increases further, letting the astrocyte strip potassium from around the neuron, hyperpolarise it, and so switch it into burst mode.

In this one region the glial cell is not a support act but a direct cause of the neuron's pathological firing, and blocking the astrocyte channel has an antidepressant effect.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the habenula and the brain keeps its reward system but loses its brake.

Nothing would tell the dopamine cells to fall silent when an expected reward failed to appear, so learning from disappointment, the ability to stop pursuing what is not working, and the normal sting of a bad outcome would all fade.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The burst is a distinct code carrying different meaning from tonic firing, produced by a partnership between the neuron's NMDA receptors, its calcium channels and the potassium-clearing behaviour of the astrocyte beside it.

Co-transmission is central, since the same medial terminal delivers a millisecond glutamate message and a seconds-long acetylcholine message while the same lateral terminal can deliver both excitation and inhibition in a slowly shifting ratio; the cells also sit at a fluid interface and respond to circulating hormones and inflammatory signals, which is one reason sickness makes people feel low as well as unwell.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: reward-prediction signals from the internal globus pallidus, 0 to 50 spikes per second; stress and arousal signals from the lateral hypothalamus; prefrontal input; septal input for the medial habenula; circulating hormone and cytokine levels as scalars.

• OUTPUTS: glutamatergic spikes to the rostromedial tegmental nucleus and dorsal raphe nucleus tagged burst or tonic; acetylcholine and glutamate co-release to the interpeduncular nucleus; a derived dopamine suppression scalar from 0 to 1.

• STATE: running expectation of reward; membrane voltage; NMDA receptor availability; calcium channel readiness; astrocytic potassium buffering; glutamate-to-GABA release ratio.

• PARAMETERS: tonic rate 2 to 10 spikes per second; burst gain multiplier 2 to 3; expectation learning rate 0.1 to 0.4; disappointment threshold for bursting.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds; burst duration 20 to 100 milliseconds; expectation update one trial; stress-induced strengthening days to weeks; ketamine reversal hours.

• FAILURE MODE: excessive bursting produces the anhedonia and behavioural despair of major depression, with reduced habenular volume seen post-mortem; weakened medial habenular signalling removes the aversive brake on nicotine intake and increases smoking.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute, trial by trial, how disappointed a lateral habenular neuron is and whether that disappointment is large enough to make it burst.
Create a number variable called expectation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called learning rate with initial value 0.25.
Create a number variable called baseline rate with initial value 4.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 22.
Create a number variable called error with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called the cell is bursting with initial value false.
Create a list variable called rewards with initial value empty list.
For each reward in rewards, perform the following operations.
    Set error to the difference of expectation and reward.
    If error is less than 0 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set error to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set firing rate to the sum of baseline rate and the product of gain and error.
    Check if error is greater than 0.6.
    Set the cell is bursting to the result of that check.
    If the cell is bursting is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to the product of firing rate and 2.5.
    End the conditional block.
    Display firing rate to the console.
    Set expectation to the sum of expectation and the product of learning rate and the difference of reward and expectation.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python chosen because the heart of this cell is a running expectation and a
# subtraction, and plain arithmetic keeps the psychology visible in the code.
ALPHA = 0.25           # how fast the expectation tracks recent reward
BASELINE_HZ = 4.0      # tonic firing when nothing surprising happens
GAIN_HZ = 22.0         # extra spikes per second per unit of disappointment
BURST_THRESHOLD = 0.6  # disappointment big enough to trigger a calcium burst
NMDA_BLOCK = 0.0       # set to 1.0 to simulate a single dose of ketamine

expectation = 0.0
trials = [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0, 1.0]

for n, reward in enumerate(trials):
    error = expectation - reward             # positive means worse than expected
    rate = BASELINE_HZ + GAIN_HZ * max(0.0, error)
    burst = (error > BURST_THRESHOLD) and (NMDA_BLOCK < 0.5)
    if burst:
        rate = rate * 2.5                    # a burst counts far more downstream
    dopamine_cut = min(1.0, rate / 40.0)     # fraction of dopamine cells silenced
    expectation = expectation + ALPHA * (reward - expectation)
    print("trial %2d  reward %.1f  expect %.2f  habenula %5.1f Hz  burst %-5s"
          "  dopamine cut %.0f%%"
          % (n + 1, reward, expectation, rate, str(burst), 100 * dopamine_cut))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only population in the brain whose firing rate goes up when something good fails to happen, and whose axons leave in a single dense vertical cable aimed at the machinery of reward.

Nowhere else does an astrocyte's potassium channel decide whether a neuron bursts, and nowhere else does blocking one receptor type in a pea-sized structure lift a person's mood within hours.

CHAPTER 89. ZONA INCERTA NEURONS (Action-Releasing Gate Neuron) (COG)

In 1877 Auguste Forel found a thin grey sheet under the thalamus, could say nothing certain of it, and named it the zone of uncertainty.

The old name is Latin for uncertain zone, a nineteenth-century confession of ignorance that still tells a student nothing.

Action-Releasing names the mechanism, because the cells are overwhelmingly inhibitory, so their effect is to lift restraint rather than to command.

Gate names the breadth of what gets released, since switching these cells on drives immediate binge-like eating, producing about thirty-five percent of a normal day's food intake in ten minutes, and simultaneously cuts short defensive freezing.

Neuron marks it as a thin sheet of cells carrying a broad, non-specific movement signal to an unusually wide list of targets, from cortex and thalamus to midbrain, of which around three-quarters are most active during sleep, so the honest reading is a general permission switch for whole behaviours rather than a dedicated feeding or fear circuit.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Zona incerta neurons are a flat sheet of mostly inhibitory cells wedged under the thalamus.

Inhibitory means they make targets less likely to fire; the sheet gates incoming touch and sets the intensity of hunting, feeding, fear, pain and sleep.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Most are multipolar: thick dendrites, the branches that collect input, radiate from the cell body like a starburst.

Dendrites run 300 to 600 micrometres, and axon side branches, called collaterals, run 400 to 500 micrometres sideways.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are small to medium, though one rodent sector is named magnocellularis, Latin for large-celled.

The dendritic field exceeds a millimetre, and the human rostral zona incerta measures 54.6 cubic millimetres a side.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Sectors are rostral, dorsal, ventral and caudal, plus magnocellularis and retropolaris in rodents.

About 79 percent of neurons release gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the main inhibitory messenger, and 19 percent glutamate; among GABA cells 53 percent carry calretinin, 37 percent somatostatin and 2 percent parvalbumin, with a dopamine group named A13 rostromedially.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lies in the subthalamus, below the thalamus and above the subthalamic nucleus, between the white matter fields of Forel, H1 above and H2 below.

Laterally it abuts the internal capsule and cerebellothalamic fasciculus, medially the hypothalamus; its key interface is the caudal zona incerta, posteromedial to the subthalamic nucleus where the posterior subthalamic area and medial lemniscus meet.

NUMBER:

No unbiased human count exists, so this is an estimate.

Roughly 200 cubic millimetres a side, at the subthalamic nucleus density of 2,200 to 3,300 neurons per cubic millimetre, gives half a million a side and a million in all, some 2 percent of the 60 million diencephalic neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Firing is slow, 1.53 spikes per second in slow-wave states and 6.33 when activated, with rebound bursts on release from inhibition through low-threshold T-type calcium channels.

Rheobase, the smallest current that triggers a spike, is 23.1 picoamps in calretinin cells, 29.2 in glutamate cells, 41.3 in somatostatin cells.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from cortical layer 5, 65 to 75 percent of human cortico-incertal tracts being frontal, plus amygdala somatostatin cells onto local parvalbumin cells, superior colliculus, ventral tegmental area and brainstem cholinergic nuclei.

Outputs reach posterior medial and paraventricular thalamus, periaqueductal grey, superior colliculus, lateral habenula, lateral hypothalamus, inferior olive, pontine nuclei and neocortex directly.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin, long and branched, so one soma sends an ascending branch to thalamus and a descending branch to midbrain at once.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA dominates, glutamate is a large minority, dopamine is confined to A13, and somatostatin, calretinin, parvalbumin, calbindin and vasopressin tune the signal.

In mouse medial zona incerta 43 percent of cells show tyrosine hydroxylase, the dopamine-making enzyme, against 4 percent laterally.

MYELINATION:

Its own axons carry thin myelin, the fatty insulation that speeds conduction.

The region is defined instead by the heavy myelin around it, seen only by windowing scans to a T1 relaxation time of 1,000 to 2,000 milliseconds.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Demand is modest at a few spikes a second, though fast-spiking parvalbumin cells are costly and iron handling here is abnormal in Parkinson's disease models.

PLASTICITY:

Amygdala synapses onto parvalbumin cells strengthen with fear conditioning and are needed to recall that fear weeks later.

Sleep pressure recruits a subgroup marked by the gene Lhx6, whose deletion in development permanently shortens sleep.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing uniquely incertal has been shown for its glia, the brain's support cells.

Only position differs: sitting inside white matter, these neurons are crowded by myelin-making oligodendrocytes rather than the astrocyte carpet of cortex.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the posterior thalamus loses its brake, so fingertip signals that should arrive late, small and filtered arrive early, large and raw.

That is central pain syndrome, where ordinary touch becomes agony.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its millimetre-wide dendritic field averages input across the whole sheet, and T-type calcium channels store recent inhibition to turn a pause into a rebound burst.

Brainstem acetylcholine suppresses the population, so arousal sets output, while A13 cells release dopamine by volume transmission, drifting through tissue fluid to distant receptors.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: cortical layer 5 excitation 0 to 40 picoamps, amygdala inhibition, collicular and tegmental drive, acetylcholine 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto posterior medial thalamus, periaqueductal grey, superior colliculus and lateral hypothalamus; glutamate from 19 percent of cells; dopamine from A13.

• STATE: voltage, T-type readiness, output conductance, recent spikes.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 70 millivolts, threshold minus 50, rheobase 23 to 41 picoamps, peak 42 to 105 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 milliseconds, T-type recovery 100 milliseconds, synapse 8 milliseconds, behaviour seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: too little output gives central pain and sensory flooding; disordered output feeds tremor, and stimulating the caudal zona incerta cuts contralateral tremor about 88 percent.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide when one zona incerta neuron fires, including its rebound after a pause in cortical drive.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called readiness with initial value 0.
For each moment in the drive list, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the sum of moment and readiness.
    Calculate the sum of voltage and the result.
    Set voltage to the result.
    If voltage is less than -20 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to -20.
        Set readiness to 6.
    End the conditional block.
    If voltage is greater than or equal to 20 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to 0.
        Set readiness to 0.
        Display moment to the console.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: no libraries, and it reads almost like English.
DT, TAU_M, V_REST, V_TH = 0.5, 20.0, -70.0, -50.0  # ms and mV
TAU_H, H_HALF, G_T = 100.0, -75.0, 2.5             # T-type calcium channel

def run(drive):
    v, h, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, []
    for i, x in enumerate(drive):
        h += DT * ((1.0 if v < H_HALF else 0.0) - h) / TAU_H  # arms when hyperpolarised
        v += DT * (-(v - V_REST) + x + G_T * h * max(0.0, v - H_HALF)) / TAU_M
        if v >= V_TH:
            v, h = V_REST, h * 0.5                 # a spike spends the stored charge
            spikes.append(i * DT)                  # spike time, milliseconds
    return spikes

n = 400                                            # tonic, pause, release
s = run([22.0] * n + [-25.0] * n + [22.0] * n)
print(round(min(t for t in s if t >= 400.0) - 400.0, 1), "ms to rebound spike")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other cell is a paper-thin sheet of inhibition slipped between two white matter bundles, with dendrites spanning its own nucleus and axons reaching thalamus, midbrain and cortex.

It alone makes a gentle touch feel like fire by falling silent, and it alone, stimulated, stills a trembling hand.


PART SEVEN: HYPOTHALAMUS - HORMONES, DRIVES, AND BODY STATE

CHAPTER 90. MAGNOCELLULAR NEUROSECRETORY CELLS (Large-Bodied Blood-Releasing Neuron) (NON-COG)

Behind your eyes sits a small crowd of giant cells that are half nerve and half gland, and every time your blood turns salty they squirt hormone straight into your bloodstream.

Magnocellular simply means large celled, so the old label carried size and nothing else.

Large-Bodied preserves that one fact, since these are among the biggest neurons in the human brain.

Blood-Releasing names the astonishing thing they do, which is to skip every synapse and empty their cargo straight into the bloodstream at the posterior pituitary.

Neuron marks it as a cell sending a single long axon with almost no branches to the posterior lobe, where it swells into roughly two thousand secretory terminals and about four hundred large storage swellings.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A magnocellular neurosecretory cell is a nerve cell that has taken a second job as a gland, and magnocellular simply means large-celled.

It fires action potentials, which are brief voltage spikes, but instead of handing them to a partner neuron it uses them to blow hormone-filled bubbles open into blood.

Its task is to convert two body facts, how concentrated the blood is and whether a baby is suckling, into a hormone level in the circulation minutes later.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A plump oval cell body crammed with rough endoplasmic reticulum, the ribbon-shaped protein factory of a cell, carrying only one to three thick dendrites, which are the branch-like input arms of a neuron.

Those dendrites are not passive listeners but are packed with hormone vesicles they release locally, while one long axon dives through the pituitary stalk and ends in a spray of terminals on blood capillaries, swelling on the way into hormone depots called Herring bodies.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 20 to 35 micrometres across, and a micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre, so three of these would span a human hair.

Dendrites run 100 to 1000 micrometres, the axon travels 2 to 4 centimetres and ends in an estimated 10,000 terminals, and Herring bodies swell to 5 to 20 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two families, the oxytocin cells and the vasopressin cells, each described as a separate type in the entries that follow.

In human tissue the vasopressin cells have slightly larger cell bodies, and roughly one to three cells in a hundred contain both peptides.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The main colony is the supraoptic nucleus, a dense cap on the optic tract just above where the optic nerves cross, with a second in the magnocellular division of the paraventricular nucleus against the third ventricle wall, and accessory groups such as the nucleus circularis between them.

The decisive interface is the pituitary stalk and posterior pituitary, where the axon leaves the protected brain and meets fenestrated capillaries, meaning vessels with windows in their walls, and a second interface is the border with the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis, a gap in the blood-brain barrier where the brain samples blood directly.

NUMBER:

Both sides combined, the supraoptic nuclei hold about 75 thousand of these cells, the magnocellular paraventricular about 30 thousand, and accessory clusters perhaps 15 thousand more.

That gives roughly 100 to 130 thousand in a human, a moderate-confidence figure because post-mortem counts vary with method, making about 1 percent of the hypothalamus and one neuron in every 700 thousand in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

At rest the cell idles at 1 to 3 spikes per second, slow enough to count by ear.

A transient potassium current delays the first spike after a quiet period, while a slow depolarising afterpotential, a lingering voltage bump left by each spike, summates so that firing makes further firing easier.

Output climbs about 0.4 to 0.5 picograms of hormone per millilitre for every milliosmole per kilogram the blood rises above a threshold near 280.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Glutamate, the brain's main accelerator chemical, arrives from the organum vasculosum, subfornical organ and nucleus tractus solitarius, while gamma-aminobutyric acid, shortened to GABA and the brain's main brake, arrives from the perinuclear zone.

Noradrenaline from the brainstem A1 group drives the cell hard during blood loss, and it also receives messages that are not synapses at all, in the form of peptide released from neighbouring dendrites.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin at 0.5 to 1 micrometre and conducting slowly at 0.5 to 1 metre per second, which costs nothing when the readout is a blood hormone level.

Each axon branches into thousands of endings pressed against windowed capillaries rather than onto another cell.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The products are peptide hormones, oxytocin or vasopressin, each packaged with a carrier protein called a neurophysin.

Co-stored partners include dynorphin, an opioid self-brake, plus galanin, cholecystokinin, nitric oxide and adenosine triphosphate, abbreviated ATP, the cell's energy currency doubling as a signal.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated throughout, meaning no fatty insulating sleeve, with the stalk axons wrapped instead by specialised glia called pituicytes.

This is no design failure, because slow conduction is invisible when the message is a hormone that circulates for minutes.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Protein output dominates the bill, not spiking, since peptide must be made, packaged and shipped along centimetres of axon.

Under dehydration these neurons hypertrophy, meaning they physically swell, raising messenger ribonucleic acid, shortened to mRNA, for the hormone gene many-fold, and they lean heavily on lactate supplied by astrocytes.

PLASTICITY:

During dehydration, birth and breastfeeding the tissue rewires within hours, as astrocyte sheets withdraw, neighbouring neurons touch and new synapses form on the exposed membrane.

The whole arrangement reverses within days, making this the best-documented structural plasticity in the adult mammalian brain.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

These astrocytes are exceptional because they retract and re-extend on demand, which astrocytes elsewhere do not do on this scale, and by leaving they stop mopping up glutamate and let neurons synchronise.

They also release taurine when swollen, quietening the neurons when blood is dilute, while pituicytes unwrap the nerve endings during demand as a mechanical tap, and microglia, the brain's immune cells, activate here in dehydration.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete these cells and the hypothalamus loses its plumbing department entirely.

The person would pour out fifteen to twenty litres of dilute urine a day, could not give birth normally or breastfeed, and the region would lose its most spectacular trick, remodelling its own architecture in response to body state.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Dendritic release is the headline: dendrites secrete hormone into the local space as a chemical broadcast, a mode called volume transmission, triggered by back-propagating action potentials that travel backwards from cell body into dendrite.

Dendritic dynorphin feeds back onto the same cell to shut off its own afterpotential, an elegant self-timer.

The cells couple through gap junctions, direct pores between neighbours, and through ephaptic effects, where one cell's electrical field nudges the next without contact.

Nitric oxide diffuses backwards to inhibit their own inputs and dilates nearby vessels, and sustained demand switches on gene transcription and dendritic protein synthesis, so the cell rebuilds itself while working.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Plasma osmolality from organum vasculosum and subfornical organ, 270 to 320 milliosmoles per kilogram.

◦ Blood volume and pressure from nucleus tractus solitarius and A1 group, percent change from normal.

◦ Suckling and cervical stretch afferents, 0 to 20 events per second.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Peptide hormone into posterior pituitary capillaries, plasma 0.5 to 20 picograms per millilitre.

◦ Dendritic peptide into the nucleus itself, 0 to 100 nanomolar.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, afterpotential amplitude, internal calcium, releasable vesicle pool, axonal store, dendritic autoinhibition, cell volume.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Osmotic threshold about 280 milliosmoles per kilogram, gain about 0.5 spikes per second per milliosmole, maximum rate 13 spikes per second, resting 1 to 3, about 10,000 terminals per axon.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 milliseconds, afterpotential 3 to 6 seconds, autoinhibition 20 to 60 seconds, plasma half-life 1 to 20 minutes, remodelling hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of 80 to 90 percent of the vasopressin cells gives arginine vasopressin deficiency, formerly central diabetes insipidus, with torrential dilute urine, while inappropriate excess gives the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis, dangerously diluting blood sodium.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert blood saltiness into a quantity of hormone released into the bloodstream by one magnocellular neurosecretory cell.
Create a number variable called osmolality with initial value 300.
Create a number variable called excess with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called pool with initial value 100.
Create a number variable called released with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called quantum with initial value 0.
Set excess to the difference of osmolality and 280.
If excess is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
    Set excess to 0.
End the conditional block.
Set firing rate to the sum of 1.5 and the product of 0.55 and excess.
If firing rate is greater than 13, then perform the following actions.
    Set firing rate to 13.
End the conditional block.
Repeat the following steps exactly 200 times.
    Set quantum to the product of 0.0012 and the product of firing rate and pool.
    Set pool to the sum of 0.04 and the difference of pool and quantum.
    Set released to the sum of released and quantum.
End the loop.
Display firing rate to the console.
Display released to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the model is arithmetic on a handful of numbers and keeps the physiology visible instead of burying it in boilerplate.

# Stimulus to secretion coupling in a magnocellular neurosecretory cell.
DT = 0.05            # seconds per step
OSM_SET = 280.0      # osmotic threshold, milliosmoles per kilogram
GAIN = 0.55          # spikes per second per milliosmole above threshold
MAX_RATE = 13.0      # ceiling on sustained firing
POOL_MAX = 100.0     # releasable hormone at the terminals, arbitrary units
REFILL = 0.8         # units resupplied by axonal transport per second
FUSION = 0.012       # fraction of pool released per spike at low rates
def firing_rate(osmolality):
    return max(0.0, min(MAX_RATE, 1.5 + GAIN * (osmolality - OSM_SET)))
def facilitation(rate):
    return 1.0 + 2.5 * (rate / (rate + 4.0))   # release per spike saturates
def run(osmolality, seconds):
    pool, released = POOL_MAX, 0.0
    rate = firing_rate(osmolality)
    for _ in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        out = min(pool, FUSION * facilitation(rate) * pool * rate * DT)
        pool = min(POOL_MAX, pool - out + REFILL * DT)
        released += out
    return rate, released, pool
for osm in (280.0, 290.0, 300.0):
    r, total, left = run(osm, 10.0)
    print("osmolality %.0f: %.2f Hz, released %.1f, pool %.1f" % (osm, r, total, left))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else in the human brain is a neuron at one end and an endocrine gland at the other, with a single unmyelinated axon running centimetres out of the brain to squirt peptide into blood.

A huge cell body, one or two fat unbranched dendrites, hormone beads along the axon, and astrocytes that move out of the way when the body is thirsty: that is this cell.

CHAPTER 91. OXYTOCIN NEURONS (Birthing-And-Nursing Burst Neuron) (NON-COG)

Every few minutes during breastfeeding a few thousand scattered cells fall silent, then fire together in a single three-second thunderclap, and milk appears.

Oxytocin is a peptide barcode, naming the molecule rather than the cell or the moment it serves.

Birthing-And-Nursing names the two occasions this cell owns, since its hormone drives the contractions of labour and the ejection of milk during suckling.

Burst corrects the common picture of a steady drip, because these cells are silent for minutes at a time and then fire a brief synchronised volley lasting only a few seconds, which is what forces a pulse of hormone into the blood.

Neuron marks it as a magnocellular secretory cell, and naming the firing pattern rather than the peptide tells a student why the milk arrives in waves every five minutes or so during a feed rather than continuously.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An oxytocin neuron is a magnocellular neurosecretory cell making oxytocin, a nine-amino-acid peptide hormone whose name means swift birth.

Its headline job is mechanical, squeezing the muscle-like cells around the milk glands so milk is ejected and squeezing the womb during labour, and its second job is chemical influence inside the brain over social recognition, trust, pain thresholds and stress buffering.

The hard part is timing, because the cells must convert a continuous stimulus, suckling, into rare synchronised pulses.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Slightly smaller and rounder than its vasopressin sibling, with one to three long, sparsely branched dendrites that bundle into a shared zone at the ventral edge of the nucleus where cells lie membrane to membrane with no astrocyte between them.

The cytoplasm holds dense-core vesicles, small bags with a dark centre under the electron microscope, each carrying oxytocin bound to a protein called neurophysin I.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly 18 to 30 micrometres across, measurably smaller in human tissue than a neighbouring vasopressin cell.

Dendrites reach several hundred micrometres and shrink by about 40 percent in total length during lactation, while the axon runs 2 to 4 centimetres to a gland holding roughly 28 micrograms of oxytocin, about 14 international units.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Magnocellular oxytocin cells make hormone for the body through the posterior pituitary, while a much smaller parvocellular group projects into brain and spinal cord instead and carries the pain and social functions.

A third group sends collaterals to both, so one cell doses blood and brain in the same moment.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in the supraoptic nucleus, mainly its dorsal part, in the magnocellular paraventricular nucleus and in accessory nuclei between them, with the parvocellular oxytocin cells in the medial parvocellular paraventricular subdivision.

Their axons reach the nucleus accumbens, central amygdala, hippocampal region CA2, nucleus tractus solitarius, dorsal vagal complex and spinal cord dorsal horn.

The key interface is the posterior pituitary, where brain tissue meets windowed capillaries, and a second is the glia-free dendritic zone at the edge of the supraoptic nucleus.

NUMBER:

There are roughly 50 thousand magnocellular oxytocin neurons in a human, both sides combined, with a defensible range of 40 to 60 thousand and moderate confidence, plus perhaps a few thousand brain-projecting parvocellular cells.

That is about 0.5 percent of the hypothalamus and one neuron in every 1.6 million in the nervous system, a startlingly small committee for birth, feeding and attachment.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Between bursts the cell fires slowly and rather regularly at 1 to 3 spikes per second, kept evenly spaced by a transient potassium current, and it does not show the long phasic bursts of a vasopressin cell.

During the milk-ejection reflex it does something unique: an explosive burst of 2 to 4 seconds at 40 to 80 spikes per second, with every oxytocin cell in both hemispheres joining within about a second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Suckling information climbs the spinal cord and brainstem, but no fast pathway is strong enough on its own to trigger the burst.

Glutamate from the organum vasculosum and noradrenaline from the A2 group set the background rate, while GABA input from the perinuclear zone switches from inhibitory to excitatory in late pregnancy because the chloride balance inside the cell changes.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, unmyelinated, roughly 0.5 to 1 micrometre across, conducting at 0.5 to 1 metre per second and ending in thousands of terminals.

Release shows strong frequency facilitation, so a 40 hertz burst delivers far more than forty times what one second at 1 hertz would.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Oxytocin with neurophysin I is the main product, acting on a single oxytocin receptor that raises internal calcium and cross-reacting weakly with vasopressin receptors.

Co-released partners include cholecystokinin, dynorphin, corticotropin-releasing hormone in some cells, and glutamate at brain-projecting terminals.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated throughout, both the pituitary-bound axons and most brain-projecting collaterals.

Myelin would be pointless for hormone release and unnecessary for slow peptide signalling inside the brain.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate at rest and enormous during lactation, when oxytocin mRNA rises several-fold and an emptied terminal store must be refilled every few minutes.

The cells rely on astrocyte-supplied lactate and dense local capillaries, and their mitochondria cluster in the dendritic release zones.

PLASTICITY:

This is the plasticity champion of the mammalian brain, as astrocyte processes withdraw, cell bodies touch, new GABA and glutamate synapses form on exposed membrane, the dendritic tree shrinks by about 40 percent and gap junctions multiply.

Every change reverses within days of weaning, and oxytocin itself is the signal that drives them.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes here behave like retractable curtains rather than fixed insulation, and their withdrawal is the enabling step for synchronised bursting, because when they leave they stop clearing glutamate and transmitter spills between cells.

Pituicytes retract from the terminals during suckling to expose more surface to the capillary wall, and astrocytes carry oxytocin receptors themselves, so neuron and glia talk both ways.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove oxytocin cells and the supraoptic nucleus becomes a pure salt thermostat with no social or reproductive dimension.

Labour would stall, milk would be made but never released, the circuit would lose synchrony altogether because vasopressin cells alone never fire together, and the wider brain would lose a diffuse calming signal that slows the heart and raises pain thresholds.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Dendritic release is the burst mechanism: suckling slowly builds oxytocin in the dendritic zone, priming the vesicles of every neighbour, and once primed the population fires together.

This is positive feedback written in chemistry rather than wiring, so the cells are coupled without being connected, and because oxytocin mobilises calcium from internal stores the priming outlasts the activity that caused it.

Gap junctions add direct electrical coupling, back-propagating spikes drive dendritic calcium entry, nitric oxide gives retrograde inhibition of incoming synapses, and oxytocin acting on astrocytes changes glutamate handling in a genuine three-way neuron, glia and hormone loop.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Suckling afferent rate from spinal cord, 0 to 20 events per second.

◦ Cervical and vaginal stretch during labour, 0 to 1 normalised.

◦ Local dendritic oxytocin, 0 to 100 nanomolar.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Plasma oxytocin, baseline 1 to 5 picograms per millilitre, pulse 20 to 100.

◦ Dendritic oxytocin priming neighbours in the nucleus.

◦ Axonal oxytocin to amygdala, accumbens, CA2, brainstem and spinal cord.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, dendritic pool, primed fraction, burst timer, refractory timer, internal calcium, astrocyte coverage.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Background 1 to 3 spikes per second, burst 40 to 80, burst length 2 to 4 seconds, inter-burst interval 3 to 10 minutes.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 milliseconds, priming build-up 10 to 60 seconds, dendritic clearance about 15 seconds, plasma half-life 1 to 6 minutes, glial retraction hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Failure of the burst causes failed milk ejection despite normal milk production and weak or prolonged labour, while reduced central oxytocin signalling is implicated in autism spectrum conditions and Prader-Willi syndrome, on correlational human evidence.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to reproduce the milk-ejection burst of a population of oxytocin neurons coupled only by hormone released from their dendrites.
Create a number variable called dendritic oxytocin with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called suckling input with initial value 2.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called burst timer with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called refractory timer with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called ejection times with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
While clock is less than 900, repeat the following steps.
    If burst timer is greater than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 55.
        Set burst timer to the difference of burst timer and 0.05.
        If burst timer is less than or equal to 0, then perform the following actions.
            Set refractory timer to 240.
        End the conditional block.
    Else if refractory timer is greater than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to the sum of 1.5 and suckling input.
        Set refractory timer to the difference of refractory timer and 0.05.
    Else if dendritic oxytocin is greater than or equal to 0.62, then perform the following actions.
        Set burst timer to 3.
        Add clock to the end of ejection times.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to the sum of 1.5 and suckling input.
    End the conditional block.
    Set dendritic oxytocin to the sum of dendritic oxytocin and the product of 0.05 and the difference of the product of 0.018 and firing rate and the product of 0.06 and dendritic oxytocin.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 0.05.
End the loop.
Display ejection times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the burst is a slow feedback loop rather than a solver problem, and a plain loop makes the priming mechanism obvious.

# Milk-ejection bursting in a dendritically coupled oxytocin population.
DT = 0.05          # seconds per step
N_CELLS = 20       # cells sharing one dendritic pool
BASE = 1.5         # background spikes per second
BURST_RATE = 55.0  # spikes per second inside a burst
BURST_LEN = 3.0    # seconds
REFRACT = 240.0    # seconds of reduced excitability after a burst
THRESH = 0.62      # dendritic oxytocin needed to trigger a burst
CLEAR = 0.06       # fraction of dendritic pool cleared per second
PROD = 0.0009      # dendritic oxytocin released per spike per cell
def simulate(suckling, seconds):
    dend, burst_left, block, t = 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0
    ejections = []
    while t < seconds:
        if burst_left > 0.0:
            rate = BURST_RATE
            burst_left -= DT
            if burst_left <= 0.0:
                block = REFRACT          # cells cannot re-burst at once
        else:
            rate = BASE + suckling
            if block > 0.0:
                block -= DT
            elif dend >= THRESH:
                burst_left = BURST_LEN   # the population fires together
                ejections.append(round(t, 1))
        dend += (PROD * rate * N_CELLS - CLEAR * dend) * DT
        t += DT
    return ejections
print("milk ejections at seconds:", simulate(suckling=2.0, seconds=900.0))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron coordinates with its neighbours by bathing them in its own hormone and then firing with them in a three-second thunderclap every few minutes.

A large hypothalamic cell whose astrocytes move aside during breastfeeding, whose dendrites secrete the peptide its axon delivers to blood, and which alternates long quiet stretches with brief 50 hertz explosions, is an oxytocin neuron.

CHAPTER 92. VASOPRESSIN NEURONS, ALSO CALLED ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE NEURONS (Water-Sparing Kidney-Signal Neuron) (NON-COG)

This cell is the reason you can walk across a desert for a day and still make urine, and it decides how much of your body water you are allowed to throw away.

Vasopressin and antidiuretic hormone are two chemical labels for one molecule, and both describe the substance rather than the cell.

Water-Sparing names the purpose, which is to hold water inside the body rather than lose it in urine.

Kidney-Signal names the target, because the hormone these cells release acts on the collecting ducts of the kidney to reabsorb water.

Neuron marks it as a superb sensor in its own right, swelling or shrinking with the saltiness of the blood and changing its firing rate to match, so that a rise of only one to two percent in blood concentration is enough to raise hormone output.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A vasopressin neuron is a magnocellular neurosecretory cell making vasopressin, also called antidiuretic hormone, a nine-amino-acid peptide differing from oxytocin by just two building blocks.

Antidiuretic means urine-reducing, and that is the job, since the hormone tells the kidney to pull water back out of the urine and return it to the blood.

It is a live sensor as well as a gland, because its own membrane detects how concentrated the blood is without any other cell telling it, and it also tightens blood vessels, which is why it is called vaso-pressin.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Large, angular cell body with one or two thick dendrites running hundreds of micrometres with very few branches.

The membrane carries mechanically gated channels, pores that open when the cell physically shrinks, so water loss becomes a voltage change, and the interior is dominated by hormone factories including an oversized Golgi apparatus, the packaging depot of a cell, and dense-core vesicles holding vasopressin bound to neurophysin II.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 20 to 35 micrometres across and averages larger than a neighbouring oxytocin cell, a difference measurable in human post-mortem tissue.

Dendrites run 200 to 1000 micrometres, the axon 2 to 4 centimetres, and the hormone beads called Herring bodies along it swell to 5 to 20 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Magnocellular vasopressin cells serve body water balance and are the type described here.

Parvocellular vasopressin cells in the paraventricular nucleus are small, send vasopressin to pituitary portal blood to amplify the stress signal, and often also contain corticotropin-releasing hormone, while separate populations in the suprachiasmatic nucleus, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and medial amygdala are counted with their own regions.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The densest colony is the ventral supraoptic nucleus, sitting on the optic tract just lateral to the optic chiasm, with a second in the magnocellular paraventricular nucleus and accessory groups such as the nucleus circularis between them.

Two interfaces are decisive: the posterior pituitary, where the axon crosses out of the blood-brain barrier into windowed capillaries, and the border with the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis and subfornical organ, circumventricular organs where the brain tastes blood directly.

NUMBER:

There are roughly 70 thousand magnocellular vasopressin neurons in a human, both sides combined, within a defensible range of 60 to 80 thousand and with moderate confidence, making up 55 to 60 percent of the magnocellular population.

That is about 0.7 percent of the hypothalamus and roughly one neuron in every 1.2 million in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

At rest the cell fires slowly and irregularly at 1 to 3 spikes per second, but raise the blood concentration and it switches into phasic firing, its signature pattern of bursts lasting 20 to 60 seconds at 5 to 13 spikes per second separated by silences of 15 to 40 seconds.

The burst is built by a slow depolarising afterpotential that summates into a plateau and ended by dynorphin released from the cell's own dendrites, which switches that afterpotential off.

Osmotic sensing depends on a shortened form of the TRPV1 channel, a pore pulled open by the shrinking cell's own skeleton, so shrinking equals depolarising equals firing.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Glutamate arrives from the organum vasculosum and subfornical organ carrying concentration and angiotensin signals, and noradrenaline from the A1 group of the ventrolateral medulla is the blood loss signal, powerfully excitatory here unlike in most of the brain.

GABA from the perinuclear zone provides the brake and is driven by baroreceptors, the pressure sensors in the great arteries, so rising blood pressure quietens the cell.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated, roughly 0.5 to 1 micrometre across, conducting at 0.5 to 1 metre per second and ending in thousands of terminals on capillaries.

Release shows strong frequency facilitation then fatigue, which is exactly why phasic firing is efficient, because a burst releases far more hormone per spike and the silence lets terminals recover.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Vasopressin with neurophysin II is the main product and dynorphin the co-stored burst-terminating self-brake, alongside galanin, apelin, nitric oxide and ATP.

Vasopressin acts on three receptors: V1a on blood vessels and in brain, V1b on pituitary corticotrophs, and V2 on kidney collecting duct cells, where it inserts water channels called aquaporin-2 into the membrane.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated everywhere.

The readout is a hormone concentration that takes minutes to act on the kidney, so a few tens of milliseconds of conduction delay are irrelevant.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high in dehydration, when the cell hypertrophies and the tail of its own hormone messenger RNA is lengthened to make the message more stable, a rare form of regulation.

Synthesis, packaging and centimetres of axonal transport dominate the energy budget rather than spiking, and misfolded mutant precursors cause an inherited form of the disease.

PLASTICITY:

Dehydration produces the same dramatic remodelling seen with oxytocin cells, as astrocytes retract, neurons touch, new synapses form and the balance of GABA and glutamate shifts within hours.

Chronic salt loading also changes which channels the cell expresses, raising intrinsic excitability, and all of it reverses on rehydration over several days.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes here release taurine through volume-sensitive channels when blood is dilute, and taurine directly inhibits the neuron, so the glia act as a second, independent osmometer feeding the same cell.

Pituicytes physically unwrap the nerve endings during dehydration and rewrap them afterwards, forming a mechanical gate on hormone output, while microglia activate in chronic dehydration and heart failure and alter excitatory drive.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this one cell type and the supraoptic nucleus stops being a water regulator and becomes only a milk and labour circuit.

The person would produce fifteen to twenty litres of dilute urine a day, drink constantly, risk death from dehydration during any illness that stopped them drinking, and the region would lose its metronome, since phasic bursting is the slow pulse of the nucleus.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The cell is its own sensor, because mechanical gating of the shortened TRPV1 channel converts cell volume directly into membrane voltage with no synapse required.

Dendritic dynorphin release is an autocrine self-timer, a signal a cell sends to itself to end its own burst, while dendritic vasopressin gives slower autoinhibition and coordinates neighbours.

Back-propagating spikes drive the dendritic calcium entry that makes this possible, and gap junctions plus ephaptic field effects synchronise small clusters.

Nitric oxide and carbon monoxide act as retrograde messengers onto its own inputs, vasopressin adjusts local microvessels, and sustained demand rewrites transcription and physically enlarges the cell.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Plasma osmolality sensed intrinsically and via organum vasculosum, 270 to 320 milliosmoles per kilogram.

◦ Blood volume via A1 noradrenergic input, minus 30 to plus 30 percent of normal.

◦ Arterial pressure via baroreceptor-driven GABA, 60 to 160 millimetres of mercury.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Plasma vasopressin, 0.5 to 20 picograms per millilitre normally, hundreds after haemorrhage.

◦ Dendritic vasopressin and dynorphin into the nucleus.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, afterpotential amplitude, dendritic dynorphin, internal calcium, terminal store, cell volume, burst flag.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Osmotic threshold 280 to 285 milliosmoles per kilogram, sensitivity 0.4 to 0.5 picograms per millilitre per milliosmole, burst rate 5 to 13 spikes per second, burst 20 to 60 seconds, silence 15 to 40 seconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 milliseconds, afterpotential 3 to 6 seconds, dynorphin autoinhibition 25 to 60 seconds, plasma half-life 5 to 20 minutes, kidney response 10 to 30 minutes.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Destruction of 80 to 90 percent of these cells causes arginine vasopressin deficiency with 15 to 20 litres of dilute urine daily, while unregulated excess causes the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis, diluting blood sodium and causing confusion and seizures.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to reproduce the phasic bursting of a vasopressin neuron, in which a fast self-excitation builds a burst and a slow self-inhibition ends it.
Create a number variable called osmolality with initial value 295.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called afterpotential with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dynorphin with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called release contribution with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called bursting with initial value false.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Set drive to the product of 0.45 and the difference of osmolality and 281.
While clock is less than 600, repeat the following steps.
    If bursting is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to the sum of 9 and the product of 0.3 and drive.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to drive.
        If firing rate is greater than 3, then perform the following actions.
            Set firing rate to 3.
        End the conditional block.
    End the conditional block.
    Set afterpotential to the sum of afterpotential and the product of 0.05 and the difference of the product of 0.03 and firing rate and the quotient of afterpotential divided by 6.
    Set release contribution to 0.
    If firing rate is greater than 5, then perform the following actions.
        Set release contribution to the product of 0.0022 and the difference of firing rate and 5.
    End the conditional block.
    Set dynorphin to the sum of dynorphin and the product of 0.05 and the difference of release contribution and the quotient of dynorphin divided by 25.
    If bursting is true, then perform the following actions.
        If dynorphin is greater than or equal to 0.25, then perform the following actions.
            Set bursting to false.
            Set afterpotential to 0.
            Display clock to the console.
        End the conditional block.
    Else if both afterpotential is greater than or equal to 0.4 and dynorphin is less than or equal to 0.08 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set bursting to true.
        Display clock to the console.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 0.05.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the phasic burst is a relaxation oscillator built from two feedback variables on different clocks, and Python shows both clocks side by side.

# Phasic bursting in a vasopressin neuron: fast plateau versus slow opioid brake.
DT = 0.05        # seconds per step
DAP_ON = 0.40    # plateau needed to launch a burst
DYN_OFF = 0.25   # dendritic dynorphin that kills the plateau
DYN_ON = 0.08    # dynorphin low enough to permit the next burst
def phasic(osmolality, seconds):
    dap, dyn = 0.0, 0.0        # afterpotential and dynorphin, arbitrary units
    bursting = False
    bursts, start, t = [], 0.0, 0.0
    drive = max(0.0, 0.45 * (osmolality - 281.0))   # spikes per second
    while t < seconds:
        rate = (9.0 + 0.3 * drive) if bursting else min(3.0, drive)
        dap += (0.030 * rate - dap / 6.0) * DT        # builds over seconds
        release = 0.0022 * max(0.0, rate - 5.0)       # needs high firing
        dyn += (release - dyn / 25.0) * DT            # builds over tens of seconds
        if bursting and dyn >= DYN_OFF:
            bursting = False
            bursts.append((round(start, 1), round(t - start, 1)))
            dap = 0.0
        elif not bursting and dap >= DAP_ON and dyn <= DYN_ON:
            bursting, start = True, t
        t += DT
    return bursts
for osm in (285.0, 295.0):
    print("osmolality %.0f -> (start s, length s):" % osm, phasic(osm, 600.0)[:5])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell in the body that measures its own volume, turns that measurement into a hormone level in blood, and paces itself with an opioid released from its own dendrites.

On a recording the signature is unmissable: half a minute of steady firing, half a minute of silence, over and over, faster the thirstier you are.

CHAPTER 93. PARVOCELLULAR NEUROSECRETORY CELLS (Pituitary-Steering Small Neuron) (NON-COG)

These tiny cells hold the leash on every hormone gland in your body, and they do it by dripping picograms of peptide into a private vein the width of a pencil lead.

Parvocellular means small celled and distinguishes these cells from their giant neighbours by size alone.

Pituitary-Steering names the work, because instead of releasing hormone into the general circulation they drip tiny quantities into a private set of portal veins at the median eminence, six to ten small vessels that carry the signal a few millimetres down the stalk to the anterior pituitary.

Small preserves the only content the old term carried.

Neuron marks it as a secretory cell that biases the gland's output up or down rather than firing it directly, which is why steering is the honest verb.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A parvocellular neurosecretory cell is a small neuron that secretes a releasing or inhibiting hormone into a dedicated set of blood vessels leading to the anterior pituitary gland, and parvocellular means small-celled.

They never touch the pituitary, releasing instead into the hypophysial portal system, a private circuit that carries their message a few centimetres down the stalk without diluting it in the rest of the body.

Because of them a handful of brain cells sets cortisol, thyroid hormone, growth, fertility and milk production for the whole organism.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small, spindle-shaped or triangular cell bodies with two to five slender dendrites forming a modest tree.

They carry fewer and smaller dense-core vesicles than magnocellular cells because they deliver nanograms into a tiny volume rather than micrograms into the whole circulation, and their fine unmyelinated axons end as clubs pressed against the basement membrane of portal capillaries.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly 8 to 15 micrometres across, less than half the diameter and under a tenth of the volume of a magnocellular cell.

Dendrites reach 100 to 300 micrometres and axons only 1 to 5 millimetres, and the portal blood they secrete into has a volume on the order of a hundredth of a millilitre, which is why tiny amounts make large concentrations.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

They are named by their product: corticotropin-releasing hormone cells, thyrotropin-releasing hormone cells, growth hormone-releasing hormone cells, somatostatin cells that inhibit growth hormone, gonadotropin-releasing hormone cells, and tuberoinfundibular dopamine cells that hold back the milk hormone prolactin.

A look-alike group, the preautonomic parvocellular neurons, project to brainstem and spinal cord instead and are not neurosecretory at all.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The parvocellular divisions of the paraventricular nucleus hold the corticotropin-releasing and thyrotropin-releasing hormone cells across its medial, dorsal, ventral and periventricular parts.

The arcuate nucleus at the floor of the hypothalamus holds growth hormone-releasing hormone and dopamine cells, the periventricular nucleus holds most somatostatin cells, and gonadotropin-releasing hormone cells are scattered through the medial preoptic area and diagonal band, having migrated in from the nose during development.

The defining interface is the median eminence, the funnel at the base of the hypothalamus where the blood-brain barrier is absent, and specifically the boundary between its internal zone, where axons pass, and its external zone, where they release.

NUMBER:

The parvocellular divisions of the paraventricular nuclei hold roughly 55 thousand neurons in a human, both sides combined, of which only some are neurosecretory rather than preautonomic.

Adding arcuate, periventricular and preoptic groups, the total is on the order of 150 to 250 thousand, a low to moderate confidence range because human counts for most subtypes have never been made, giving roughly 1.5 to 2.5 percent of the hypothalamus and about one neuron in every 400 thousand in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These cells fire faster and more irregularly than magnocellular cells, typically 2 to 10 spikes per second, and many carry a low-threshold calcium spike allowing brief doublets and triplets, plus a transient potassium current that sharpens the onset of a hormone pulse when inhibition lifts.

Their most important property is at population level, because the group synchronises into pulses lasting minutes and the pituitary reads the frequency and amplitude of those pulses rather than the mean firing rate.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Dense GABA input from the peri-paraventricular zone, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and the preoptic area holds them under constant restraint, while glutamate from brainstem, arcuate and other hypothalamic nuclei supplies the drive.

Noradrenaline and serotonin modulate, and the cells are directly sensitive to blood-borne cortisol, thyroid hormone and sex steroids feeding back on their own output.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Very fine at 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres, unmyelinated, conducting well under one metre per second, travelling in the tuberoinfundibular tract and ending in the external zone of the median eminence separated from portal blood by only two basement membranes.

Tanycytes, specialised glia lining the third ventricle, wrap those terminals and can block or expose them, so the axon's access to blood is gated by glia.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The defining products are peptide releasing hormones, or for the dopamine cells a classical monoamine used as a hormone, and most also release glutamate or GABA at brain-directed collaterals.

Common co-stored peptides include vasopressin, which amplifies the corticotropin-releasing hormone signal, plus neurotensin, enkephalin, galanin and cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable in the usual sense, because these axons are entirely unmyelinated and no myelinated variant exists.

The message is a hormone concentration built over seconds to minutes, so conduction speed contributes nothing and myelin would only obstruct the terminals' access to blood.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest compared with magnocellular cells, since the quantities are nanograms, but sustained during chronic stress or thyroid failure when synthesis climbs.

The median eminence has one of the highest blood flows in the brain, so substrate is generous, but because it lies outside the blood-brain barrier these terminals are also exposed to circulating toxins and immune signals.

PLASTICITY:

The terminals remodel constantly as tanycyte processes advance and retreat over hours, opening and closing the door to portal blood under the influence of oestrogen, thyroid hormone and nutrition.

Synaptic input onto the cell bodies is rebuilt by stress, with glutamate synapses strengthening within an hour of a severe stressor, and the cells switch peptide phenotype, adding vasopressin to their output during chronic stress.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Tanycytes are the specialised glia here and they do what no other glia do, acting as a physical shutter and a chemical filter between nerve terminal and blood.

They convert thyroid hormone from inactive to active form, carry the enzyme that destroys thyrotropin-releasing hormone outside the terminal, and transport leptin and glucose signals in from blood, while median eminence microglia sample blood directly and are the first brain cells to learn of an infection.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the hypothalamus stops being the master gland controller and becomes merely a behavioural and autonomic centre.

The anterior pituitary would fall silent within days, with no cortisol response to stress, no thyroid hormone, no growth, no puberty, no fertility, and paradoxically a flood of prolactin because the dopamine brake would be gone, and the region would lose the hourly and daily hormone cadence that organises the body's day.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

These cells are pulse generators, not relays, because their essential computation is to synchronise into episodic bursts whose frequency carries the message, and pituitary cells decode frequency rather than level.

Release into blood with no postsynaptic partner is the purest volume transmission in the brain, and it is gated mechanically by tanycytes, so output can change without a single spike changing.

They read their own feedback directly, since steroid and thyroid hormones enter the cell nucleus and alter transcription over hours, while faster membrane feedback silences their own excitatory inputs within minutes through retrograde endocannabinoid messengers.

Lying outside the blood-brain barrier, they also perform immune surveillance, responding to circulating cytokines, which are inflammatory messenger proteins, and they run rapid gene transcription with immediate early genes switching on minutes after a stressor.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ GABA drive from peri-paraventricular zone and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, 0 to 40 events per second.

◦ Glutamate drive from brainstem and hypothalamic nuclei, 0 to 40 events per second.

◦ Feedback hormones: cortisol 1 to 25 micrograms per decilitre, free thyroxine 10 to 25 picomoles per litre, sex steroids in physiological range.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Releasing or inhibiting hormone into portal blood, picomolar to nanomolar there and undetectable in the general circulation.

◦ Fast transmitter at collateral branches inside the brain.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, internal calcium, releasable peptide pool, peptide messenger RNA, tanycyte gate openness, pulse phase.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Cell body 8 to 15 micrometres, firing 2 to 10 spikes per second, axon 1 to 5 millimetres, portal volume about 0.05 millilitres, portal flow about 0.5 millilitres per minute.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 15 milliseconds, portal washout 5 to 10 seconds, secretory pulses 5 to 120 minutes apart, transcriptional feedback 1 to 24 hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of the population, as in stalk section or tumour, causes panhypopituitarism, meaning failure of all anterior pituitary hormones, with high prolactin as the tell-tale sign, while loss of pulsing alone is itself a disease, since continuous rather than pulsatile gonadotropin-releasing hormone shuts fertility down completely.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a pulse of firing in a parvocellular neurosecretory cell into a concentration of releasing hormone in the small volume of portal blood reaching the pituitary.
Create a number variable called portal volume with initial value 0.05.
Create a number variable called portal flow with initial value 0.008.
Create a number variable called concentration with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called secretion with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called peak with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called phase with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
While clock is less than 10800, repeat the following steps.
    Set phase to the remainder of clock divided by 3600.
    If phase is less than 300, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 12.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 0.2.
    End the conditional block.
    Set secretion to the product of 0.004 and firing rate.
    Set concentration to the sum of concentration and the product of 0.5 and the quotient of the difference of secretion and the product of portal flow and concentration divided by portal volume.
    If concentration is greater than peak, then perform the following actions.
        Set peak to concentration.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 0.5.
End the loop.
Display peak to the console.
Display concentration to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole computation is a one-line mass balance on a small compartment, and Python lets that single equation stay the centre of attention.

# Firing pulse to portal hormone concentration for a parvocellular cell.
DT = 0.5              # seconds per step
PORTAL_VOLUME = 0.05  # millilitres of hypophysial portal blood
PORTAL_FLOW = 0.008   # millilitres per second washing through it
PER_SPIKE = 0.004     # picomoles secreted per spike
def portal_profile(period, width, pulse_rate, basal_rate, seconds):
    conc = 0.0                       # picomoles per millilitre
    peak, trough, t = 0.0, float("inf"), 0.0
    while t < seconds:
        rate = pulse_rate if (t % period) < width else basal_rate
        secretion = PER_SPIKE * rate                    # picomoles per second
        conc += (secretion - PORTAL_FLOW * conc) / PORTAL_VOLUME * DT
        if t > 3600.0:               # ignore the first hour while it settles
            peak = max(peak, conc)
            trough = min(trough, conc)
        t += DT
    return peak, trough
p, tr = portal_profile(3600.0, 300.0, 12.0, 0.2, 10800.0)
print("portal peak %.3f, trough %.3f pmol/mL, ratio %.0f" % (p, tr, p / tr))
# Washout time constant is volume over flow, about 6 seconds, so the pituitary
# sees a sharp square pulse rather than a smeared average.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is a neuron whose synapse is a blood vessel, whose postsynaptic cell is a gland centimetres away, and whose message is written in pulses per hour rather than spikes per second.

Look for a small cell with a very short unmyelinated axon ending in the median eminence, outside the blood-brain barrier, with a tanycyte wrapped around the terminal like a shutter.

CHAPTER 94. CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE (CRH) NEURONS (Stress-Cascade Starting Neuron) (NON-COG)

When a car horn blares behind you, a few thousand cells the size of dust motes fire, and within fifteen minutes your blood is carrying stress hormone to every cell you own.

The old label is a hormone barcode compressed to an acronym, naming the peptide and not the cell.

Stress names the trigger, since these cells are recruited by threats of every kind, from a predator odour to low blood sugar.

Cascade names the chain they open, in which their peptide reaches the pituitary, the pituitary releases adrenocorticotropic hormone into the blood, and the adrenal cortex then makes cortisol.

Starting is the precise verb, because they are the first switch in that three-step chain, and the chain never fully rests, running instead as roughly hourly pulses across the whole twenty-four hour day even with no threat present.

Neuron marks it as a parvocellular secretory cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A corticotropin-releasing hormone neuron, shortened to CRH neuron, is the switch at the top of the body's stress system.

Corticotropin-releasing hormone is a chain of 41 amino acids dripped into the portal blood going to the anterior pituitary, where it makes pituitary cells release adrenocorticotropic hormone, abbreviated ACTH, which travels to the adrenal glands above the kidneys and releases cortisol.

That three-step chain is the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, and this neuron is its first step, its rate setter and its feedback receiver, while branches staying inside the brain drive freezing, arousal and loss of appetite directly.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small oval or spindle-shaped cell body with three to five modestly branched dendrites spanning a few hundred micrometres.

Those dendrites are blanketed with GABA-releasing terminals more densely than almost any other hypothalamic cell, because the default state of this neuron is to be held down, and in chronically stressed people its hormone vesicles also carry vasopressin.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly 10 to 15 micrometres across, small enough that eight would fit inside one magnocellular cell.

Dendritic trees span 150 to 300 micrometres and the axon to the median eminence is only 1 to 3 millimetres, one of the shortest hormone-delivery axons in the body.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The main type is the hypophysiotropic CRH neuron of the paraventricular nucleus, which alone controls the stress axis, and a subset of these co-expresses vasopressin in a fraction that rises with age and chronic stress.

Separate CRH populations in the central amygdala, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, Barrington's nucleus and cortex are counted with their own regions.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The hypophysiotropic cells sit almost entirely in the dorsal medial parvocellular subdivision of the paraventricular nucleus, a compact wing close to the third ventricle, and their axons end in the external zone of the median eminence on portal capillaries.

The critical interface is that median eminence, where the axon leaves the protected brain, and a second is the peri-paraventricular zone, a shell of GABA neurons around the nucleus through which almost all inhibitory control passes.

NUMBER:

The best available human estimates put CRH-expressing neurons in the paraventricular nuclei at roughly 5 to 20 thousand in total across both sides, and confidence is low.

The uncertainty is worth stating plainly, because counts come from staining tissue for the peptide, so a quiet neuron holding little peptide is invisible and the number measured tracks activity as well as anatomy, which is why the counted number rises about fourfold in people who died with major depression.

Taking the middle of the range, these are about 0.1 percent of the hypothalamus and one neuron in every 6 million in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

At rest the cell fires slowly at 0.5 to 5 spikes per second, much of the time in brief rhythmic bursts that cap the average rate, and a stressor flips it to continuous single spiking, which removes that cap and lets the rate climb steeply.

Across the day the population shows an ultradian rhythm, meaning a rhythm faster than daily, with a period close to one hour, and each upstate produces one pulse of cortisol.

A low-threshold calcium current and a transient potassium current together give a burst of spikes the moment inhibition lifts, a property called rebound firing.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Powerful GABA inhibition arrives from the peri-paraventricular shell, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, the medial preoptic area and the hippocampus by way of relay neurons.

Glutamate excitation arrives from the nucleus tractus solitarius carrying pain and blood pressure alarms and from the arcuate and dorsomedial nuclei carrying metabolic news, and a local loop exists in which CRH neurons excite nearby interneurons carrying the CRH receptor, which inhibit them back.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Fine at 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres, unmyelinated, conducting far below one metre per second, with a main branch only millimetres long ending on portal capillaries.

Collaterals reach the brainstem locus coeruleus and autonomic centres, so the same spike that orders a cortisol pulse also raises arousal and heart rate.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Corticotropin-releasing hormone is the defining product, acting on the CRH receptor type 1 on pituitary corticotroph cells.

Vasopressin is co-released by a large subset and acts on the V1b receptor, where it does little alone but multiplies the effect of CRH severalfold, while glutamate serves the brain-directed collaterals alongside neurotensin, enkephalin and cholecystokinin.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable in the usual sense, since these axons are unmyelinated and no myelinated form of this cell exists.

The output is a hormone concentration built over tens of seconds, so conduction speed is irrelevant and myelin would only impede release.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low at rest and steeply higher under chronic stress, when peptide synthesis rises and the gene is transcribed within minutes of a stressor.

Terminals sit in the median eminence, among the best perfused tissue in the brain, so substrate is generous, though chronic overdrive is costly and animal studies show raised mitochondrial density and oxidative stress.

PLASTICITY:

Acute stress rewires these cells within an hour, as glutamate synapses onto them strengthen lastingly, GABA synapses weaken and the neuron becomes easier to excite next time.

Chronic stress goes further, adding vasopressin to the peptide mix so the same output becomes more potent at the pituitary, while endocannabinoids released backwards onto their own inputs let cortisol switch off excitatory drive within minutes.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes around these cells are unusual in carrying glucocorticoid receptors and changing their glutamate transporter levels in response to cortisol, so the glia sit inside the feedback loop.

Microglia matter here in a way untrue of most regions, because the median eminence lies outside the blood-brain barrier, so microglia detect circulating inflammatory signals and relay them to these neurons, which is how an infection raises cortisol.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the paraventricular nucleus keeps water balance, thyroid and autonomic control but loses the stress axis entirely.

The person would mount no cortisol response to injury, infection or surgery and would risk circulatory collapse during any serious illness, and the nucleus would lose its hourly pulse and its daily cortisol rhythm, including the morning surge that organises alertness, appetite and immune tone.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The essential computation is delayed negative feedback, because the neuron commands cortisol, cortisol takes about fifteen minutes to appear, and the neuron then reads that cortisol back, which is exactly the recipe for an oscillator.

That is why cortisol arrives in roughly hourly pulses rather than a steady stream, and the pulse pattern itself is the signal target tissues read.

Feedback runs on three timescales at once: seconds to minutes through a membrane receptor and retrograde endocannabinoid release, tens of minutes through changed excitability, and hours through gene transcription.

The cell switches on immediate early genes within five minutes of a stressor, responds directly to cytokines, releases CRH diffusely inside the brain as volume transmission, and runs a genuine microcircuit through CRH-receptor interneurons.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ GABA drive from peri-paraventricular zone and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, 0 to 50 events per second.

◦ Glutamate drive from nucleus tractus solitarius and hypothalamic nuclei, 0 to 50 events per second.

◦ Plasma cortisol feedback, 1 to 25 micrograms per decilitre, fast membrane path plus slow genomic path.

◦ Circulating cytokines such as interleukin-1 beta and interleukin-6, picograms per millilitre.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ CRH into portal blood, high picomolar to low nanomolar there, with vasopressin co-released.

◦ Glutamate and CRH to locus coeruleus and autonomic centres.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, burst or single-spike mode, internal calcium, releasable CRH pool, CRH messenger RNA, vasopressin co-expression fraction, endocannabinoid tone.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting 0.5 to 5 spikes per second, peak stress 15 to 25, ultradian period 50 to 90 minutes, cell body 10 to 15 micrometres, axon 1 to 3 millimetres.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 15 milliseconds, portal washout 6 seconds, ACTH rise 2 to 5 minutes, cortisol delay 12 to 20 minutes, fast feedback 1 to 10 minutes, genomic feedback 1 to 24 hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Persistent overactivity is the best-documented biological finding in major depression, where counted CRH neuron numbers are about four times higher than in controls, and it also appears in primary hypertension, while underactivity gives secondary adrenal insufficiency after long steroid treatment.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to reproduce the roughly hourly cortisol pulse that arises when a CRH neuron commands a hormone which returns fifteen minutes later to switch it off.
Create a number variable called acth with initial value 2.
Create a number variable called cortisol with initial value 5.
Create a number variable called previous cortisol with initial value 5.
Create a number variable called ratio with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called feedback with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called crh with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called delayed acth with initial value 2.
Create a list variable called delay line with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called peak times with initial value empty list.
Create a boolean variable called rising with initial value true.
Create a number variable called minute with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 15 times.
    Add 2 to the end of delay line.
End the loop.
While minute is less than 600, repeat the following steps.
    Set ratio to the quotient of cortisol divided by 6.
    Set feedback to the quotient of 1 divided by the sum of 1 and the product of ratio and the product of ratio and ratio.
    Set crh to feedback.
    Set acth to the sum of acth and the difference of the product of 3 and crh and the product of 0.2 and acth.
    Set delayed acth to the item at position 0 in delay line.
    Remove the item at position 0 from delay line.
    Add acth to the end of delay line.
    Set cortisol to the sum of cortisol and the difference of the product of 0.3 and delayed acth and the product of 0.12 and cortisol.
    If both rising is true and cortisol is less than previous cortisol are true, then perform the following actions.
        Add minute to the end of peak times.
        Set rising to false.
    Else if cortisol is greater than previous cortisol, then perform the following actions.
        Set rising to true.
    End the conditional block.
    Set previous cortisol to cortisol.
    Set minute to the sum of minute and 1.
End the loop.
Display peak times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the pulse depends on a fifteen minute transport delay, and Python's deque gives an exact delay line in one line of code.

# Ultradian cortisol pulsing from delayed feedback onto a CRH neuron.
from collections import deque
DELAY = 15          # minutes from ACTH rise to cortisol appearing
def hpa_axis(crh_drive, minutes):
    acth, cort = 2.0, 5.0                        # pg/mL and micrograms/dL
    pipe = deque([acth] * DELAY, maxlen=DELAY)   # the adrenal transport delay
    peaks, prev, rising = [], cort, True
    for t in range(minutes):
        feedback = 1.0 / (1.0 + (cort / 6.0) ** 3)   # cortisol brakes the cell
        crh = crh_drive * feedback                   # portal CRH, arbitrary units
        acth += 3.0 * crh - 0.20 * acth              # pituitary corticotrophs
        delayed = pipe[0]                            # ACTH from 15 minutes ago
        pipe.append(acth)
        cort += 0.30 * delayed - 0.12 * cort         # adrenal cortex output
        if rising and cort < prev:
            peaks.append((t, round(prev, 2)))        # one cortisol pulse peak
            rising = False
        elif cort > prev:
            rising = True
        prev = cort
    return peaks
pulses = hpa_axis(crh_drive=1.0, minutes=600)
print("pulse peaks (minute, micrograms per decilitre):", pulses[:8])
if len(pulses) > 1:
    gaps = [pulses[i + 1][0] - pulses[i][0] for i in range(len(pulses) - 1)]
    print("mean pulse interval %.1f minutes" % (sum(gaps) / len(gaps)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron whose output loops through two glands and the bloodstream before returning to its own nucleus as a steroid that rewrites its genes.

Look for a small, densely GABA-blanketed cell in the dorsal medial parvocellular paraventricular nucleus that switches from rhythmic mini-bursts to continuous firing the instant something frightening happens.

CHAPTER 95. THYROTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE (TRH) NEURONS (Chemical-Pace Setting Neuron) (NON-COG)

Three amino acids long, the smallest hormone in your body is made by a cell that decides how fast every mitochondrion in you will burn.

The old label is a hormone barcode compressed to an acronym, and it names the released peptide rather than the quantity being defended.

Chemical-Pace names what is being held, namely the resting burn rate of the whole body, which can fall by as much as thirty percent when thyroid hormone is absent.

Setting names the mechanism exactly, because these cells hold a set point for thyroid hormone and adjust their output to defend it, as a household thermostat defends a temperature.

Neuron marks it as a secretory cell whose set point is movable, since when the fat hormone leptin falls during fasting these cells reduce their output and the body deliberately turns its own heating down.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A thyrotropin-releasing hormone neuron, shortened to TRH neuron, sets the body's metabolic rate.

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone is a chain of only three amino acids, the shortest peptide hormone known, released into the portal blood of the pituitary stalk, where it makes pituitary cells release thyroid stimulating hormone, which orders the thyroid gland in the neck to release thyroid hormone that sets the resting speed of nearly every cell in the body.

Crucially it is not a simple thermostat, because it also reads whether you have enough body fat to afford a fast metabolism and turns the throttle down when you do not.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small round or oval cell body with two to four sparsely branched dendrites and a very fine unmyelinated axon, scattered as a loose sheet through several subdivisions of the paraventricular nucleus rather than packed into a ball.

Its vesicles hold a large precursor protein, pro-thyrotropin-releasing hormone, snipped into five or six copies of the three-amino-acid hormone plus several other active fragments.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly 10 to 15 micrometres across, dendritic trees span 100 to 250 micrometres, and the axon runs only 1 to 3 millimetres to the median eminence.

The hormone itself weighs about 362 daltons, small enough to slip easily through the windowed portal capillary wall.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The hypophysiotropic TRH neurons, in the medial and caudal parvocellular paraventricular nucleus, control the thyroid axis and are the type described here.

Non-hypophysiotropic TRH neurons elsewhere in the same nucleus project into the brain and influence arousal, feeding and autonomic tone instead, while much larger TRH populations in the brainstem raphe, spinal cord and pancreas are counted with their own regions.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Hypophysiotropic cell bodies lie in the medial parvocellular subdivision of the paraventricular nucleus, with contributions from its periventricular and anterior parvocellular parts, and their axons end in the external zone of the median eminence.

Two interfaces define this cell: the median eminence, where terminals meet portal blood outside the blood-brain barrier, and the third ventricle wall, where tanycyte cell bodies sit and send processes down to wrap those very terminals.

A third interface matters functionally, the arcuate nucleus, whose appetite-sensing neurons project directly onto TRH dendrites and hand over the body's energy report.

NUMBER:

Human counts of hypophysiotropic TRH neurons have not been reliably published, so the honest answer is that the exact number is unknown.

A defensible bound, scaling from rodent counts of roughly 1,500 to 2,000 such cells per side and allowing for the larger human nucleus, is 5 to 15 thousand in total across both sides, with low confidence.

That would be roughly 0.1 percent of the hypothalamus and about one neuron in every 8 million in the nervous system, meaning a population smaller than a village runs the metabolism of an entire body.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Modest spontaneous firing at 1 to 6 spikes per second, irregular rather than bursting, with a low-threshold calcium current allowing rebound spikes when inhibition lifts and a hyperpolarisation-activated current pulling the membrane back toward threshold afterwards.

They are directly sensitive to their own feedback, since thyroid hormone changes the channels they express over hours to days, and they are also glucose-sensing and leptin-sensitive, shifting firing within minutes when fuel status changes.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The dominant inputs come from the arcuate nucleus as two opposing messages onto the same dendrites.

Alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone and cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript, released by well-fed arcuate neurons, switch the TRH gene on, while agouti-related protein and neuropeptide Y from hungry arcuate neurons switch it off, which is why starvation lowers metabolic rate.

Further input arrives as noradrenaline from the brainstem carrying cold signals from the skin, glutamate from the dorsomedial nucleus, and GABA from the peri-paraventricular zone.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Very fine at 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres, unmyelinated, only 1 to 3 millimetres long, ending as boutons in the external zone of the median eminence.

Terminals are separated from portal blood by two basement membranes and physically embraced by tanycyte processes, so the axon lacks unconditional access to blood and the glia decide how much gets through.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone is the defining product, acting on the TRH receptor of pituitary thyrotroph and lactotroph cells.

Many of these neurons also make glutamate, subsets co-express cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript, neurotensin, cholecystokinin, enkephalin or corticotropin-releasing hormone, and the precursor protein yields further active peptides, so one gene produces a small family of messengers.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable in the usual sense, because these axons are unmyelinated and no myelinated variant exists.

They are only a few millimetres long and their output is a hormone level in blood, so insulation would give no speed benefit and would block the terminals from the vessels they must reach.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low at baseline, since the peptide is three amino acids and the axon is short.

Demand rises sharply in cold exposure and untreated thyroid failure, when transcription of the precursor gene climbs steeply, and substrate is never limiting because the terminals lie in well-perfused tissue outside the blood-brain barrier.

PLASTICITY:

The most striking plasticity is not in the neuron but at its terminal, where tanycyte processes advance to engulf the endings or retreat to expose them, changing hormone delivery within hours with no change in firing.

The neuron itself alters its peptide output over days in response to thyroid hormone, cold and fasting, and leptin, released by fat tissue, is required for normal responses, which is why weight loss produces a persistently lowered metabolic set point.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Tanycytes are the specialised glia here and they do three things no other glia do for any other neuron.

They convert inactive thyroid hormone into its active form using an enzyme called type 2 deiodinase, creating a local pool of feedback signal made by glia rather than delivered by blood.

They carry pyroglutamyl peptidase II, a membrane enzyme that destroys thyrotropin-releasing hormone just outside the terminal, in an amount itself set by thyroid hormone, so the glia run a second independent feedback loop, and they also physically wrap and unwrap the terminals.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the paraventricular nucleus loses its metabolic throttle while keeping stress, water and autonomic control.

The result is central hypothyroidism, with slow heartbeat, cold intolerance, weight gain, constipation, dry skin, memory failure and profound fatigue, in a person whose thyroid gland is perfectly healthy and simply never told what to do, and the nucleus would also lose the link between fat stores and metabolic rate that lets the body economise during famine.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The most interesting computation in this system happens outside the neuron, because the feedback signal that switches the TRH gene off is made by a glial cell.

Tanycytes convert thyroxine into the active triiodothyronine that then enters the neuron and acts on its nucleus, so the set point is a joint property of neuron and glia, and a second glial loop degrades the hormone after release with an enzyme whose level is thyroid-hormone-controlled.

The neuron performs genomic computation, since thyroid hormone receptors bind the precursor gene directly and change transcription over hours, and it integrates thyroid hormone, leptin and cold into one output.

It can even suppress its own gene despite low thyroid hormone during starvation or serious illness, a state called non-thyroidal illness syndrome that looks like a bug and is probably a survival feature, with retrograde endocannabinoid signalling, volume transmission and structural remodelling of arcuate synapses completing the picture.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Free triiodothyronine reaching the cell nucleus, largely made locally by tanycytes, 3 to 7 picomoles per litre equivalent.

◦ Leptin from fat tissue, 1 to 30 nanograms per millilitre.

◦ Alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone and agouti-related protein drive from arcuate nucleus, 0 to 1 normalised each.

◦ Cold signal as noradrenaline from brainstem, 0 to 1 normalised.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Thyrotropin-releasing hormone into portal blood, picomolar to nanomolar there.

◦ Glutamate and co-peptides at brain-directed collaterals.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, internal calcium, precursor messenger RNA, releasable peptide pool, tanycyte gate openness, tanycyte degrading enzyme level.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting 1 to 6 spikes per second, cell body 10 to 15 micrometres, axon 1 to 3 millimetres, hormone about 362 daltons, feedback steep enough to hold free thyroxine within about 30 percent of set point.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 15 milliseconds, portal washout 6 seconds, thyroid stimulating hormone response 15 to 60 minutes, thyroid hormone response 6 to 48 hours, genomic feedback 12 to 72 hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss or suppression causes central hypothyroidism, in which thyroid hormone is low but thyroid stimulating hormone is not raised, the signature that the fault is in the brain and not the gland, while in starvation and severe illness the cells suppress their own gene despite low thyroid hormone, producing non-thyroidal illness syndrome.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute how much thyrotropin-releasing hormone actually reaches the pituitary, given thyroid hormone feedback, body fat signals, appetite signals and the degrading enzyme carried by tanycytes.
Create a number variable called free triiodothyronine with initial value 4.5.
Create a number variable called leptin with initial value 10.
Create a number variable called melanocyte stimulating drive with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called agouti related drive with initial value 0.1.
Create a number variable called enzyme activity with initial value 0.6.
Create a number variable called ratio with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called feedback with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called energy permission with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called arcuate balance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called synthesis with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called delivered with initial value 0.
Set ratio to the quotient of free triiodothyronine divided by 4.5.
Set feedback to the product of ratio and the product of ratio and the product of ratio and ratio.
Set feedback to the quotient of 1 divided by the sum of 1 and feedback.
Set energy permission to the quotient of leptin divided by the sum of leptin and 4.
Set energy permission to the sum of 0.25 and the product of 0.75 and energy permission.
Set arcuate balance to the difference of the product of 0.6 and melanocyte stimulating drive and the product of 0.6 and agouti related drive.
Set arcuate balance to the sum of 1 and arcuate balance.
If arcuate balance is less than 0.1, then perform the following actions.
    Set arcuate balance to 0.1.
End the conditional block.
Set synthesis to the product of feedback and the product of energy permission and arcuate balance.
Set delivered to the quotient of synthesis divided by the sum of 1 and enzyme activity.
Display synthesis to the console.
Display delivered to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the interesting result is a comparison across four body states, and a table of tuples plus one formatted print makes that comparison immediate.

# How thyroid hormone, body fat and the tanycyte enzyme set TRH output.
def trh_output(free_t3, leptin, alpha_msh, agrp, enzyme):
    """Return (synthesis, delivered) in arbitrary units per minute."""
    feedback = 1.0 / (1.0 + (free_t3 / 4.5) ** 4)      # T3 shuts the gene down
    energy = 0.25 + 0.75 * (leptin / (leptin + 4.0))   # leptin permits it
    arcuate = max(0.1, 1.0 + 0.6 * alpha_msh - 0.6 * agrp)  # fed versus hungry
    synthesis = feedback * energy * arcuate
    delivered = synthesis / (1.0 + enzyme)             # tanycyte enzyme degrades
    return synthesis, delivered
states = [
    # name,                free T3, leptin, alphaMSH, AgRP, enzyme
    ("rested and well fed",    4.5,   10.0,      1.0,  0.1,  0.6),
    ("three days fasting",     3.2,    1.0,      0.2,  0.9,  0.6),
    ("untreated overactive",   9.0,   10.0,      1.0,  0.1,  1.4),
    ("primary hypothyroid",    1.5,   10.0,      1.0,  0.1,  0.3),
]
for name, t3, lep, msh, agrp, enz in states:
    made, sent = trh_output(t3, lep, msh, agrp, enz)
    print("%-22s synthesis %.3f  delivered %.3f" % (name, made, sent))
# The fasting row is the point: thyroid hormone is low, which should raise TRH,
# yet output falls. That paradox is the non-thyroidal illness syndrome.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron whose feedback signal is manufactured for it by a glial cell and whose released hormone is destroyed by an enzyme that the same glial cell carries on its surface.

Look for a small scattered cell in the medial parvocellular paraventricular nucleus contacted by both hunger and fullness fibres from the arcuate nucleus, whose three-amino-acid product sets the burn rate of the entire body.

CHAPTER 96. GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE (GNRH) NEURONS (Fertility Rhythm-Setting Neuron) (NON-COG)

Every human puberty is switched on by about a thousand cells that were not born inside the brain.

The old label is a hormone barcode compressed to an acronym.

Fertility names the faculty, since without these cells puberty never begins and reproduction never happens.

Rhythm-Setting names the mechanism and corrects the usual misconception that the signal is a level, because it is a beat, and the pituitary responds only to pulses delivered roughly once an hour, a steady infusion of the same total amount shutting reproduction down instead of driving it.

Neuron marks it as one of only a few thousand such cells in the entire human brain, and the one neuron type not born in the brain at all, migrating in from the nose along olfactory nerves before birth.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons are the final common pathway for reproduction, squirting a ten-amino-acid peptide (a very short protein-like messenger) into the private blood supply of the pituitary gland.

The squirt must be roughly hourly, because the pituitary answers pulses and goes deaf to a steady signal.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The small spindle-shaped cell body sends out a hybrid process called a dendron, which takes synapses like a dendrite, fires its spike 30 to 140 micrometres out, and releases hormone like an axon.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 10 to 20 micrometres across, a fifth the width of a human hair, while the dendron runs one to two millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Unipolar and bipolar forms both occur, bipolar dominating in adults, and fetal studies describe a second, cryptic population that migrates to the basal forebrain instead of the hypothalamus.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies scatter through the medial preoptic area, septo-preoptic continuum, organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis, anterior hypothalamus and infundibular (arcuate) nucleus.

Terminals occupy the external zone of the median eminence, the interface between brain tissue and the fenestrated (leaky) portal capillaries, where the blood-brain barrier is deliberately absent.

NUMBER:

The adult human hypothalamus holds roughly 1,000 to 2,000 of these cells, a figure repeated across surveys and held with moderate confidence.

That is 0.01 to 0.02 percent of the roughly 10 million hypothalamic neurons, and one cell in 43 million of the roughly 86 billion in the brain.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

At rest the inside sits near minus 60 millivolts, firing under one spike per second, and during a pulse the cell bursts for tens of seconds, with calcium from internal stores setting burst length.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The pulse command comes from KNDy neurons of the infundibular nucleus, named for their kisspeptin, neurokinin B and dynorphin content, while glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) synapses land along the dendron, GABA unusually exciting these cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, mostly unbranched and one to two millimetres long, ending in swellings packed with dense-core vesicles against portal capillaries, its slow conduction irrelevant to a hormone read in minutes.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The product is GnRH, a decapeptide whose blocked front end and amidated tail slow its destruction in blood, and many of these cells also carry galanin.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable, because these projections are unmyelinated: myelin is fatty insulation that speeds conduction, and a cell whose output is an hourly blood pulse gains nothing from it.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Firing is cheap but peptide manufacture is not, so the budget is dominated by protein synthesis and hauling vesicles two millimetres for every pulse.

PLASTICITY:

At puberty excitatory synapses increase over months, while across the cycle oestrogen remodels synapses and glial coverage within days, switching the cells from hourly pulses to the surge that triggers ovulation.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Beta-tanycytes, glia lining the third ventricle floor, wrap these terminals and hold them off the blood, then retract within hours under oestrogen and nitric oxide, so a glial cell is the tap on the reproductive axis.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell type and the preoptic area still runs sleep, temperature and parenting, but the reproductive future vanishes: the gonads stay infantile and puberty never arrives.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The dendron receives synapses and fires spikes in the same cable, so computation happens in the wire rather than at the cell body.

They synchronise without touching, through shared kisspeptin drive and through GnRH acting back on their own terminals by volume transmission, in which a messenger diffuses through tissue instead of crossing one synapse.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: kisspeptin drive as a 0 to 1 signal, glutamate and GABA currents of 0 to 50 picoamps, oestradiol of 50 to 1500 picomoles per litre acting indirectly.

• OUTPUTS: GnRH into portal blood, up to about 100 picograms per millilitre per pulse, reaching pituitary gonadotrophs only.

• STATE: membrane voltage, dendron trigger-zone voltage, calcium store, burst timer, vesicle pool, tanycyte coverage.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 60 millivolts, threshold minus 45 millivolts, baseline under 1 hertz, burst 5 to 15 hertz, cell count 1,000 to 2,000.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 milliseconds, burst 20 to 60 seconds, interpulse interval 60 minutes follicular and 90 luteal.

• FAILURE MODE: failed migration causes Kallmann syndrome, absent puberty with absent smell, while continuous rather than pulsatile exposure desensitises the pituitary, as leuprolide does deliberately.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to generate hourly gonadotropin-releasing hormone pulses from a kisspeptin pulse generator.
Create a number variable called brake with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called hormone with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called generator with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 14400, repeat the following steps.
    If brake is greater than 4, then perform the following actions.
        Set generator to 0.
    Else if brake is less than 0.2, then perform the following actions.
        Set generator to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set brake to the sum of brake and the difference of the product of 0.067 and generator and the quotient of brake divided by 1200.
    Set hormone to the sum of hormone and the difference of the product of 0.01 and generator and the quotient of hormone divided by 300.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display hormone to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the point is a slow feedback loop read at a glance, and it needs no libraries.

# KNDy pulse generator: a dynorphin brake gating one GnRH neuron, one second per step.
brake, hormone, gen = 0.0, 0.0, 1.0
for step in range(14400):                  # four simulated hours
    if brake > 4.0:                        # brake wins, burst ends
        gen = 0.0
    elif brake < 0.2:                      # brake cleared, next pulse starts
        gen = 1.0
    brake += 0.067 * gen - brake / 1200.0
    hormone += 0.01 * gen - hormone / 300.0
    if step % 300 == 0:
        print("t=%6.1f min  generator=%.0f  portal GnRH=%6.4f"
              % (step / 60.0, gen, hormone))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron in the body born outside the brain, in the nasal placode, crawling in along the olfactory nerves before birth.

That is why a failed journey leaves a patient who cannot smell and never enters puberty.

CHAPTER 97. GROWTH HORMONE-RELEASING HORMONE (GHRH) NEURONS (Growth-Spurt Prompting Neuron) (NON-COG)

Children grow in the dark, and these are the cells that decide it.

The old label is a hormone barcode compressed to an acronym.

Growth names the faculty, since the pituitary hormone these cells release drives the lengthening of bone and the building of tissue.

Spurt is the load-bearing word, because growth hormone is not secreted evenly but in sharp bursts, most of them during deep sleep, and the burst is what the tissues read.

Prompting rather than commanding is honest, since fewer than two thousand of these cells sit in the arcuate nucleus and their prompts are only permitted to become a pulse when the opposing brake lifts.

Neuron marks it as a small secretory population with an outsized effect on body size.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) neurons make a 44-amino-acid peptide, cut from a 108-amino-acid precursor, and release it into the pituitary's private blood supply.

There it makes somatotroph cells release growth hormone in pulses, the loudest arriving 60 to 90 minutes after sleep onset.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small round to oval cells with two to four modest dendrites and one fine axon ending in boutons crammed with dense-core vesicles, the granules that store peptide hormone.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are about 10 to 18 micrometres across, and the axon is under half a millimetre because the median eminence lies directly beneath the nucleus.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Roughly 60 percent answer circulating growth hormone with STAT5 phosphorylation, an internal mark that the receptor was engaged, while the rest appear blind to it.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies fill the infundibular nucleus, the human equivalent of the rodent arcuate nucleus, with a scatter in the ventromedial and paraventricular regions.

Terminals lie in the external zone of the median eminence, the interface between brain tissue and the fenestrated portal capillaries, a deliberate window in the blood-brain barrier.

NUMBER:

Rodent counts put this population below 2,000 cells, and scaling to human arcuate size gives 5,000 to 15,000, held with low confidence because no human count exists.

Against the measured infundibular total of about 520,000 neurons, even the top estimate is under 0.15 percent of the ten million hypothalamic neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential sits near minus 57 millivolts, and somatostatin, an inhibitor, paradoxically triggers rhythm by opening potassium channels, so that on withdrawal the cell rebounds into a burst.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inhibition arrives from periventricular somatostatin and neuropeptide Y cells, excitation from ghrelin acting directly, and the output goes to blood rather than to a neuron.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Short, fine and unmyelinated, ending on the space around portal vessels, with conduction speed irrelevant to a hormone measured in minutes.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GHRH is the defining product, released with neurotensin or galanin in subsets, and because release faces blood this is called neurosecretion rather than neurotransmission.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable: these axons are unmyelinated, because the distance is a fraction of a millimetre and the readout is a slow blood hormone.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Peptide synthesis dominates and swings across the day, and the leaky median eminence next door gives direct access to circulating fuel.

PLASTICITY:

Growth hormone suppresses GHRH gene expression within hours, fasting and sleep loss reshape it over days, and puberty raises pulse amplitude several-fold.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Tanycytes, ependymal glia lining the third ventricle floor, sheath these terminals and gate their access to portal blood, a job ordinary astrocytes never do.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the nucleus still runs appetite, reproduction and prolactin, but stature goes: children stop growing, and adults gain fat while losing muscle and bone.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell is a rhythm generator using inhibition as its metronome, so a plain integrate-and-fire model gives the wrong output.

It rewrites its own transcription under hormone feedback, senses blood ghrelin directly, couples to neighbours by collaterals, is gated by glial endfeet, and encodes frequency rather than amount.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: somatostatin tone 0 to 1, ghrelin up to 1,000 picograms per millilitre before meals, growth hormone 0 to 30 nanograms per millilitre, slow-wave-sleep flag.

• OUTPUTS: GHRH into portal blood, up to 500 picograms per millilitre, targeting pituitary somatotrophs only.

• STATE: membrane voltage, somatostatin-set potassium conductance, rebound timer, releasable GHRH pool, messenger RNA level.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 57 millivolts, burst 5 to 20 hertz, cell count 5,000 to 15,000, growth hormone pulses 6 to 12 daily.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 milliseconds, rebound tens of seconds, pool refill 6 minutes, hormone clearance 12 to 20 minutes, transcription hours.

• FAILURE MODE: GHRH receptor mutations cause growth hormone deficiency and severe short stature, while a tumour elsewhere secreting GHRH drives acromegaly, the disease of adult overgrowth.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to produce pulses of growth hormone from a GHRH neuron gated by somatostatin.
Create a number variable called pool with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called blood hormone with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called brake with initial value 0.2.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 1440, repeat the following steps.
    Set excitation to 1.3.
    If step is less than 150, then perform the following actions.
        Set excitation to 2.8.
    End the conditional block.
    Set gate to the quotient of 1 divided by the sum of 1 and the product of 3 and brake.
    Set pool to the sum of pool and the difference of the product of excitation and gate and the quotient of pool divided by 6.
    Set blood hormone to the sum of blood hormone and the difference of the product of 2 and pool and the quotient of blood hormone divided by 12.
    Set brake to the sum of brake and the difference of the product of 0.01 and blood hormone and the quotient of brake divided by 90.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display blood hormone to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because this is a tight three-variable loop over thousands of steps, and C keeps the arithmetic explicit.

#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>

int main(void) {
    double ghrh = 0.0, gh = 0.0, sst = 0.2;   /* pool, blood hormone, brake */
    int m;
    for (m = 0; m < 1440; m++) {              /* one minute per step, 24 hours */
        double sws = (m < 150) ? 1.5 : 0.0;    /* first deep sleep block */
        double excite = 1.3 + sws + ((fmod(m, 300.0) < 30.0) ? 0.4 : 0.0);
        double gate = 1.0 / (1.0 + exp(3.0 * (sst - 1.0))); /* brake shuts the tap */
        ghrh += excite * gate - ghrh / 6.0;
        gh   += 2.0 * ghrh - gh / 12.0;
        sst  += 0.01 * gh - (sst - 0.2) / 90.0;             /* short loop feedback */
        if (m % 30 == 0)
            printf("t=%4d min GHRH=%7.3f GH=%8.3f SST=%7.3f\n", m, ghrh, gh, sst);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron is silenced into rhythm: give this cell its inhibitor and it starts oscillating, the opposite of what inhibition does elsewhere.

And none signs a body so visibly, since its output is your height.

CHAPTER 98. SOMATOSTATIN NEURONS (Pulse-Trough Curbing Neuron) (NON-COG)

This is the cell that says no, and the body grows in the gaps between its refusals.

Somatostatin names the peptide and says nothing about the rhythm the cell exists to create.

Pulse-Trough names what the cell actually builds, because a pulse only exists if there are valleys between the peaks, and it is this cell that digs the valleys.

Curbing names the work, since the peptide it releases does nothing but silence the growth hormone signal, acting through potassium channels that quieten the prompting neurons directly.

Neuron marks it as the cell whose irregular suppression turns the chatter of the prompting cells into slow population-level oscillations, teaching the general lesson that in the body a rhythm is usually built by an inhibitor rather than by a driver.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Somatostatin neurons of the periventricular zone release a small ring-shaped peptide into the pituitary blood supply to shut growth hormone off, so it escapes only when this brake lifts.

The same peptide also restrains thyroid-stimulating hormone, so one inhibitor polices two hormonal axes.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small fusiform cells with two or three sparse dendrites parallel to the third ventricle wall, sending axons to the median eminence and branches into the infundibular nucleus.

SIZE:

Cell bodies measure roughly 10 to 15 micrometres, among the smallest neuroendocrine cells in the hypothalamus, with axons of one to two millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

This entry covers the hypophysiotropic subtype that controls the pituitary; other somatostatin cells act locally in feeding circuits, and a vast unrelated family exists elsewhere.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The core population fills the periventricular nucleus and adjacent anterior periventricular area, a thin sheet pressed against the third ventricle above the optic chiasm.

Terminals sit in the external zone of the median eminence at the brain-to-blood interface, and collaterals cross into the infundibular nucleus, straddling two territories.

NUMBER:

A defensible working estimate is 10,000 to 25,000 human hypophysiotropic somatostatin neurons, held with low confidence because no direct human stereological count exists.

That is roughly 0.1 to 0.25 percent of the approximately 10 million neurons of the hypothalamus.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential near minus 60 millivolts with tonic firing of a few spikes per second, rising with growth hormone and falling during deep sleep.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are growth hormone feedback, glucose- and leptin-sensitive afferents, noradrenaline and sleep inhibition; outputs are peptide into blood and synapses onto GHRH neurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin unmyelinated axons of one to two millimetres end beside portal capillaries, plus a collateral making conventional synapses, so one cell both broadcasts and wires.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Two lengths of one peptide, somatostatin-14 and somatostatin-28, cut from a 116-amino-acid precursor, act on five receptor subtypes that open potassium channels and make targets harder to excite.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable: these axons are unmyelinated, because the pathway is short and the signal is a slow blood concentration.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest, dominated by continuous peptide manufacture rather than electrical work, and eased by a leaky barrier nearby giving easy access to glucose.

PLASTICITY:

Growth hormone raises somatostatin gene expression over hours, sex steroids reshape the population across puberty, and chronic sleep loss blunts the nightly withdrawal over days.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Tanycyte endfeet cover these terminals and gate peptide release into blood; nothing unusual is reported for oligodendrocytes here, because there is no myelin to make.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take this cell away and the zone still relays circadian and autonomic traffic, but growth hormone stops arriving in sharp nightly pulses and dribbles out continuously.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell imposes a rhythm on its target rather than passing one along, because inhibiting a GHRH neuron and then releasing it produces a rebound burst.

It uses volume transmission, causes an immediate potassium-channel effect then a slower shift in its target's glutamate and GABA balance, and rewrites its own transcription.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: growth hormone 0 to 30 nanograms per millilitre, glucose 3 to 10 millimoles per litre, brainstem noradrenaline, and a slow-wave-sleep inhibition flag.

• OUTPUTS: somatostatin-14 and somatostatin-28 into portal blood, plus inhibition of GHRH neurons.

• STATE: membrane voltage, firing rate, somatostatin-14 pool, somatostatin-28 pool, fraction of target receptors still on the surface.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 60 millivolts, baseline 2 to 6 hertz, stress up to 12 hertz, cell count 10,000 to 25,000.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 milliseconds, somatostatin-14 clearance about 3 minutes, somatostatin-28 several times longer, receptor recovery 5 minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: too little brake permits continuous growth hormone output, which is why somatostatin copies such as octreotide and lanreotide treat acromegaly.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute how strongly a somatostatin neuron closes the growth hormone tap.
Create a number variable called short peptide with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called long peptide with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called receptors with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 3600, repeat the following steps.
    Set firing to 4.
    If both step is greater than 1200 and step is less than 2400 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing to 12.
    End the conditional block.
    Set short peptide to the sum of short peptide and the difference of the product of 0.02 and firing and the quotient of short peptide divided by 3.
    Set long peptide to the sum of long peptide and the difference of the product of 0.006 and firing and the quotient of long peptide divided by 15.
    Set total to the sum of short peptide and long peptide.
    Set occupancy to the quotient of total divided by the sum of total and 0.05.
    Set receptors to the difference of receptors and the product of 0.002 and occupancy.
    Set gate to the difference of 1 and the product of occupancy and receptors.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display gate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because these are coupled leaky pools a reader can paste straight into a browser console.

// Periventricular somatostatin neuron closing the growth hormone tap.
let sst14 = 0.0, sst28 = 0.0;   // the two peptide lengths, arbitrary units
let receptors = 1.0;            // fraction of target receptors still on the surface
for (let s = 0; s < 3600; s++) {                        // one second per step
  const firing = (s > 1200 && s < 2400) ? 12.0 : 4.0;   // exercise raises the brake
  sst14 += 0.02 * firing - sst14 / 3.0;
  sst28 += 0.006 * firing - sst28 / 15.0;               // longer form clears slowly
  const total = sst14 + sst28;
  const occupancy = total / (total + 0.05);
  receptors += (1.0 - receptors) / 300.0 - 0.002 * occupancy;   // receptor fatigue
  const ghGate = 1.0 - occupancy * receptors;           // 1 = tap open, 0 = shut
  if (s % 600 === 0)
    console.log("t=" + s + "s SST14=" + sst14.toFixed(3) + " gate=" + ghGate.toFixed(3));
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only hypothalamic neuron whose whole job is subtraction, and whose most important moment is the moment it stops, every night, an hour after you fall asleep.

CHAPTER 99. TUBEROINFUNDIBULAR DOPAMINE (TIDA) NEURONS (Milk-Hormone Curbing Neuron) (NON-COG)

A few thousand cells stand between every human being and spontaneous lactation.

The old label is an anatomical route compressed to an acronym, naming where the axons run rather than what they hold back.

Milk-Hormone names the target in words a reader can picture, namely prolactin, the pituitary hormone that makes milk.

Curbing names the unusual arrangement and corrects an assumption, because this is the one pituitary hormone whose default state is on, held down continuously by dopamine from these cells rather than switched on by a releasing factor.

Neuron marks it as a cell whose restraint is dynamic rather than fixed, since prolactin feeds back onto it and during lactation its membrane oscillations shift to a faster pattern that reverses again after weaning, which is why suckling raises milk supply.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Tuberoinfundibular dopamine (TIDA) neurons pour dopamine into the pituitary's blood supply, where it clamps down on prolactin, the hormone of milk production.

Prolactin alone among pituitary hormones is held back by an inhibitor rather than a releasing factor, so these cells work continuously.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small oval cells with two or three simple dendrites, packed into the dorsomedial arcuate nucleus as the A12 catecholamine group, and pigmented in adult humans.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are about 10 to 16 micrometres with axons under half a millimetre, so portal dopamine changes within seconds of a change in firing.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Three related groups feed the pituitary: the tuberoinfundibular group ending in the median eminence, the tuberohypophysial group, and the periventricular hypophysial group.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies occupy the dorsomedial arcuate (infundibular) nucleus of the mediobasal hypothalamus, beside the third ventricle.

Terminals lie in the external zone of the median eminence, the interface between neural tissue and fenestrated portal capillaries.

NUMBER:

A working estimate is 5,000 to 15,000 human tuberoinfundibular dopamine neurons, held with low confidence because published human counts are descriptive rather than stereological.

That is roughly 0.05 to 0.15 percent of the ten million hypothalamic neurons, far fewer than the substantia nigra yet controlling a whole endocrine axis.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The signature is a slow rhythmic swing of membrane voltage giving alternating bursts and silences, reported in mouse slices at about 0.05 cycles per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Oxytocin excites these cells, opioids inhibit them, and prolactin is the main feedback, switching them from phasic bursting to tonic firing with broadened spikes.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Very short, fine, unmyelinated axons ending in varicosities, and they reportedly carry little dopamine transporter, so released dopamine is swept away by blood rather than recaptured.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Dopamine, made by tyrosine hydroxylase, acting on D2 receptors of pituitary lactotrophs, with many cells also releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable: the axons are unmyelinated, because the journey is under half a millimetre and the endpoint is a blood vessel.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Dopamine synthesis is oxygen- and iron-dependent and unpackaged dopamine oxidises into reactive by-products, which is why these cells accumulate pigment.

PLASTICITY:

Prolactin acting through the STAT5 pathway raises tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine output over tens of minutes, and lactation resets the whole network.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Tanycytes wrap these terminals and gate access to blood, and because they take up and metabolise monoamines they also act as a local dopamine sink.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Without this cell type the arcuate nucleus still handles appetite, growth and reproduction, but restraint over the breast is lost: milk appears in people not nursing.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The slow oscillation is intrinsic, so this cell is a clock rather than a relay, and a simple threshold unit loses its most characteristic behaviour.

It switches firing mode under hormonal control, co-releases GABA onto neighbours, synchronises within a local network, and rewrites its own enzyme levels.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: prolactin, about 5 to 25 nanograms per millilitre at rest and hundreds during lactation, plus oxytocin, opioid peptides and local GABA and glutamate.

• OUTPUTS: dopamine into portal blood onto D2 receptors of lactotrophs, plus local GABA onto arcuate neighbours.

• STATE: membrane voltage, slow oscillator variable, tyrosine hydroxylase activity, dopamine pool, phasic-versus-tonic mode flag.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 60 millivolts, oscillation about 0.05 hertz in rodent slices, within-burst firing 5 to 20 hertz, cell count 5,000 to 15,000.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 milliseconds, oscillator 5 to 20 seconds, dopamine clearance seconds, prolactin feedback about 30 minutes, lactational resetting days.

• FAILURE MODE: antipsychotic blockade of D2 receptors removes the brake and causes hyperprolactinaemia with milk secretion and infertility, while prolactin-secreting tumours are treated with cabergoline.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to switch a tuberoinfundibular dopamine neuron from phasic to tonic firing under prolactin.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value minus 60.
Create a number variable called slow current with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dopamine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called prolactin with initial value 5.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 600000, repeat the following steps.
    If step is greater than 180000, then perform the following actions.
        Set prolactin to 60.
    End the conditional block.
    Set target to the difference of the sum of minus 45 and the product of 0.45 and prolactin and the product of 25 and slow current.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the product of 0.02 and the difference of target and voltage.
    Set wanted to 0.
    If voltage is greater than minus 47, then perform the following actions.
        Set wanted to 1.
        Set dopamine to the sum of dopamine and 0.005.
    End the conditional block.
    Set slow current to the sum of slow current and the product of 0.002 and the difference of wanted and slow current.
    Set dopamine to the difference of dopamine and the quotient of dopamine divided by 6000.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display dopamine to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the interesting result is a change of firing mode over minutes, and the oscillator and the slow hormone feedback sit side by side.

import math
# TIDA neuron: intrinsic slow oscillation, then prolactin switches it to tonic firing.
dt, v, h, th, da, prl = 0.01, -60.0, 0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 5.0
for step in range(600000):                   # 100 simulated minutes
    t = step * dt
    if t > 1800.0:
        prl = 60.0                           # suckling bout or tumour at 30 min
    th += dt * ((1.0 + 0.05 * prl) - th) / 1800.0          # STAT5 feedback, ~30 min
    v += dt * ((-45.0 + 0.45 * prl - 25.0 * h) - v) / 0.5  # fast membrane
    h += dt * (1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(v + 47.0) / 3.0)) - h) / 5.0  # slow current
    da += dt * (0.5 * (1.0 if v > -47.0 else 0.0) * th - da / 60.0)
    if step % 30000 == 0:                    # every five simulated minutes
        print("t=%5.1f min V=%7.2f mV TH=%5.2f dopamine=%7.3f" % (t / 60.0, v, th, da))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only major neuron whose normal state is to say no continuously, which is why a drug blocking its receptor can start lactation in a man.

CHAPTER 100. AGOUTI-RELATED PEPTIDE AND NEUROPEPTIDE Y (AGRP/NPY) NEURONS OF THE ARCUATE NUCLEUS (Hunger-Driving Foraging Neuron) (NON-COG)

Kill these cells in an adult mouse and it starves to death in about six days beside a full bowl of food.

The old label is two peptide barcodes bolted to an address, which teaches nothing about what the cell does.

Hunger names the sensation these cells create rather than merely report, since switching them on in a fed animal makes it eat within seconds and destroying them in an adult animal causes it to stop eating and starve.

Driving is literal, because their activity is a motivating urge and not a readout.

Foraging names the behaviour the urge produces, the searching that happens before any food is found, and this is where the peptide neuropeptide Y earns its place, sustaining the drive across the gap between leaving and eating.

Neuron marks it as an arcuate cell whose feeding effect disappears entirely if that peptide is deleted.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Agouti-related peptide and neuropeptide Y (AgRP/NPY) neurons are the hunger cells, sitting where the blood-brain barrier leaks and tasting the blood for signs of an empty body.

Switching them on with light in a mouse produces voracious feeding within minutes, with no training required.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small oval to fusiform cells with two to four sparse dendrites, but with an unusually wide axonal broadcast and three messengers packed into one cell.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly 10 to 15 micrometres across, while one axon tree reaches several millimetres into the paraventricular nucleus, lateral hypothalamus and brainstem.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Individual cells target one or two nuclei rather than all, and in human tissue about 70 percent of neuropeptide Y neurons carry no agouti-related peptide.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies fill the ventromedial arcuate (infundibular) nucleus, beside the third ventricle and directly above the median eminence, an interface between the sealed brain and the open bloodstream.

Terminals reach the paraventricular nucleus, lateral hypothalamic area, dorsomedial hypothalamus, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, central amygdala, periaqueductal grey and parabrachial nucleus.

NUMBER:

Mouse counts put agouti-related peptide neurons near ten thousand, and scaling by arcuate size gives a human working estimate of 30,000 to 90,000, held with low confidence.

Against the measured human bound of about 520,000 infundibular neurons, that is 0.3 to 0.9 percent of the ten million hypothalamic neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential near minus 55 millivolts with tonic firing of one to six spikes per second that rises on fasting, yet collapses within seconds of merely seeing or smelling food.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Leptin and insulin inhibit them while ghrelin excites them, and their critical output is the GABA synapse onto the parabrachial nucleus, whose loss alone causes starvation.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Fine, unmyelinated and extensively branched, with thousands of varicosities releasing on three timescales from millisecond GABA to hour-long peptide.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) acts in milliseconds and neuropeptide Y over minutes, while agouti-related peptide acts over hours as an inverse agonist, pushing the melanocortin receptor below its resting activity.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable: these axons are unmyelinated, because they carry a slow motivational state measured in minutes and hours.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Electrically cheap but committed to heavy peptide manufacture across a large axon tree, and directly sensitive to glucose, so they are sensors as much as neurons.

PLASTICITY:

Synapses onto these cells rearrange within hours of a change in leptin, among the fastest structural rewiring known in the adult brain.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Tanycytes shuttle leptin and ghrelin from blood into the nucleus and set how leaky the barrier is, while arcuate microglia turn reactive within days of a high-fat diet.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the arcuate nucleus still controls growth and reproduction, but urgency disappears: nothing reports that fuel is running out, and an animal starves beside food.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

One cell multiplexes three chemical channels whose timescales span six orders of magnitude, so a simulation needs at least three output variables.

It reads hormones straight from blood, spreads peptide by volume transmission, inhibits its antagonist neighbours, remodels its synapses, and generates a feeling the animal works to switch off.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: leptin 1 to 100 nanograms per millilitre, insulin, ghrelin up to 1,000 picograms per millilitre when fasting, glucose 3 to 10 millimoles per litre, food-seen flag.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto the parabrachial nucleus and arcuate neighbours, neuropeptide Y onto Y1 and Y5 receptors, agouti-related peptide onto melanocortin 4 receptors.

• STATE: membrane voltage, firing rate, GABA pool, neuropeptide Y tone, agouti-related peptide tone, leptin signalling level.

• PARAMETERS: rest about minus 55 millivolts, baseline 1 to 6 hertz, fasted up to 20 hertz, cell count 30,000 to 90,000.

• TIME CONSTANTS: GABA 10 milliseconds, sensory shut-off 1 to 5 seconds, neuropeptide Y minutes, agouti-related peptide hours, remodelling hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE: losing these neurons in adulthood causes lethal loss of appetite, over-activity drives the hunger of leptin deficiency and post-diet regain, and their suppression contributes to cancer cachexia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn hunger and fullness hormones into fast and slow output from an AgRP and NPY neuron.
Create a number variable called peptide y with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called agrp with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 6000, repeat the following steps.
    Set drive to 1.4.
    If step is greater than 300, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set firing to the quotient of the product of 20 and drive divided by the sum of 1 and drive.
    Set fast signal to the product of 0.05 and firing.
    Set peptide y to the sum of peptide y and the difference of the product of 0.001 and firing and the quotient of peptide y divided by 200.
    Set agrp to the sum of agrp and the difference of the product of 0.0002 and firing and the quotient of agrp divided by 6000.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display agrp to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Go is chosen because three output channels run on wildly different clocks in one loop, and Go's explicit types make those timescales impossible to overlook.

package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	ghrelin, leptin := 1.0, 0.2 // high when empty, low when thin
	var fastGABA, npy, agrp float64
	dt := 0.1 // seconds per step
	for step := 0; step < 6000; step++ {
		sight := 0.0
		if float64(step)*dt >= 30.0 { // food comes into view at 30 seconds
			sight = 1.0
		}
		drive := 2.0*ghrelin - 3.0*leptin - 2.5*sight
		if drive < 0 {
			drive = 0
		}
		firing := 20.0 * drive / (1.0 + drive) // saturating, spikes per second
		fastGABA = 0.05 * firing               // milliseconds
		npy += dt * (0.01*firing - npy/20.0)   // tens of seconds
		agrp += dt * (0.002*firing - agrp/600.0)
		if step%600 == 0 {
			fmt.Printf("t=%5.1fs firing=%5.2fHz GABA=%5.3f NPY=%6.4f AgRP=%7.5f\n",
				float64(step)*dt, firing, fastGABA, npy, agrp)
		}
	}
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else in the brain kills so quickly by absence, and nothing else falls silent at the mere sight of food, before a single calorie has been absorbed.

CHAPTER 101. PRO-OPIOMELANOCORTIN AND COCAINE- AND AMPHETAMINE-REGULATED TRANSCRIPT (POMC/CART) NEURONS OF THE ARCUATE NUCLEUS (Meal-Ending Fullness Neuron) (NON-COG)

One gene in this cell is chopped into a satiety hormone, a pigment hormone and the body's own morphine.

The old label is a pair of gene and transcript barcodes bolted to an address, which teaches nothing about what the cell does.

Meal-Ending names the work, because after eating it releases alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone, the cleavage product of the pro-opiomelanocortin protein, which suppresses further feeding.

Fullness names the state the cell reports, since it reads leptin and insulin from the bloodstream through the leaky blood-brain barrier at the base of the hypothalamus and fires when energy stores are adequate.

Neuron marks it as the direct opponent of the hunger-driving cells sitting beside it in the same nucleus, and losing pro-opiomelanocortin function produces severe early-onset human obesity.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Pro-opiomelanocortin and cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (POMC/CART) neurons are the fullness cells, opponents of the hunger neurons beside them.

They read leptin and insulin as proof of fuel and answer with alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone, telling downstream cells to stop eating and burn more.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small oval cells with two to four modest dendrites, intermingled with the hunger neurons that inhibit them, carrying enzymes that cut one precursor into several finished hormones.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are about 12 to 18 micrometres, and axons range from a millimetre to tens of millimetres reaching the spinal cord.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Some release glutamate and others GABA, leptin-receptor and insulin-receptor cells barely overlap, and a brainstem population handles meal-by-meal fullness.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies occupy the ventrolateral and ventromedial arcuate (infundibular) nucleus, at the interface between the sealed brain and the leaky median eminence where blood leptin arrives.

Axons end in the paraventricular nucleus, lateral hypothalamic area, dorsomedial nucleus, periaqueductal grey, parabrachial nucleus and spinal intermediolateral column.

NUMBER:

Mouse counts range from three thousand to nine thousand, and scaling to human arcuate size gives 40,000 to 100,000 human cells, held with low confidence.

Against the measured human infundibular total of about 520,000 neurons, that is 0.4 to 1 percent of the ten million hypothalamic neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential near minus 65 millivolts with steady firing of two to eight spikes per second, held low by a slow after-hyperpolarisation.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Leptin, insulin and serotonin excite them, GABA from neighbouring hunger neurons inhibits them, and their key output lands on melanocortin 4 receptor neurons of the paraventricular nucleus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, largely unmyelinated and widely branched, releasing peptide from varicosities along the axon rather than only at endings.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone signals fullness, transcript peptide reinforces it, and co-released beta-endorphin, the body's own opioid, encourages eating.

MYELINATION:

Largely absent, and sparse where it appears, because the signal is a slow metabolic report rather than a time-critical command.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Precursor synthesis and enzymatic cutting are expensive, and these glucose-sensing cells are lost in rodents after prolonged high-fat feeding.

PLASTICITY:

Leptin rewires the synapses onto these cells within hours, and early-life leptin surges set their innervation of the paraventricular nucleus for life.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Tanycytes carry leptin into the nucleus, and their failure is one proposed mechanism of leptin resistance, while arcuate microglia turn reactive on a high-fat diet.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the nucleus still senses hunger, but there is no voice for enough: eating never stops, and obesity begins in infancy.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Chemistry is the computation here, since the same messenger RNA yields different hormones depending on which cutting enzymes are present.

It co-releases an opioid that opposes its own satiety peptide, spreads peptide by volume transmission, remodels synapses under leptin, and can be destroyed by diet-driven inflammation.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: leptin 1 to 100 nanograms per millilitre, insulin, serotonin, GABA from agouti-related peptide neurons, glucose 3 to 10 millimoles per litre.

• OUTPUTS: alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone onto melanocortin 3 and 4 receptors, beta-endorphin onto mu-opioid receptors, and fast glutamate or GABA by subtype.

• STATE: membrane voltage, after-hyperpolarisation, satiety peptide pool, beta-endorphin pool, precursor stock, leptin signalling.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 65 millivolts, threshold minus 45 millivolts, firing 2 to 8 hertz, cell count 40,000 to 100,000.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 milliseconds, after-hyperpolarisation 300 milliseconds, satiety peptide clearance 2 minutes, beta-endorphin 10 minutes, leptin rewiring hours.

• FAILURE MODE: mutations in the precursor gene, convertase 1, the leptin receptor or the melanocortin 4 receptor cause severe childhood obesity, treatable with setmelanotide, approved in the United States in November 2020.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn leptin and insulin into a melanocortin fullness signal from a POMC and CART neuron.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value minus 65.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called satiety peptide with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 60000, repeat the following steps.
    Set target to the difference of minus 37 and adaptation.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the product of 0.05 and the difference of target and voltage.
    Set adaptation to the difference of adaptation and the quotient of adaptation divided by 300.
    If voltage is greater than or equal to minus 45, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to minus 60.
        Set adaptation to the sum of adaptation and 6.
        Set satiety peptide to the sum of satiety peptide and 0.0002.
    End the conditional block.
    Set satiety peptide to the difference of satiety peptide and the quotient of satiety peptide divided by 120000.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display satiety peptide to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Java is chosen because this cell needs an explicit spiking model with an adaptation current and separately clocked peptide pools.

public class PomcNeuron {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        double leptin = 1.0, insulin = 0.6;   // arbitrary units of fuel reporting
        double agrpBlock = 0.3;               // AgRP holding MC4R below baseline
        double v = -65.0, adapt = 0.0;        // millivolts
        double aMsh = 0.0, bEnd = 0.0;        // peptide pools
        final double dt = 0.001, tauM = 0.020, tauA = 0.30;   // seconds
        for (int step = 0; step < 60000; step++) {
            double drive = 1.4 * leptin + 0.6 * insulin;
            double target = -65.0 + 14.0 * drive - adapt;
            v += dt / tauM * (target - v);
            adapt -= dt * adapt / tauA;
            double spike = 0.0;
            if (v >= -45.0) { v = -60.0; adapt += 6.0; spike = 1.0; }
            aMsh += dt * (0.2 * spike - aMsh / 120.0);
            bEnd += dt * (0.1 * spike - bEnd / 600.0);
            double mc4r = aMsh / (aMsh + 0.05) - agrpBlock;   // net fullness drive
            if (step % 15000 == 0)
                System.out.printf("t=%5.1fs aMSH=%6.4f MC4R=%6.3f%n", step * dt, aMsh, mc4r);
        }
    }
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron whose single gene product is butchered inside the cell into a fullness hormone, a skin-darkening hormone and an opioid, and the only one with a drug built to replace its missing message.

CHAPTER 102. MELANOCORTIN RECEPTOR 4-EXPRESSING NEURONS OF THE PARAVENTRICULAR NUCLEUS (Appetite-Halting Hub Neuron) (NON-COG)

Roughly one person in every five hundred is born with a broken copy of a single gene, and the reason they are ravenous from their first year of life is that a few tens of thousands of these cells never hear the brain's order to stop eating.

The old name is a receptor barcode joined to a nucleus address.

Appetite-Halting names the proven job, because restoring melanocortin receptor 4 in this nucleus alone in receptor-deleted mice abolishes nearly all of the overeating, showing the cell is both necessary and sufficient to hold feeding in check.

Hub names its position, because it is the collection point where the fullness signal from the arcuate cells is received and passed on as glutamate to the parabrachial nucleus in the brainstem, which finally stops the meal.

Neuron marks it as the cell whose receptor carries the commonest single-gene cause of human obesity, at roughly one in a thousand people.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are small neurons packed into the paraventricular nucleus (PVN), a pair of wing-shaped cell clusters that sit one on each side of the third ventricle, the narrow fluid-filled slot running down the midline of the brain.

Each cell carries a docking protein on its surface called the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), which is a lock that fits one key in particular.

The key is alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH), a short chain of amino acids released by nerve fibres arriving from the arcuate nucleus, a feeding-control centre sitting lower down in the same hypothalamus.

When alpha-MSH docks, these neurons become more excitable, and the animal eats less and burns more.

A rival peptide called agouti-related peptide (AgRP) docks at the same lock and does the opposite, so the cell is permanently caught in a tug of war between two chemical messages meaning "stop eating" and "keep eating".

The output of that tug of war is the single most powerful genetic determinant of human body weight that we know of.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

They are parvocellular neurons, meaning small-bodied, in contrast to the giant magnocellular neurons in the same nucleus that make the hormones oxytocin and vasopressin.

The cell body is oval or spindle-shaped, with three to five main dendrites, which are the branching input antennae of a neuron.

The dendrites are sparsely studded with spines, the tiny mushroom-shaped knobs where excitatory contacts land, which tells you these cells are tuned by relatively few, strong, hormone-modulated inputs rather than by thousands of weak ones.

Some of these dendrites run towards the ventricle wall, where they can sample the cerebrospinal fluid compartment for circulating signals.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 10 to 18 micrometres across, roughly one fifth the width of a human hair.

The dendritic field spans about 200 to 350 micrometres, so a single cell listens to a patch of tissue about a third of a millimetre wide.

The axon, the single output cable, can be long: a PVN neuron projecting to the brainstem or to the spinal cord runs 3 to 12 centimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

At least three functionally distinct populations carry MC4R in the PVN.

• Neurons projecting to the lateral parabrachial nucleus in the brainstem, which set how much food is eaten in a meal.

• Neurons projecting to the nucleus of the solitary tract, the brainstem's gut-signal relay, which act on meal termination and nausea.

• Neurons descending to the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord, which set the sympathetic outflow to brown fat and so control heat production.

Overlapping with these are cells that also make oxytocin, thyrotropin-releasing hormone, or pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP), so the same melanocortin signal is translated into feeding, thyroid drive and stress-axis tone through different chemical channels.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The medial parvocellular, dorsal parvocellular and ventral subdivisions of the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, in both hemispheres.

A thinner population extends into the adjacent periventricular zone and the anterior hypothalamic area.

The important interface is the border between the PVN and the third ventricle, where the neurons abut tanycytes, the specialised stretched glial cells that line the ventricle and control what gets through from the fluid to the tissue.

A second interface matters just as much: the PVN sits directly downstream of the arcuate nucleus and the median eminence, the one part of the hypothalamus where the blood-brain barrier is deliberately leaky.

NUMBER:

The whole paraventricular nucleus holds about 85 thousand neurons in the human brain.

Rodent work suggests roughly a quarter of PVN neurons carry the MC4R gene, which gives a human estimate of about 20 thousand cells, with low confidence, because no unbiased stereological count of human MC4R neurons has been published.

The defensible bound is 10 thousand to 30 thousand.

That is about 0.2 percent of the roughly 10 million neurons of the hypothalamus, and about one neuron in every four million in the nervous system as a whole.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting membrane voltage, the steady electrical charge across the cell's skin when nothing is happening, sits at about minus 55 to minus 65 millivolts.

They fire spontaneously and slowly, typically 0.5 to 5 action potentials per second, an action potential being the brief electrical spike that carries a message down the axon.

Input resistance is high, often 500 million to 1 billion ohms, which means very small currents change the voltage a lot, so these cells are exquisitely sensitive to weak hormonal nudges.

The signature mechanism is unusual: alpha-MSH acting at MC4R closes a potassium channel called Kir7.1, and closing a channel that normally leaks positive charge out of the cell makes the cell more positive and more likely to fire.

AgRP opens the same channel, and it does so even without any alpha-MSH present, so the receptor has a resting activity that AgRP actively switches off.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from arcuate proopiomelanocortin neurons carrying alpha-MSH, from arcuate AgRP neurons that also release the inhibitory transmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid, from the nucleus of the solitary tract carrying gut and vagal news, from the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and from the suprachiasmatic clock.

Outputs go to the lateral parabrachial nucleus, the nucleus of the solitary tract, the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, the ventrolateral periaqueductal grey and the spinal intermediolateral column.

A typical cell carries an estimated 2,000 to 6,000 synaptic contacts, and the mix of excitatory to inhibitory contacts on it is rearranged within hours by fasting or by the fat-derived hormone leptin.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin, about 0.2 to 0.6 micrometres in diameter, and conduct slowly at roughly 0.5 to 2 metres per second.

They branch modestly, contacting two or three target nuclei from one parent cell, and they end in varicosities, bead-like swellings along the fibre from which peptide is released into the surrounding tissue rather than only into a tight synaptic cleft.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The primary fast transmitter is glutamate, the brain's standard excitatory chemical, loaded into vesicles by vesicular glutamate transporter 2.

Glutamate release is not optional decoration: when MC4R was restored in these neurons in receptor-deficient mice, obesity was largely corrected, and blocking glutamate release from the very same cells abolished the benefit entirely.

Subsets co-release oxytocin, thyrotropin-releasing hormone, corticotropin-releasing hormone, PACAP or nesfatin-1.

MYELINATION:

Local collaterals inside the hypothalamus are unmyelinated.

Long descending axons to the brainstem and spinal cord acquire a thin myelin sheath, the fatty insulating wrap that speeds conduction, typically with only a few wraps, so conduction stays modest.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Firing slowly, these are not expensive cells, but they are unusually dependent on accurate metabolic reporting, and they are damaged by chronic overnutrition.

In diet-induced obesity the surrounding PVN loses neurons while the MC4R population itself survives, yet the surviving cells lose mitochondria, the cell's power plants, and lose MC4R protein from the surface.

PLASTICITY:

Synaptic inputs from the arcuate nucleus are remodelled within hours of a change in leptin or in feeding state.

Receptor trafficking is a second layer of plasticity: MC4R is escorted to the surface by a chaperone protein called melanocortin receptor accessory protein 2, and many disease-causing mutations act simply by leaving the receptor stranded inside the cell.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here are not passive: they carry leptin receptors, and their processes physically retract from synapses on these neurons within days of high-fat feeding, changing how much glutamate lingers.

Tanycytes at the ventricle wall shuttle leptin and other blood-borne signals into the nucleus and can be reconfigured by fasting.

Microglia, the brain's resident immune cells, multiply and become inflamed in the mediobasal hypothalamus within a day of high-fat feeding, before any body fat has been gained, which is one of the earliest known events in diet-induced obesity.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this one cell type and the paraventricular nucleus is still a superb hormone factory and still commands the stress axis, but it becomes deaf to the body's fat stores.

The region would keep issuing orders about cortisol, water and heat while having no opinion at all about whether the meal should end, and the animal would eat itself into massive obesity with a normal stress response and normal water balance.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The MC4R receptor changes the cell's excitability by directly gating the Kir7.1 potassium channel, apparently without the usual second-messenger cascade, which is a rare example of a hormone receptor working like a switch on a channel.

The receptor has constitutive activity, meaning it signals with no key in the lock at all, and AgRP is an inverse agonist that shuts that resting signal down, so the cell reports the ratio of two peptides rather than the presence of one.

Oxytocin-containing members of this population release peptide from their dendrites as well as their axon terminals, bathing neighbours in hormone by volume transmission, which is chemical signalling that spreads through the tissue instead of travelling down a wire.

These cells also instruct blood flow and sympathetic tone in distant fat tissue, so a synaptic event here becomes a change in whole-body heat production minutes later.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ alpha-MSH concentration from arcuate proopiomelanocortin terminals, 0 to 1 normalised occupancy of MC4R.

◦ AgRP concentration from arcuate AgRP terminals, 0 to 1 normalised occupancy, acting as an inverse agonist.

◦ Fast glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid conductances from ascending brainstem and forebrain inputs, 0 to 20 nanosiemens.

◦ Circulating leptin, 1 to 40 nanograms per millilitre, acting indirectly through the arcuate nucleus and directly on local astrocytes.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Glutamate release onto lateral parabrachial nucleus, nucleus of the solitary tract and spinal intermediolateral column.

◦ Peptide release of oxytocin, thyrotropin-releasing hormone or PACAP from a subset, by volume transmission.

◦ A scalar satiety signal usable by a simulation, expressed as spikes per second, range 0 to 12.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ Open fraction of the Kir7.1 potassium channel, 0 to 1.

◦ Surface MC4R density, 0 to 1 of maximum.

◦ Slow adaptation variable tracking recent firing.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Reversal voltage with Kir7.1 shut, about minus 37 millivolts.

◦ Maximum hyperpolarisation with Kir7.1 fully open, about 25 millivolts.

◦ Spike threshold, about minus 45 millivolts.

◦ Input resistance, 500 megaohms to 1 gigaohm.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane time constant, 20 to 60 milliseconds.

◦ Peptide receptor occupancy, 1 to 30 seconds.

◦ Synaptic rewiring by leptin, 2 to 24 hours.

◦ Receptor trafficking to the surface, hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss-of-function mutation in MC4R gives severe early-onset obesity, hyperphagia and increased lean mass, and is the commonest single-gene cause of human obesity at roughly 1 in 500 people.

◦ Loss of the receptor's partner protein melanocortin receptor accessory protein 2 gives a similar picture.

◦ Excess melanocortin drive, as in cancer-associated wasting, produces anorexia and loss of body mass.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn the tug of war between two arcuate peptides into the firing of a paraventricular melanocortin receptor 4 neuron, first in the fed state and then in the fasted state.
Create a number variable called kir_open_fraction with initial value 0.8.
Create a number variable called membrane_potential with initial value -62.
Create a number variable called depolarisation with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called firing with initial value false.
Create a list variable called peptide_balance with initial value empty list.
Add 0.9 to the end of peptide_balance.
Add -0.7 to the end of peptide_balance.
For each net_drive in peptide_balance, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of net_drive and 0.6.
    Set kir_open_fraction to the result.
    Calculate the difference of 0.8 and kir_open_fraction.
    Set kir_open_fraction to the result.
    Calculate the product of kir_open_fraction and 25.
    Set depolarisation to the result.
    Calculate the difference of -37 and depolarisation.
    Set membrane_potential to the result.
    Check if membrane_potential is greater than -45.
    If the result is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing to true.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set firing to false.
    End the conditional block.
    Display membrane_potential to the console.
    Display firing to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because this is a short numerical model with no dependencies,
# so a reader can paste it into any machine and watch satiety switch off.
ALPHA_FED = 1.0     # arcuate alpha-MSH tone, normalised 0 to 1
AGRP_FED = 0.1      # agouti-related peptide tone, normalised 0 to 1
E_KIR_SHUT = -37.0  # mV the cell drifts to when Kir7.1 is closed
KIR_SWING = 25.0    # mV of hyperpolarisation when Kir7.1 is fully open
THRESHOLD = -45.0   # mV spike threshold

def kir_open_fraction(alpha_msh, agrp):
    """alpha-MSH shuts the Kir7.1 potassium channel, AgRP re-opens it."""
    drive = alpha_msh - agrp
    frac = 0.8 - 0.6 * drive
    return min(1.0, max(0.0, frac))

def step(alpha_msh, agrp):
    frac = kir_open_fraction(alpha_msh, agrp)
    voltage = E_KIR_SHUT - KIR_SWING * frac
    return voltage, voltage > THRESHOLD

fed_spikes = 0
fasted_spikes = 0
for t in range(1000):
    if t < 500:
        a, g = ALPHA_FED, AGRP_FED          # fed: melanocortin tone high
    else:
        a, g = 0.2, 0.9                     # fasted: AgRP takes over
    voltage, fired = step(a, g)
    if fired and t < 500:
        fed_spikes += 1
    elif fired:
        fasted_spikes += 1
print("membrane voltage when fed:", round(step(ALPHA_FED, AGRP_FED)[0], 2))
print("membrane voltage when fasted:", round(step(0.2, 0.9)[0], 2))
print("spikes in the fed half:", fed_spikes)
print("spikes in the fasted half:", fasted_spikes)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron in the body whose excitability is set by a hormone receptor closing a potassium channel, whose resting signal is switched off rather than switched on by its rival peptide, and whose single-copy loss in a human being produces lifelong hunger and severe obesity with an otherwise entirely normal brain.

CHAPTER 103. OREXIN NEURONS, ALSO CALLED HYPOCRETIN NEURONS, OF THE LATERAL HYPOTHALAMUS (Sleep-Intrusion Blocking Neuron) (COG)

About seventy thousand cells, fewer than one in a million of your neurons, are the reason you can stay awake through a dull afternoon, and when the immune system destroys them a person begins collapsing into sleep in the middle of sentences.

Orexin and hypocretin are both peptide barcodes, and the fact that the same cell carries two competing chemical names shows how little either teaches.

Sleep-Intrusion names exactly what goes wrong without it, because when eighty-five to ninety-five percent of these cells are destroyed in narcolepsy type one, fragments of sleep invade the waking day as sudden sleep attacks and as cataplexy, the collapse of muscle tone during emotion.

Blocking names the work, since the cell does not create wakefulness so much as hold the boundary between states firm, exciting the histamine, noradrenaline and serotonin arousal centres so that transitions happen only at the right time.

Neuron marks it as one of only a few tens of thousands of such cells, all packed into one small strip of the lateral hypothalamus.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These neurons make a pair of peptides discovered twice in the same year by two teams, which is why they have two names: orexin-A and orexin-B to one group, hypocretin-1 and hypocretin-2 to the other.

Both peptides are cut from a single parent protein called prepro-orexin, and orexin-A is 33 amino acids long while orexin-B is 28.

The cells do not generate wakefulness by themselves; they stabilise it, by holding every other arousal system in the brain in the "on" position at once.

They are simultaneously a metabolic sensor, quietening when blood sugar rises after a meal and firing harder when the body is hungry, which is why a heavy lunch makes you drowsy.

They are also the switch that keeps the muscle paralysis of dream sleep from leaking into waking life.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is medium-sized and irregularly shaped, often triangular or many-sided, with three to six thick dendrites that radiate without an obvious preferred direction.

The dendritic tree is untidy and open rather than neatly layered, which suits a cell that must sample whatever is drifting through the tissue.

Vesicles containing the peptide are large and dense-cored, meaning they look black in an electron microscope, and they are found not only at nerve terminals but along the dendrites.

SIZE:

The cell body is 20 to 30 micrometres across in the human brain, noticeably larger than a typical cortical neuron.

The dendritic field is 300 to 500 micrometres wide.

The axon is extraordinary for the size of the cell: a single orexin neuron sends branches to almost the entire brain, with total axonal length plausibly tens of centimetres, reaching from the front of the cortex to the lower spinal cord.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There is no clean anatomical division, but three distinctions matter.

• A medial group near the dorsomedial hypothalamus, biased towards arousal and stress, and a lateral group biased towards reward and feeding.

• Cells that co-express the peptide dynorphin and cells that do not, which changes whether the target is excited or inhibited.

• Cells that project to the locus coeruleus versus cells that project to the ventral tegmental area, separable by their firing during reward anticipation.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The perifornical area, the lateral hypothalamic area and the posterior hypothalamic area, forming a band wrapped around the fornix, which is the arching white matter bundle carrying fibres from the hippocampus.

In humans the population extends into the dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus and the subthalamic region, and a few scattered cells lie in the zona incerta.

The critical interface is with melanin-concentrating hormone neurons, which are intermingled cell by cell in the very same tissue while doing the opposite job.

NUMBER:

Approximately 70 thousand orexin neurons in the human brain, from careful counts of post-mortem tissue, with a refined range of 60 thousand to 80 thousand.

Confidence is moderate rather than high, because a second team using different staining reported about 20 thousand, and the discrepancy is thought to reflect staining sensitivity.

That is about 0.7 percent of the roughly 10 million hypothalamic neurons, and about one neuron in 1.2 million in the nervous system as a whole.

In narcolepsy with cataplexy, 85 to 95 percent of them are gone.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is about minus 55 to minus 60 millivolts, unusually depolarised, meaning the cell sits close to its firing threshold and needs little persuasion.

Firing is 3 to 7 spikes per second during active waking, slower in quiet waking, sparse in deep sleep, and almost completely silent in rapid eye movement sleep.

They possess a low-threshold calcium spike and a strong after-hyperpolarisation, which together make them fire in irregular bursts rather than metronomically.

Glucose inhibits them directly by opening a background potassium channel of the two-pore family, and the sensitivity covers the physiological range, so the difference between a fasting and a post-meal brain is enough to change firing.

They are also acid-sensitive, firing faster when carbon dioxide rises, which links breathing to arousal and explains part of the arousal from sleep apnoea.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from the lateral septum, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, the amygdala, the preoptic sleep-promoting neurons, the suprachiasmatic clock by way of the subparaventricular zone, and from arcuate AgRP neurons.

Outputs are close to global: the densest projection of all goes to the locus coeruleus, the noradrenaline source, and heavy projections reach the tuberomammillary histamine neurons, the dorsal raphe, the laterodorsal and pedunculopontine tegmentum, the basal forebrain, the ventral tegmental area, the thalamus, the whole cortex and the spinal cord.

Orexin acts on two receptors: orexin receptor 1, which prefers orexin-A, and orexin receptor 2, which takes both and is the one that matters most for holding sleep at bay.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are fine, 0.2 to 0.8 micrometres, and conduct at roughly 0.5 to 3 metres per second, which is slow, but the system is not built for speed.

Branching is enormous, with one cell contributing terminals in a dozen or more distant nuclei.

Terminals are heavily varicose, releasing peptide into the tissue at large as well as at conventional synapses.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Orexin-A and orexin-B, both excitatory at their receptors and both acting slowly, over seconds.

Glutamate is co-released as the fast excitatory signal, and most of these cells also carry dynorphin, an opioid peptide that is inhibitory, so a single terminal can excite and inhibit the same target on different timescales.

Many also carry galanin and neuronal activity-regulated pentraxin, the latter being useful because it survives in post-mortem tissue and lets pathologists count the cells that used to be there.

MYELINATION:

Most orexin axons are unmyelinated or very thinly myelinated.

Slow conduction is acceptable because the job is to set a background state that must last for hours, not to deliver a millisecond-accurate message.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate in absolute terms, but with a peculiar dependence: these neurons rely on lactate supplied by neighbouring astrocytes, and blocking astrocyte lactate release silences them.

This makes their electrical output a direct readout of local glial metabolism, and it is one reason arousal tracks whole-body energy state so tightly.

PLASTICITY:

Their synaptic inputs are remodelled by food restriction, by chronic stress and by repeated exposure to drugs of abuse, with increased excitatory contacts after cocaine or morphine.

They also change their own peptide production with the circadian clock, and they show striking developmental plasticity, forming their vast projection map in the first weeks of postnatal life.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes surrounding orexin neurons are their fuel supply, exporting lactate through monocarboxylate transporters, without which the cells stop firing.

The same astrocytes release adenosine that acts on A1 receptors to inhibit these neurons as waking hours accumulate, so the glia are part of the sleep-pressure mechanism rather than mere scaffolding.

Microglia are the villains of narcolepsy's endgame: the loss is an immune attack, associated with a tissue type variant called human leucocyte antigen DQB1 06:02, in some cases triggered by influenza infection or by a particular 2009 pandemic influenza vaccine.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take these cells out and the lateral hypothalamus still regulates feeding, still signals reward, still drives arousal in bursts.

What it loses is continuity.

Wakefulness becomes a state the brain keeps falling out of, dream-sleep paralysis intrudes into laughter and surprise as cataplexy, and the boundary between sleeping and waking, which the rest of the brain treats as absolute, becomes porous.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Orexin peptide is released from dendrites as well as terminals, and orexin neurons excite each other through this local release, so the population behaves as a self-igniting unit rather than a set of independent cells.

They are directly chemosensitive to glucose, to carbon dioxide and to the hormones ghrelin and leptin, which makes them a genuine sensor organ inside the brain.

They exert control over local blood flow and over the sympathetic nervous system, raising blood pressure and heart rate as part of the waking package.

Their dynorphin co-release provides a built-in brake that opposes their own orexin signal with a different time course, a form of self-limiting output.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Extracellular glucose, 0.5 to 5 millimoles per litre in brain tissue, inhibitory.

◦ Carbon dioxide or pH, excitatory as carbon dioxide rises.

◦ Ghrelin, excitatory, and leptin, inhibitory, both from blood.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid from the ventrolateral preoptic sleep-promoting neurons, inhibitory.

◦ Circadian drive from the suprachiasmatic nucleus by way of the subparaventricular zone and dorsomedial hypothalamus.

◦ Astrocytic lactate availability, 0 to 1, a hard requirement for firing.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Orexin-A and orexin-B to locus coeruleus, tuberomammillary nucleus, dorsal raphe, basal forebrain, ventral tegmental area, thalamus, cortex, spinal cord.

◦ Glutamate as a fast excitatory co-transmitter, dynorphin as a slow inhibitory one.

◦ A scalar arousal-stabilising signal, 0 to 7 spikes per second.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ Homeostatic sleep pressure, accumulated adenosine, 0 to 1.

◦ Peptide store in vesicles, 0 to 1.

◦ Calcium concentration governing the after-hyperpolarisation.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting voltage minus 58 millivolts, threshold minus 45 millivolts, reset minus 65 millivolts.

◦ Membrane time constant about 100 milliseconds.

◦ Half-maximal glucose inhibition near 5 millimoles per litre.

◦ Population size 70 thousand cells.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Spike generation, milliseconds.

◦ Peptide action at targets, 1 to 60 seconds.

◦ Glucose and hormone modulation, minutes.

◦ Sleep pressure accumulation, 12 to 16 hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Immune destruction of 85 to 95 percent of the population produces narcolepsy type 1, defined clinically by a cerebrospinal fluid orexin-A level below 110 picograms per millilitre, with cataplexy, sleep paralysis and hallucinations at sleep onset.

◦ Overactivity contributes to insomnia and to panic, which is why orexin receptor blockers such as suvorexant, lemborexant and daridorexant are licensed sleeping medicines.

◦ Replacing the missing signal is now feasible: the selective orexin receptor 2 agonist oveporexton met all endpoints in two phase 3 trials in narcolepsy type 1 reported in 2025.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether an orexin neuron of the lateral hypothalamus is still holding the brain awake as sleep pressure builds.
Create a number variable called membrane_potential with initial value -58.
Create a number variable called glucose with initial value 4.
Create a number variable called sleep_pressure with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called brake with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike_count with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 600 times.
    Calculate the difference of glucose and 5.
    Set brake to the result.
    Calculate the product of brake and 3.
    Set brake to the result.
    Calculate the difference of 16 and brake.
    Set drive to the result.
    Calculate the difference of drive and sleep_pressure.
    Set drive to the result.
    Calculate the sum of -58 and drive.
    Set membrane_potential to the result.
    Check if membrane_potential is greater than -45.
    If the result is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of spike_count and 1.
        Set spike_count to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of sleep_pressure and 0.03.
    Set sleep_pressure to the result.
End the loop.
Display spike_count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C is chosen because a whole-brain simulator runs this inner loop millions of
   times per simulated second, and C compiles to a tight deterministic loop.
   Build with:  cc -std=c99 orexin.c -lm -o orexin                          */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>

static double sigmoid(double x) { return 1.0 / (1.0 + exp(-x)); }

int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.001;        /* seconds per step */
    const double tau = 0.100;       /* membrane time constant, 100 ms */
    const double v_rest = -58.0;    /* mV */
    const double v_thresh = -45.0;  /* mV */
    const double v_reset = -65.0;   /* mV */
    const double wake_drive = 18.0; /* mV of depolarising arousal input */
    double v = v_rest;
    double glucose = 4.0;           /* mmol per litre, fasting brain tissue */
    int spikes_before = 0, spikes_after = 0;

    for (int i = 0; i < 10000; i++) {          /* ten seconds of simulated time */
        if (i == 5000) glucose = 8.0;          /* a meal is absorbed */
        /* two-pore potassium current: glucose opens it and quietens the cell */
        double glucose_brake = 14.0 * sigmoid((glucose - 5.0) * 1.5);
        double input = wake_drive - glucose_brake;
        v += (dt / tau) * (-(v - v_rest) + input);
        if (v >= v_thresh) {
            v = v_reset;
            if (i < 5000) spikes_before++; else spikes_after++;
        }
    }
    printf("spikes in 5 s of low glucose: %d\n", spikes_before);
    printf("spikes in 5 s of high glucose: %d\n", spikes_after);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other cell in the body is a peptide-releasing glucose sensor that projects to nearly every arousal nucleus at once, is silent in dream sleep, and can be identified beyond doubt by a single laboratory test on spinal fluid, because losing it drops the orexin-A concentration below 110 picograms per millilitre and turns an ordinary life into narcolepsy.

CHAPTER 104. MELANIN-CONCENTRATING HORMONE (MCH) NEURONS OF THE LATERAL HYPOTHALAMUS (Dream-Sleep Promoting Neuron) (COG)

They are mixed cell by cell among the orexin neurons in the same slab of tissue, they use a peptide first found in fish, where it makes skin go pale, and in you they fall silent all day and then blaze into life during your dreams.

Melanin-concentrating hormone is a peptide barcode named for a fish skin-colour effect that has nothing to do with its job in the human brain.

Dream-Sleep names the one sleep stage this cell selectively serves, because switching these cells on drives that stage specifically rather than raising sleep in general, and it does so even when its glutamate release is genetically removed.

Promoting is deliberately modest and honest, since the cell also carries cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript and influences feeding, so promotion of one sleep stage is the best-established claim rather than the whole story.

Neuron marks it as a lateral hypothalamic cell sitting interleaved with the sleep-boundary cells of the same region and firing in near-opposition to them.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These neurons make melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a ring-shaped peptide 19 amino acids long that got its name from its job in fish skin and kept it after it turned out to do something entirely different in mammals.

In the human brain MCH is a sleep and energy-conservation signal.

These cells are nearly silent during waking, tick over slowly during deep sleep, and fire fastest of all during rapid eye movement sleep, the phase in which most vivid dreaming happens.

They are the mirror image of their neighbours the orexin neurons in almost every respect: orexin promotes waking, MCH promotes sleep, glucose inhibits orexin neurons and excites MCH neurons, and losing orexin neurons causes narcolepsy while MCH neurons survive untouched in the same brains.

They also promote feeding and fat storage, and they suppress the neurons that form new memories in the hippocampus, which is one current explanation for why dreams are so rarely remembered.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is fusiform or triangular, with two to four long, sparsely branched dendrites that tend to run parallel to the passing fibre bundles.

The whole cell is less bushy than an orexin neuron, giving a spare, elongated silhouette.

Peptide is stored in large dense-cored vesicles distributed all along the axon, which is thick with varicosities.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 15 to 25 micrometres across, slightly smaller on average than the orexin neurons they sit among.

The dendritic field is elongated, roughly 400 by 150 micrometres.

The axonal arbour is again vast for the size of the cell, reaching from the olfactory bulb at the front of the brain to the spinal cord.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Cells that also contain the inhibitory transmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid, which is the large majority, since about 85 percent of MCH neurons carry the enzyme that makes it.

• A glutamate-releasing minority, defined by vesicular glutamate transporter 2.

• Cells co-expressing cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript or nesfatin-1, biased towards feeding control.

• A separate group in the zona incerta and incerto-hypothalamic area, anatomically continuous with the main population but with different targets.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The lateral hypothalamic area, the perifornical region, the posterior hypothalamic area, the zona incerta and the incerto-hypothalamic area, in a broad sheet that in humans spreads further laterally and posteriorly than the orexin field.

The defining interface is with the orexin population: the two cell types are interdigitated in the same cubic millimetres of tissue, share the same astrocytes, and yet keep opposite schedules.

A second interface is with the fornix and the medial forebrain bundle, the fibre highways that these axons join to reach the rest of the brain.

NUMBER:

There is no agreed unbiased stereological count of MCH neurons in the human brain, and it is honest to say so.

In every species measured they outnumber orexin neurons by roughly one and a half to three times, which for a human orexin population of 70 thousand gives a working estimate of 80 thousand cells, with a defensible bound of 50 thousand to 200 thousand and low confidence.

That is around 0.8 percent of the roughly 10 million hypothalamic neurons, and about one neuron in a million in the nervous system as a whole.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is about minus 60 millivolts and these cells are quieter than orexin neurons at rest.

In freely behaving animals they are essentially silent in waking, fire at low rates in slow wave sleep, and reach their maximum, often several spikes per second, in rapid eye movement sleep.

They show a prominent A-type potassium current, a fast-inactivating outward current that delays the first spike after an input arrives, so the cell responds late and gradually rather than instantly.

Glucose excites them, over the same physiological range that inhibits orexin neurons, which makes the pair a push-pull glucose detector built out of two intermingled cell types.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from the ventrolateral preoptic sleep-promoting neurons, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, the lateral septum, the amygdala, the arcuate nucleus, the raphe and the locus coeruleus, and from orexin neurons themselves acting through orexin receptor 2.

Outputs are brain-wide and heavily biased towards the cortex, the hippocampus, the septum, the thalamic reticular nucleus, the dorsal and median raphe, the tuberomammillary nucleus, the locus coeruleus and the spinal cord.

In the human brain they also make direct contacts onto gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons, linking energy state to fertility.

MCH acts on MCH receptor 1, and humans, unlike mice and rats, additionally possess a functional MCH receptor 2.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are 0.3 to 1 micrometre in diameter, conducting at about 0.5 to 2 metres per second.

They branch profusely and are studded with varicosities, and a striking feature is that MCH-containing fibres reach the ependymal lining of the ventricles, so peptide can be released into cerebrospinal fluid and carried far from its source.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

MCH itself, which is inhibitory at MCH receptor 1 because that receptor works through the inhibitory G protein Gi.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid in the large majority of cells, glutamate in a minority, plus cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript and nesfatin-1 in subsets.

Notably, MCH neurons can promote rapid eye movement sleep even when their glutamate release is genetically deleted, which shows the peptide and the inhibitory transmitter carry the essential message.

MYELINATION:

Largely unmyelinated, with thin myelin on the longest descending fibres.

As with orexin, the currency is a slowly changing brain state, so conduction speed is not the limiting factor.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low while awake, since the cells are near-silent, rising during sleep, which is an unusual inversion of the normal brain pattern where most cells are cheapest at night.

Their excitation by glucose means their energy supply and their signal are the same molecule, so they are intrinsically well matched to their fuel.

PLASTICITY:

Fasting increases MCH gene expression sharply, and the peptide level tracks body energy stores over days.

Their inputs are remodelled by chronic high-fat feeding and by sleep deprivation, and their activity shapes plasticity elsewhere: by inhibiting hippocampal circuits during rapid eye movement sleep they influence which memories are consolidated and which are allowed to fade.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes here are shared with orexin neurons and supply the same lactate, but MCH neurons are far less dependent on it because they are usually quiet when the brain is most active.

The most remarkable glial and immune fact about these cells is negative: in narcolepsy, where the immune system destroys almost every orexin neuron in the immediate neighbourhood, MCH neurons in the very same tissue are spared in normal numbers, which tells us the attack is exquisitely molecularly targeted rather than a general injury to the region.

In Alzheimer's disease, by contrast, MCH neurons show their own specific pattern of degeneration.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the lateral hypothalamus keeps its hunger and its arousal, but it loses its off-switch and its dream engine.

The region would still shout "eat" and "wake up" and would have no voice saying "stop, conserve, sleep, and let this experience go unrecorded".

Rapid eye movement sleep would become shorter and more fragile, body weight would fall, and the nightly wave of hippocampal quietening that normally accompanies dreaming would not arrive.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

MCH is released into the cerebrospinal fluid from fibres near the ventricle wall, a genuine example of volume transmission over centimetres rather than micrometres.

The peptide acts on a receptor that inhibits its targets by a slow second-messenger route, so a burst of firing during one dream episode changes the excitability of distant cortex for minutes afterwards.

These neurons are direct chemical sensors of glucose, and they are also modulated by their own neighbours' peptide, since orexin excites them through orexin receptor 2, creating a delayed negative feedback that helps terminate waking.

Their inhibition of hippocampal circuits during rapid eye movement sleep is an active instruction to forget, one of the clearest cases in the brain of a cell type whose function is subtraction rather than addition.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Extracellular glucose, 0.5 to 5 millimoles per litre, excitatory.

◦ Orexin from neighbouring cells acting at orexin receptor 2, excitatory and delayed.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid from preoptic sleep neurons and noradrenaline from locus coeruleus, inhibitory during waking.

◦ Rapid eye movement sleep drive from the pontine sublaterodorsal nucleus, 0 to 1.

◦ Leptin and body fat signals, setting slow gain over days.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ MCH peptide to cortex, hippocampus, septum, thalamic reticular nucleus, raphe, locus coeruleus, tuberomammillary nucleus, spinal cord and cerebrospinal fluid.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid at conventional synapses in most cells.

◦ A scalar sleep-and-conserve signal, 0 to 6 spikes per second.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ A-type potassium current inactivation, 0 to 1.

◦ Peptide store, 0 to 1.

◦ Accumulated rapid eye movement sleep debt, 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting voltage about minus 60 millivolts, threshold about minus 45 millivolts.

◦ Peak firing in rapid eye movement sleep, 3 to 6 spikes per second.

◦ Fraction of population that is gamma-aminobutyric acid positive, 0.85.

◦ Population size, working estimate 80 thousand cells.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane time constant, 30 to 80 milliseconds.

◦ A-type current inactivation, 20 to 100 milliseconds.

◦ Peptide action at targets, 10 seconds to several minutes.

◦ State switching between waking and rapid eye movement sleep, 1 to 10 minutes.

◦ Gene expression response to fasting, 12 to 48 hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss or silencing shortens and fragments rapid eye movement sleep and produces leanness with resistance to diet-induced obesity.

◦ Overactivity is associated with excessive rapid eye movement sleep, weight gain and, in animal models, depression-like behaviour, and MCH receptor 1 blockers were developed as anti-obesity drugs before cardiac side effects halted them.

◦ Specific degeneration of these neurons occurs in Alzheimer's disease and may contribute to its disrupted sleep.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to find the moment at which a melanin concentrating hormone neuron overcomes the waking system and lets rapid eye movement sleep begin.
Create a number variable called wake_activity with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called mch_activity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called rem_pressure with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called mch_drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called glucose with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called switch_minute with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called minute with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 120 times.
    Calculate the sum of minute and 1.
    Set minute to the result.
    Calculate the sum of rem_pressure and 0.01.
    Set rem_pressure to the result.
    Calculate the product of rem_pressure and 3.
    Set mch_drive to the result.
    Calculate the sum of mch_drive and glucose.
    Set mch_drive to the result.
    Calculate the difference of mch_drive and wake_activity.
    Set mch_drive to the result.
    Set mch_activity to mch_drive.
    Check if mch_activity is greater than 0.5.
    If the result is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set wake_activity to 0.
        Set switch_minute to minute.
        Break out of the current loop immediately.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display switch_minute to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the essential idea is two populations inhibiting each
# other, which reads most clearly as four lines of arithmetic inside one loop.
import math

def sigmoid(x):
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-x))

dt = 0.5                 # seconds per step
tau_wake, tau_mch = 60.0, 90.0     # seconds, slow state variables
wake, mch = 1.0, 0.0     # normalised population activity, 0 to 1
rem_pressure = 0.0       # builds up across a sleep episode
glucose = 1.0            # normalised; glucose excites MCH neurons
log = []

for i in range(4800):                     # forty minutes of simulated sleep
    rem_pressure += dt / 1800.0
    drive_wake = 3.0 - 6.0 * mch          # MCH neurons inhibit the wake side
    drive_mch = 6.0 * rem_pressure + 2.0 * glucose - 6.0 * wake - 3.0
    wake += dt / tau_wake * (sigmoid(drive_wake) - wake)
    mch += dt / tau_mch * (sigmoid(drive_mch) - mch)
    if mch > 0.5:                         # entering REM discharges the pressure
        rem_pressure = max(0.0, rem_pressure - dt / 300.0)
    log.append((i * dt, wake, mch))

crossing = next((t for t, w, m in log if m > 0.5), None)
print("MCH activity crossed 0.5 at t =", crossing, "seconds")
print("final wake activity %.3f, final MCH activity %.3f" % (log[-1][1], log[-1][2]))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the cell that sits shoulder to shoulder with the orexin neurons and does everything backwards: excited by the sugar that silences them, loudest when they are mute, spared by the immune attack that annihilates them, and named after a job it does only in fish.

CHAPTER 105. HISTAMINERGIC NEURONS OF THE TUBEROMAMMILLARY NUCLEUS (Wake-Holding Ceiling Neuron) (COG)

Every drop of histamine your brain has ever used came from about sixty-four thousand cells at the very base of the hypothalamus, which is why an old-fashioned hay-fever tablet can put a grown adult to sleep in twenty minutes.

The old name is a transmitter label joined to a Latin address.

Wake-Holding names the effect, because these cells switch on just after waking, fire at about five impulses per second, and fall silent in sleep.

Ceiling names the reach of a tiny population, since roughly sixty-four thousand cells in the human brain, all clustered in one small nucleus, send axons to the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, cerebellum, brainstem and spinal cord, and they are the sole source of histamine for the entire nervous system.

Neuron marks it as the cell whose receptors, when blocked, are precisely why older antihistamine tablets for hay fever make people drowsy.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are the only neurons in the entire nervous system that make histamine, a small molecule better known for causing itching and swelling in an allergic reaction.

They manufacture it from the dietary amino acid histidine using a single enzyme, histidine decarboxylase, and that enzyme is their unmistakable chemical signature.

Their job is wakefulness of a particular flavour: not the raw ability to be awake, but alertness, attention and the suppression of drowsiness.

They fire steadily whenever you are awake and attentive, slow down when you are drowsy, and stop completely during rapid eye movement sleep.

Because they broadcast to nearly the whole brain, blocking their receptor with a first-generation antihistamine that crosses into the brain produces the familiar heavy sedation.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

These are large, plump neurons with a big pale nucleus and two to five thick, long, sparsely branched dendrites.

The dendrites are remarkable for where they go: many of them run out of the nucleus altogether and lie along the surface of the brain, directly beneath the pia mater, dipping into the subarachnoid space that holds cerebrospinal fluid.

A neuron with its antennae in the spinal fluid is sampling the whole body's chemistry, not just its neighbours' opinions.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 20 to 35 micrometres across in the human brain, among the larger neurons of the hypothalamus.

Dendrites extend 400 to 800 micrometres, sometimes further along the brain surface.

Total axonal length per cell is very large, since a single neuron can send branches to cortex, thalamus, hippocampus and brainstem at once.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The human tuberomammillary nucleus is conventionally divided into five groups, often labelled E1 to E5, and functionally at least three subtypes matter.

• A ventral group projecting mainly to the cortex and the basal forebrain, serving cortical arousal.

• A medial and diffuse group projecting to the thalamus, hypothalamus and brainstem, serving autonomic and feeding control.

• A caudal group projecting to the spinal cord and to the trigeminal system.

Subtypes also differ in whether they co-express galanin, gamma-aminobutyric acid, enkephalin, substance P or thyrotropin-releasing hormone.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The tuberomammillary nucleus of the posterior hypothalamus, wrapped around and behind the mammillary bodies, spreading forward along the ventral surface as far as the supraoptic region.

The cells are scattered rather than tightly packed, forming a loose shell rather than a dense ball.

The interfaces that matter are three: the boundary with the mammillary bodies just behind, the boundary with the lateral hypothalamic orexin field just in front and above, and the boundary between the nucleus and the pial surface of the brain, across which the dendrites reach into cerebrospinal fluid.

NUMBER:

About 64 thousand histamine-producing neurons in the human brain, a figure that is reasonably well established and repeatedly cited, with a plausible range of 50 thousand to 80 thousand.

Confidence is moderate: the counts come from a small number of post-mortem series.

That is about 0.6 percent of the roughly 10 million hypothalamic neurons, and about one neuron in every 1.3 million in the nervous system as a whole.

Every histamine synapse in the brain, in a structure of 86 billion neurons, is supplied by this handful of cells.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They are slow, regular pacemakers: even removed from the brain and placed in a dish, they keep firing rhythmically at about 1 to 4 spikes per second with no input at all.

Resting voltage is about minus 50 to minus 55 millivolts, and the pacemaking depends on a persistent sodium current and a hyperpolarisation-activated current that together drag the voltage steadily up to threshold after each spike.

The action potential is broad, 1.2 to 2 milliseconds, with a large calcium component and a long after-hyperpolarisation lasting tens of milliseconds, which enforces the slow rate.

Firing is highest in active waking, roughly halved in quiet waking, near zero in slow wave sleep and completely absent in rapid eye movement sleep.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The strongest excitatory input is from orexin neurons, which is how the two arousal systems reinforce one another.

Powerful inhibition arrives from the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus, using gamma-aminobutyric acid and the peptide galanin, and this is the direct pathway by which the sleep switch turns histamine off.

Other inputs come from the infralimbic cortex, the septum, the amygdala and the brainstem.

Outputs reach essentially the whole brain: all cortical layers, hippocampus, amygdala, thalamus, striatum, hypothalamus, brainstem nuclei, cerebellum and spinal cord.

Histamine acts on four receptors, three of which matter here: H1 and H2 excite the target, and H3 sits on the histamine neuron's own terminals as an autoreceptor, a brake that reports how much histamine has already been released.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are very fine, 0.1 to 0.5 micrometres, and conduct slowly, around 0.5 to 1.5 metres per second.

Branching is exuberant, and most of the fibre length is varicose: the swellings frequently have no postsynaptic partner facing them at all.

Histamine is therefore released mainly into the extracellular space rather than into sealed synaptic clefts, and diffuses to receptors tens of micrometres away.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Histamine, made by histidine decarboxylase from histidine and packaged by the vesicular monoamine transporter 2.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid is co-released by most of these cells, along with galanin, enkephalin, substance P and thyrotropin-releasing hormone in various subsets.

A defining oddity: unlike every other monoamine, histamine has no reuptake transporter on the releasing neuron, so once released it must be chemically inactivated by the enzyme histamine N-methyltransferase, which makes the signal slower to clear and inherently broadcast in character.

Human tuberomammillary neurons are also unusually rich in adenosine deaminase, which is a useful marker for them in human tissue.

MYELINATION:

Essentially unmyelinated throughout.

This is entirely consistent with the cell's role: it is a chemical broadcaster setting a background level over minutes, and a fast insulated cable would be wasted on it.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest and steady, but with a strict daily rhythm, because the cell is on for sixteen hours and off for eight.

The histamine it makes is expensive in a different currency: histidine must be imported from the diet across the blood-brain barrier, so the size of the brain's histamine signal is partly set by what was eaten.

PLASTICITY:

Histidine decarboxylase levels rise with prolonged wakefulness, so the system upregulates its own supply under pressure.

H3 autoreceptor sensitivity adapts over days, which is why tolerance develops to some antihistamines.

The projection is also remodelled by chronic stress and by long-term antihistamine or antipsychotic exposure, and the histamine system instructs plasticity elsewhere by gating long-term potentiation in the hippocampus and cortex.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes around these neurons carry an unusually high load of histamine N-methyltransferase, so the glia, not the neuron, are the main off-switch for the transmitter, a division of labour found nowhere else in monoamine signalling.

Because the dendrites lie against the pia, these neurons are wrapped by meningeal cells and bathed in cerebrospinal fluid rather than being fully enclosed by astrocytic endfeet.

The neighbourhood also contains mast cells, immune cells that themselves store histamine, so this is one of very few brain regions where a neuronal transmitter has a non-neuronal source sitting beside it.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the posterior hypothalamus still remembers routes through space in the mammillary bodies and still runs autonomic reflexes, but the whole brain loses its tone control.

The flavour lost is vigilance: the fine adjustment between merely being awake and being sharp.

Animals without histamine are awake for a normal number of hours yet fail to wake up properly when something new happens, and they cannot stay alert at the wrong time of day.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

These neurons release transmitter from dendrites as well as axons and they self-inhibit through H3 autoreceptors, so the population computes its own output level by negative feedback rather than being commanded from outside.

H3 receptors also sit on other neurons' terminals as heteroreceptors, controlling the release of noradrenaline, acetylcholine, dopamine and serotonin, so this cell type is a master gain control over the other arousal chemicals.

The dendrites in cerebrospinal fluid make the cell a whole-body chemosensor, and the axon terminals influence the calibre of local blood vessels, coupling arousal to brain blood flow.

They also signal to the immune system and are themselves modulated by immune mediators, which is part of why infection makes you drowsy.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Orexin from lateral hypothalamus, excitatory, 0 to 1 normalised.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid and galanin from the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus, inhibitory, the sleep switch.

◦ Extracellular histamine acting on H3 autoreceptors, inhibitory feedback, 0 to 1.

◦ Histidine availability from the blood, setting maximum synthesis rate.

◦ Circadian drive from the suprachiasmatic nucleus by way of the subparaventricular zone.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Histamine, released by volume transmission across cortex, thalamus, hippocampus, striatum, brainstem, cerebellum and spinal cord.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid and peptide co-transmitters at conventional synapses.

◦ A scalar vigilance signal, 0 to 4 spikes per second.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ Pacemaker current activation, 0 to 1.

◦ Extracellular histamine concentration in the target field.

◦ H3 autoreceptor occupancy, 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Intrinsic pacemaker rate with no input, 1 to 4 spikes per second.

◦ Action potential width, 1.2 to 2 milliseconds.

◦ Maximum autoreceptor suppression of release, about 50 to 80 percent.

◦ Population size, 64 thousand cells.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Interspike interval, 250 to 1000 milliseconds.

◦ After-hyperpolarisation, 30 to 100 milliseconds.

◦ Histamine clearance by histamine N-methyltransferase, tens of seconds to minutes.

◦ Sleep and wake state transitions, seconds to minutes.

◦ Histidine decarboxylase upregulation, hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of these neurons occurs in multiple system atrophy and dementia with Lewy bodies and contributes to the daytime sleepiness in those diseases.

◦ Blocking H1 receptors, as first-generation antihistamines and many antipsychotics do, causes sedation, cognitive slowing and weight gain.

◦ Blocking the H3 autoreceptor with the inverse agonist pitolisant releases the brake and raises histamine output, and is a licensed treatment for the sleepiness of narcolepsy.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to follow the histamine level around a tuberomammillary neuron as its own autoreceptor brake is applied and then lifted by a drug.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 2.
Create a number variable called histamine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called brake with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called release with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called change with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drug with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called tick with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 1200 times.
    Calculate the sum of tick and 1.
    Set tick to the result.
    Check if tick is equal to 600.
    If the result is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drug to 2.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of histamine and 0.05.
    Set brake to the result.
    Calculate the difference of brake and drug.
    Set brake to the result.
    Calculate the difference of firing_rate and brake.
    Set release to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of histamine divided by 60.
    Set change to the result.
    Calculate the difference of release and change.
    Set change to the result.
    Calculate the sum of histamine and change.
    Set histamine to the result.
End the loop.
Display histamine to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the whole point is a negative feedback loop, and it is
# easiest to trust when it is four lines of arithmetic you can read at a glance.
FIRING_RATE = 2.0     # spikes per second, quiet waking
AUTO_GAIN = 0.05      # strength of the H3 autoreceptor brake per unit histamine
CLEARANCE_TAU = 60.0  # steps for histamine N-methyltransferase to clear the pool
DT = 1.0              # one step, arbitrary time units

histamine = 0.0       # extracellular histamine, arbitrary units
drug = 0.0            # pitolisant-like H3 inverse agonist, 0 or 2
trace = []

for tick in range(1200):
    if tick == 600:
        drug = 2.0                                  # the drug arrives
    brake = AUTO_GAIN * histamine - drug            # self-inhibition, minus the block
    release = FIRING_RATE - brake                   # release per step
    clearance = histamine / CLEARANCE_TAU
    histamine += DT * (release - clearance)
    trace.append(histamine)

print("steady histamine before the drug: %.2f" % trace[599])
print("steady histamine after the drug:  %.2f" % trace[-1])
print("fold increase: %.2f" % (trace[-1] / trace[599]))
# Analytic check: before the drug 2 = 0.05h + h/60 gives h = 30.
# After the drug 4 = 0.05h + h/60 gives h = 60, so histamine doubles.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the sole source of a transmitter for an entire brain, it has no reuptake pump so its glia must destroy the signal for it, it dangles its dendrites in cerebrospinal fluid, and it is the cell you switch off by accident every time you take the wrong hay-fever tablet.

CHAPTER 106. KISSPEPTIN, NEUROKININ B, AND DYNORPHIN (KNDY) NEURONS (Hormone-Pulse Generator Neuron) (NON-COG)

Once an hour, for your entire reproductive life, a small knot of cells at the floor of the brain fires all at once for a few minutes and then falls silent, and that heartbeat is the metronome of human fertility.

The old name is three peptide barcodes compressed into an unspeakable acronym.

Hormone-Pulse names the stake, since without this rhythm the ovaries and testes are never driven and puberty never arrives, which is why humans lacking kisspeptin signalling fail to enter puberty.

Generator names the machinery, because these cells are the pulse generator itself, neurokinin B exciting the network into a synchronised burst, kisspeptin carrying that burst to the gonadotropin-releasing hormone cells, and dynorphin then shutting the burst off after a short delay.

Neuron marks it as the cell that swells and overproduces its peptides after menopause, which is why drugs blocking the neurokinin B receptor now treat hot flushes.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

KNDy is an acronym built from the three chemicals every one of these cells makes at the same time: kisspeptin, neurokinin B (NKB), and dynorphin, with the y borrowed from the chemical shorthand Dyn.

Kisspeptin is the output, the message sent onward.

Neurokinin B is the accelerator the cells use on each other, and dynorphin is the brake they use on each other.

Together those three make a relaxation oscillator, an engineering term for a circuit that charges up, discharges in a burst, and then has to recharge before it can burst again.

Every burst releases kisspeptin onto gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons, which then release their own hormone into the blood vessels feeding the pituitary gland, which then releases luteinising hormone into the general circulation, which then tells the ovary or testis what to do.

If this clock beats too slowly, puberty never happens and periods stop; if it beats correctly, the whole reproductive system follows.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Medium-sized, round to oval cell bodies with three to five dendrites, distinguished by an unusual habit: their axons and dendrites wrap around each other's cell bodies.

Each KNDy neuron is contacted by many other KNDy neurons, forming a densely reciprocal mesh, which is exactly the architecture needed for a population that must ignite together.

In humans the cells also send fibres into the median eminence, the specialised zone where brain and pituitary blood supply meet, and there they lie next to GnRH terminals.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 15 to 25 micrometres across in premenopausal women.

They enlarge dramatically after the menopause: measured cell body areas roughly triple, from about 175 square micrometres before the menopause to about 565 square micrometres afterwards, because the oestrogen that normally restrains them has gone.

Dendritic fields are compact, 150 to 300 micrometres, since most of the wiring is local.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• The infundibular or arcuate population, which is the KNDy population proper and generates the pulses.

• A separate preoptic and rostral periventricular kisspeptin population, which does not make neurokinin B or dynorphin and instead generates the single large surge of luteinising hormone that triggers ovulation.

• Within the infundibular group, cells differ in whether they also contain substance P, which is common in humans and rare in rodents.

• The population is sexually dimorphic, with more cells in women than in men.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The infundibular nucleus of the human hypothalamus, which is the human name for the arcuate nucleus, forming a curved sheet along the wall of the third ventricle just above the pituitary stalk.

Fibres run down into the median eminence and up into the preoptic area.

The interface that matters most is the one with the median eminence, because that is where the blood-brain barrier is deliberately incomplete: these neurons are positioned to be bathed in circulating sex hormones, which is the whole point of their location.

A second interface is with the tanycytes lining the ventricle, which physically move to open and close access to the portal blood.

NUMBER:

No consensus human count exists, and it would be wrong to pretend otherwise.

Studies counting kisspeptin-labelled cell bodies in human post-mortem tissue report thousands per nucleus, and a reasonable working estimate for the combined infundibular KNDy population is about 10 thousand cells, with a defensible bound of 3 thousand to 30 thousand and low confidence.

That is roughly 0.1 percent of the approximately 10 million neurons of the hypothalamus, and about one neuron in every 8 million in the nervous system as a whole.

For a population that decides whether a species reproduces, it is a startlingly small number of cells.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Between pulses they are quiet, firing at well under 1 spike per second.

During a pulse the whole population synchronises and fires in a burst lasting one to several minutes, with individual rates of 5 to 20 spikes per second.

The synchrony is built from mutual excitation: neurokinin B acting on the NK3 receptor slowly depolarises neighbouring KNDy cells, and glutamate acting at AMPA receptors provides the fast component.

Termination is built from dynorphin acting on the kappa opioid receptor, which arrives with a delay of tens of seconds to minutes and shuts the burst down; the slow recovery from that inhibition sets the interval to the next pulse.

In humans and other primates the resulting rhythm is roughly one pulse per hour in the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, slowing to one pulse every few hours in the luteal phase.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs include one another, which is the defining feature, plus proopiomelanocortin and AgRP neurons reporting energy state, orexin and MCH fibres, noradrenergic brainstem inputs, and inputs carrying circadian time from the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Outputs go to GnRH cell bodies in the preoptic area and to GnRH terminals in the median eminence, and also to the preoptic thermoregulatory area, which is why the same cells that time fertility also help set body temperature.

Oestrogen and testosterone act directly on these cells through oestrogen receptor alpha and the androgen receptor, and this is the principal site of the negative feedback that keeps sex hormone levels stable.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin, 0.2 to 0.6 micrometres, unmyelinated, conducting at under 1 metre per second.

Local collaterals are short and dense, while the projection to the median eminence runs a few millimetres.

Terminals in the median eminence are the classic neurosecretory type, releasing peptide into a blood plexus rather than onto another neuron.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Kisspeptin, the product of the KISS1 gene, acting on the kisspeptin receptor KISS1R.

Neurokinin B, the product of the TAC3 gene, acting on the NK3 receptor encoded by TACR3.

Dynorphin, the product of the PDYN gene, acting on the kappa opioid receptor.

Glutamate is co-released as the fast transmitter, and in humans substance P is frequently present as well.

The genetics is the proof: loss-of-function mutations in KISS1, KISS1R, TAC3 or TACR3 each cause normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, in which puberty simply never arrives in an otherwise healthy person.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable in any meaningful sense, because these axons are unmyelinated.

The reason is worth stating so it is not mistaken for an omission: the signal here is a hormone pulse measured in minutes, travelling at most a few millimetres, so there is nothing for myelin to improve.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low on average, since the cells are silent most of the time, with sharp metabolic spikes during each burst.

Peptide synthesis is the main ongoing cost, and it is strongly regulated: after the menopause, kisspeptin and neurokinin B gene expression in these cells rises steeply.

They are also energy sensors, and they shut the reproductive clock down when the body is starved, which is the mechanism behind the loss of periods in anorexia nervosa and in extreme athletic training.

PLASTICITY:

These cells rewire in response to sex hormones across the menstrual cycle, across puberty and across the menopause.

Oestrogen withdrawal causes hypertrophy, increased kisspeptin and neurokinin B expression and decreased dynorphin expression, all of which speed and strengthen the pulse.

Puberty itself is largely a story of these neurons increasing their coupling and escaping childhood restraint.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Tanycytes are the specialised glia that matter here: they ensheath the terminals in the median eminence and physically retract or extend their processes across the oestrous cycle, opening and closing the neurons' access to the portal blood in a way glia do nowhere else.

Astrocytes in the infundibular nucleus express oestrogen receptors and release prostaglandin E2 and growth factors that modulate the pulse generator directly.

Because the barrier is porous here, microglia in this nucleus are chronically exposed to circulating signals and respond to diet and inflammation with unusual speed.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the infundibular nucleus still senses hunger and still controls growth hormone and thyroid pathways, but it loses its clock.

The region would become a metabolic sensor with no rhythm and no reproductive voice: GnRH neurons would sit intact and silent, puberty would not begin, and the ovary and testis would never receive an instruction.

The nucleus would also lose the thermostat contribution that makes falling oestrogen produce hot flushes.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is one of the clearest examples in the brain of computation performed by a network's chemistry rather than by any single cell: neither the accelerator nor the brake would generate a rhythm alone, and the period of the oscillation is set by the decay rate of a peptide, not by any membrane property.

The cells release peptide onto each other by volume transmission, so the burst spreads through the tissue as a chemical wave.

They read steroid hormones directly by nuclear receptors and change their gene transcription accordingly, so the same cell operates on timescales from seconds to decades.

They release their product into blood rather than onto a neuron, making them neurosecretory in the strict sense, and their projection to the preoptic thermoregulatory neurons means they also directly command skin blood flow.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Neurokinin B from other KNDy neurons, excitatory, slow, 0 to 1 normalised.

◦ Dynorphin from other KNDy neurons, inhibitory, slower still, 0 to 1.

◦ Glutamate from other KNDy neurons, fast excitatory.

◦ Circulating oestradiol, 20 to 400 picograms per millilitre, or testosterone, acting through nuclear receptors as negative feedback.

◦ Energy-state signals: leptin, insulin and input from AgRP and proopiomelanocortin neurons.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Kisspeptin onto GnRH cell bodies and terminals, driving one pulse of gonadotropin-releasing hormone per burst.

◦ Projections to preoptic thermoregulatory neurons setting the heat-loss threshold.

◦ A pulse train, typically one pulse every 30 to 120 minutes.

• STATE.

◦ Population activity, 0 to 1.

◦ Neurokinin B tone, 0 to 1.

◦ Dynorphin tone, 0 to 1.

◦ Peptide stores and steroid receptor occupancy.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Neurokinin B feedback gain, high enough to make the burst all or none.

◦ Dynorphin feedback gain, setting burst duration of 1 to 5 minutes.

◦ Oestradiol sensitivity, setting overall pulse frequency.

◦ Population size, working estimate 10 thousand cells.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Glutamate synchronisation, milliseconds.

◦ Neurokinin B action, 10 to 60 seconds.

◦ Dynorphin action and recovery, 10 to 60 minutes.

◦ Steroid feedback through gene transcription, hours to days.

◦ Reorganisation at puberty and menopause, months to years.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss-of-function mutations in TAC3, TACR3, KISS1 or KISS1R abolish the pulse and cause failure of puberty with normal sense of smell.

◦ Excess pulse frequency contributes to polycystic ovary syndrome.

◦ After the menopause the loss of oestrogen leaves these neurons hypertrophied and overactive, and their runaway neurokinin B signalling onto the preoptic thermostat produces hot flushes, which is why NK3 receptor blockers work: fezolinetant was approved in May 2023 and the dual NK1 and NK3 blocker elinzanetant was approved in October 2025 for menopausal hot flushes.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to generate the hourly pulse train of the kisspeptin pulse generator from a slow dynorphin brake.
Create a number variable called neurokinin with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dynorphin with initial value 1.
Create a boolean variable called firing with initial value false.
Create a number variable called minute with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called kisspeptin_released with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called pulse_minutes with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 720 times.
    Calculate the sum of minute and 1.
    Set minute to the result.
    Check if dynorphin is less than 0.2.
    If the result is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing to true.
        Set neurokinin to 1.
        Set dynorphin to 1.
        Add minute to the end of pulse_minutes.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set firing to false.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of dynorphin and 0.97.
    Set dynorphin to the result.
    Calculate the product of neurokinin and 0.8.
    Set neurokinin to the result.
    Calculate the sum of kisspeptin_released and neurokinin.
    Set kisspeptin_released to the result.
End the loop.
Display pulse_minutes to the console.
Display kisspeptin_released to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the output of interest is a list of pulse times that a
# reader can compare directly with a real luteinising hormone assay printout.
DYN_DECAY = 0.97      # dynorphin brake decays 3 percent per simulated minute
DYN_THRESHOLD = 0.20  # below this the network escapes and fires
NKB_DECAY = 0.80      # neurokinin B burst envelope decays fast

dynorphin = 1.0
neurokinin = 0.0
kisspeptin_released = 0.0
pulse_minutes = []

for minute in range(1, 721):              # twelve hours
    if dynorphin < DYN_THRESHOLD:         # brake has worn off, the network ignites
        neurokinin = 1.0                  # neurokinin B makes the burst all or none
        dynorphin = 1.0                   # dynorphin is released and reapplies the brake
        pulse_minutes.append(minute)
    dynorphin *= DYN_DECAY
    neurokinin *= NKB_DECAY
    kisspeptin_released += neurokinin     # kisspeptin output tracks the burst envelope

gaps = [b - a for a, b in zip(pulse_minutes, pulse_minutes[1:])]
print("pulse onsets in minutes:", pulse_minutes)
print("interpulse intervals:", gaps)
if gaps:
    print("mean interval: %.1f minutes" % (sum(gaps) / len(gaps)))
print("total kisspeptin released: %.2f arbitrary units" % kisspeptin_released)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron that carries an accelerator and a brake for its own network in the same vesicles, that triples in size when a woman's ovaries stop working, and whose single accelerator receptor can be blocked by a tablet to stop hot flushes.

CHAPTER 107. SUPRACHIASMATIC NUCLEUS NEURONS (Master Body-Clock Neuron) (COG)

Two grains of tissue the size of a pinhead, sitting just above the crossing point of your optic nerves, keep a twenty-four-hour clock that runs in a dish, in the dark, with no input at all, for weeks.

The old name is purely an address, meaning the nucleus lying above the optic chiasm, and it tells a reader only where to dig.

Master names the rank, because this cluster of roughly twenty thousand cells sets the phase of subordinate clocks in the liver, gut, heart and skin.

Body distinguishes it from any single organ rhythm.

Clock names the mechanism, because each of these cells runs a self-sustaining loop of clock gene transcription lasting close to but not exactly twenty-four hours, and a slice of the nucleus in a dish keeps ticking for weeks.

Neuron marks it as the cell reset each morning by light delivered along a direct tract from specialised retinal cells.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is the master circadian clock, circadian meaning "about a day".

Every neuron in it contains a molecular oscillator: a loop in which two proteins, CLOCK and BMAL1, switch on the genes Period and Cryptochrome, whose protein products then travel back into the nucleus and switch their own genes off, after which they are destroyed and the cycle restarts.

One turn of that loop takes about twenty-four hours, and it is called a transcription translation feedback loop (TTFL).

Individually these cells are sloppy timekeepers; coupled together by peptides and gap junctions they become extraordinarily precise.

Their job is to read the time of day from light arriving down a dedicated nerve pathway, correct their own clock accordingly, and then broadcast that time to every organ in the body.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

These are among the smallest neurons in the brain, with scant cytoplasm, few organelles, and short, simple, sparsely branched dendrites.

They are packed together at an unusually high density, and neighbouring cells touch one another directly, with electrical connections called gap junctions, which are protein tunnels that let ionic current pass straight from one cell into the next.

Synapses are dominated by inhibitory contacts, and dendrites overlap heavily, so the nucleus behaves less like a wiring diagram and more like a syncytium, a tissue whose cells act as one.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are only 8 to 12 micrometres across, roughly the smallest neuronal somata in the mammalian brain.

Dendritic fields extend just 50 to 150 micrometres, entirely within the nucleus.

The whole nucleus is about 0.5 to 1 cubic millimetre per side in humans, and the vasopressin-containing subnucleus occupies about 0.25 cubic millimetres per side.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Core, or ventrolateral, neurons containing vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and gastrin-releasing peptide, which receive light information and act as the coupling agents that keep the population in step.

• Shell, or dorsomedial, neurons containing arginine vasopressin (AVP), which act as the primary pacemakers setting the period of the whole network and carry the output.

• Neurons containing calretinin, neurotensin, somatostatin, prokineticin 2 or angiotensin II, which subdivide the two main groups further.

• Almost every one of these cells, whatever its peptide, also uses gamma-aminobutyric acid, so the nucleus is fundamentally an inhibitory network.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The anterior hypothalamus, immediately above the optic chiasm, which is the X-shaped crossing of the two optic nerves, and immediately beside the third ventricle, one nucleus in each hemisphere.

The interfaces that define it are unusually crisp: below and in front lies the optic chiasm, the source of its light input; medially lies the third ventricle and its ependymal lining; dorsally and caudally lies the subparaventricular zone, through which almost all of its output passes.

NUMBER:

About 50 thousand neurons per nucleus in the human brain, so roughly 100 thousand for the pair, with moderate confidence.

The uncertainty is real: rodent nuclei contain around 10 to 20 thousand neurons each, and some human estimates are lower than 50 thousand.

The count also falls with age and falls further in Alzheimer's disease.

Taking 100 thousand, the SCN is about 1 percent of the roughly 10 million hypothalamic neurons, and about one neuron in every 860 thousand in the nervous system as a whole.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The signature property is a spontaneous circadian rhythm in firing rate: about 6 to 10 spikes per second during the subjective day, falling below 1 spike per second at night, with many cells electrically silent at night.

This rhythm persists in a slice of tissue kept alive in a dish for weeks with no light, no hormones and no input, which is the single most convincing demonstration that the clock is intrinsic.

The daily switch is produced by the clock proteins regulating potassium and sodium channels, including members of the Kv4 and Kv12 families and a persistent sodium current.

Resting voltage swings across the day too, from about minus 45 millivolts in the day to about minus 60 millivolts at night.

Action potentials are narrow and the cells fire tonically and regularly rather than in bursts.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The dominant input is the retinohypothalamic tract, a dedicated bundle of axons from a small class of retinal ganglion cells that contain the pigment melanopsin and measure overall brightness rather than form.

These fibres release glutamate and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide onto core neurons, and glutamate at night triggers the gene expression that shifts the clock.

Other inputs arrive from the intergeniculate leaflet of the thalamus carrying non-photic and behavioural cues, and from the median raphe carrying serotonin.

Outputs run mainly to the subparaventricular zone, and from there to the dorsomedial hypothalamus, the paraventricular nucleus, the preoptic area and the orexin field.

The route to the pineal gland runs from the paraventricular nucleus down the spinal cord to the superior cervical ganglion and back up, which is how darkness is turned into melatonin.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are extremely fine, 0.1 to 0.4 micrometres, unmyelinated, and mostly very short, because most SCN neurons contact only other SCN neurons.

Output axons travel only a few millimetres to the subparaventricular zone.

Conduction speed is under 1 metre per second, which is irrelevant to a system whose unit of time is the hour.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid is used by essentially all SCN neurons, which is surprising for a clock that must excite the body into activity, and its effect inside the nucleus can be inhibitory or excitatory depending on the time of day and the internal chloride concentration of the target cell.

VIP is the essential coupling signal; without it or its receptor VPAC2 the neurons keep ticking individually but drift out of step and behavioural rhythms collapse.

AVP carries much of the output and sets the network period, and prokineticin 2, transforming growth factor alpha and cardiotrophin-like cytokine act as diffusible output signals that suppress activity without any synapse at all.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable, because SCN axons are unmyelinated, and the reason is worth spelling out so it is not read as an oversight.

Myelin exists to make signals arrive within a millisecond of each other; this system's precision requirement is measured in minutes per day, so insulation would buy nothing.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Glucose uptake in the SCN oscillates with a clear daily rhythm, high in the subjective day and low at night, and this rhythm was one of the earliest ways the nucleus was identified in the living brain.

Total consumption is small, because the cells are tiny and slow, but it is one of the most metabolically rhythmic tissues in the body.

PLASTICITY:

The synapses inside the nucleus are structurally remodelled every single day, with astrocytic processes advancing and retreating around them on a daily cycle.

Light at night causes rapid induction of the Period genes, which is the molecular event underlying jet lag.

The network can be reprogrammed by unusual light schedules, splitting into two mutually antagonistic halves under some conditions, and its coupling strength changes with day length, which is how a mammal measures the season.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes of the SCN are not support staff, they are timekeepers in their own right: they carry a full molecular clock, they release glutamate rhythmically at night onto neuronal receptors, and an astrocyte clock alone can drive circadian behaviour in an animal whose neuronal clock has been disabled.

Nowhere else in the brain is a glial cell an equal partner in the core computation.

Astrocytic processes also physically wrap and unwrap synapses on a daily schedule, changing how far transmitter can spread.

Microglia in the SCN show daily rhythms in shape and in inflammatory signalling.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the anterior hypothalamus keeps everything else it does, sleep drive, temperature control, hormone release, but every one of those functions becomes arrhythmic.

The lost flavour is anticipation.

A body without an SCN still sleeps, eats and secretes cortisol, but it does all of these things in random bouts scattered across the day and night, always reacting and never preparing, and it can no longer use dawn to predict anything at all.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The primary computation here is not electrical, it is transcriptional: the cell's state variable is the abundance of a set of proteins, and firing rate is downstream of it, which makes this the clearest case in the nervous system of a neuron that computes with gene expression.

The cells are coupled by gap junctions and by peptides diffusing through the tissue, so the nucleus synchronises without needing precise wiring.

They release diffusible output factors that act on distant tissue without synapses at all.

They engage in genuine two-way metabolic and signalling partnership with astrocytes, they instruct daily rhythms in blood flow and in blood-brain barrier permeability, and they impose their timing on clocks in every organ of the body through hormones and the autonomic nervous system.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Retinal irradiance from melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells, expressed as photons per square centimetre per second or simply as light on or off, delivered as glutamate and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide.

◦ Serotonin from the median raphe, non-photic.

◦ Neuropeptide Y from the intergeniculate leaflet, carrying behavioural arousal.

◦ Melatonin feedback at MT1 and MT2 receptors.

◦ Astrocytic glutamate, rhythmic, peaking at night.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Gamma-aminobutyric acid and AVP to the subparaventricular zone, dorsomedial hypothalamus and paraventricular nucleus.

◦ Diffusible factors: prokineticin 2, transforming growth factor alpha, cardiotrophin-like cytokine.

◦ A phase signal, expressed as circadian time in hours from 0 to 24, and a firing rate from 0 to 10 spikes per second.

• STATE.

◦ Clock phase in circadian hours.

◦ Period and Cryptochrome messenger RNA and protein levels.

◦ Membrane voltage and potassium conductance.

◦ Coupling strength across the population, 0 to 1.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Free-running period in humans, about 24.2 hours.

◦ Daytime firing rate 6 to 10 spikes per second, night-time below 1.

◦ Maximum single-pulse phase shift, about 1 to 2 hours.

◦ Population size, about 50 thousand neurons per side.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Action potential and synaptic events, milliseconds.

◦ Immediate early gene induction by light, 15 to 60 minutes.

◦ One turn of the transcription translation feedback loop, about 24 hours.

◦ Re-entrainment after a time-zone shift, about 1 hour of shift per day.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Mutations in the clock genes cause inherited sleep timing disorders: a change in PER2 causes familial advanced sleep phase syndrome, in which people fall asleep in the early evening, and a CRY1 variant causes delayed sleep phase disorder.

◦ Age and Alzheimer's disease reduce SCN neuron number and flatten the rhythm, producing the fragmented sleep and evening agitation known as sundowning.

◦ Shift work and jet lag desynchronise the SCN from peripheral organ clocks, with measurable metabolic and cardiovascular consequences.

◦ Total destruction abolishes all circadian rhythms while leaving total sleep amount roughly normal.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to advance a suprachiasmatic clock neuron minute by minute and to shift its phase when light arrives late in the subjective night.
Create a number variable called phase_hours with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called period_ratio with initial value 1.00833.
Create a number variable called step_hours with initial value 0.0167.
Create a number variable called light with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called shift with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called advance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called elapsed with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 1260 times.
    Calculate the sum of elapsed and step_hours.
    Set elapsed to the result.
    Set light to 0.
    Check if elapsed is greater than 20.
    If the result is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set light to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of light and 1.5.
    Set shift to the result.
    Calculate the product of shift and step_hours.
    Set shift to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of step_hours divided by period_ratio.
    Set advance to the result.
    Calculate the sum of phase_hours and advance.
    Set phase_hours to the result.
    Calculate the sum of phase_hours and shift.
    Set phase_hours to the result.
End the loop.
Display phase_hours to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

// JavaScript is chosen because this phase model has no dependencies and runs
// unchanged in any browser console or under Node, so anyone can check it.
const TAU_FREE = 24.2;          // hours, the measured human free-running period
const DT = 0.005;               // hours per step
const TWO_PI = 2 * Math.PI;

// Phase 0 is subjective dawn. Light in the subjective day does nothing (the
// dead zone), light in early subjective night delays, light late advances.
function prc(phase) {
  return phase > Math.PI ? -1.5 * Math.sin(2 * (phase - Math.PI)) : 0;
}

// Run the clock until its third subjective dawn, optionally with a light pulse.
function thirdDawn(pulseStart, pulseHours) {
  let phase = 0.0, t = 0.0;
  while (phase < 3 * TWO_PI) {
    const lit = (t >= pulseStart && t < pulseStart + pulseHours) ? 1 : 0;
    const drift = TWO_PI / TAU_FREE;                       // radians per hour
    const kick = lit * prc(phase % TWO_PI) * TWO_PI / 24;  // hours to radians
    phase += DT * (drift + kick);
    t += DT;
  }
  return t;
}

const control = thirdDawn(-1, 0);                 // no pulse at all
for (let hour = 0; hour < 24; hour += 3) {
  const shift = control - thirdDawn(hour, 1);     // positive means advanced
  console.log("1 h light pulse at hour " + hour +
              ": phase shift " + shift.toFixed(2) + " h");
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron whose defining computation is a loop of gene transcription rather than a flow of current, the only one that keeps perfect twenty-four-hour time alone in a dish in total darkness, and the only one whose surrounding astrocytes are full partners in the calculation rather than support staff.

CHAPTER 108. PREAUTONOMIC NEURONS OF THE PARAVENTRICULAR NUCLEUS (Organ-Command Setting Neuron) (NON-COG)

Somewhere above the roof of your mouth sits a cluster of cells no bigger than a grain of rice that decides, second by second, how hard your heart will beat.

The old name is a technical prefix joined to an address and would mean nothing to a newcomer.

Organ-Command names what the cell reaches, because its axons run all the way down to the sympathetic outflow columns of the thoracic spinal cord and, by collaterals, to the vagal motor cells of the medulla, so a single cell can touch both the accelerating and the braking side of the involuntary nervous system.

Setting names the work rather than commanding it, because the cell biases ongoing brainstem control of blood pressure, heart rate and gastric acid rather than issuing single orders.

Neuron marks it as a descending hypothalamic cell whose overactivity is a well-documented contributor to sustained high blood pressure and to heart failure.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A preautonomic neuron is a nerve cell that sits one step upstream of the body's automatic control wiring.

The word autonomic means the part of the nervous system that runs the body without conscious effort, such as heartbeat, sweating, blood vessel width and gut movement.

These particular cells live in the paraventricular nucleus, a nucleus being a tight cluster of nerve cell bodies with a shared job, and paraventricular meaning that it hugs the wall of a fluid-filled cavity in the brain called the third ventricle.

Their job is to take a running summary of the body's state and turn it into a command signal for the spinal cord and the brainstem.

When they fire faster, blood pressure rises, heart rate climbs, the kidney holds salt, brown fat burns energy as heat, and the liver releases sugar.

When they fall silent, the body coasts.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Each cell has a small, roughly oval body with three to six dendrites, dendrites being the branching antennae that collect incoming signals.

The dendritic tree is sparse and long rather than bushy, so a single cell samples a wide slab of tissue instead of listening intensely to one small spot.

One thin axon, the output cable, leaves the cell and often splits, sending one branch down to the spinal cord and another to the brainstem, so a single neuron can command two relay stations at once.

Many of these cells push their dendrites right up against the wall of the third ventricle and against blood vessels, which places them where chemical messages in the cerebrospinal fluid and the blood can reach them.

SIZE:

The cell body is small, about 10 to 15 micrometres across, which is why the population is called parvocellular, from the Latin for small cell.

A micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre, so about a hundred of these cell bodies laid in a row would span one millimetre.

The dendritic field spans roughly 200 to 400 micrometres.

The axon is the extreme dimension: in an adult human, a branch running from the hypothalamus to the lower thoracic spinal cord travels roughly 20 to 35 centimetres, making the output cable more than ten thousand times longer than the cell body is wide.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Spinally projecting preautonomic neurons, often abbreviated as sympathetic preautonomic neurons, reach the intermediolateral cell column of the spinal cord, the strip of tissue that houses the first relay of the fight-or-flight system.

• Medulla-projecting preautonomic neurons target the rostral ventrolateral medulla, a small brainstem region that acts as the body's blood pressure amplifier.

• Vagal preautonomic neurons target the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus and the nucleus ambiguus, which slow the heart and drive digestion.

• Dual-projecting neurons send collateral branches to both spinal cord and medulla, so one cell can act directly and indirectly on the same outflow.

• Peptide-defined subsets overlap these classes: some carry oxytocin, some vasopressin, some corticotropin-releasing hormone, some thyrotropin-releasing hormone.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They occupy the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, on both sides of the third ventricle, mainly in its parvocellular subdivisions.

Within that nucleus they concentrate in the dorsal cap, the ventromedial part and the posterior part, while the lateral magnocellular part is dominated by the large hormone-secreting cells instead.

Because their dendrites reach the ependymal lining of the third ventricle and the perivascular space around penetrating arterioles, these cells genuinely sit at an interface: the border between brain tissue, cerebrospinal fluid and blood.

Their axons cross a second interface, leaving the hypothalamus to end in the brainstem and in the thoracic and upper lumbar spinal cord.

NUMBER:

The two paraventricular nuclei together hold roughly 85 thousand neurons in the adult human.

Preautonomic cells are a minority of these, and the best available estimate places them at roughly 10 thousand to 15 thousand neurons across both sides.

Confidence is moderate at best, because the count is extrapolated from rodent tracing studies rather than from a direct human stereological census, and no unbiased human count of preautonomic subtypes exists.

Against a nervous system of about 86 billion neurons, this is on the order of 0.000015 percent, roughly one neuron in every seven million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

At rest the inside of the cell sits at about minus 60 millivolts relative to the outside, a millivolt being one thousandth of a volt.

Input resistance is high, often 0.5 to 1.5 gigaohms, which means even a tiny injected current shifts the voltage noticeably, so these cells are easy to push.

Their signature is a low-threshold spike carried by T-type calcium channels, protein pores that open only after the cell has been held unusually negative for a while.

The practical result is rebound firing: inhibit the cell, release the inhibition, and it fires a short burst rather than simply returning to baseline.

Spontaneous firing in vivo is slow and irregular, typically 0.5 to 5 spikes per second, and this low rate is set largely by a constant background of inhibition rather than by silence of excitation.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input arrives from the subfornical organ and the organum vasculosum, both blood-sampling sensors, and from the nucleus of the solitary tract, which relays gut, lung and blood pressure information.

Inhibitory input arrives from the surrounding hypothalamus, especially a shell of GABA-releasing cells that wraps the nucleus, GABA being gamma-aminobutyric acid, the brain's main calming chemical.

Outputs synapse onto sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the intermediolateral column, onto bulbospinal neurons of the rostral ventrolateral medulla, and onto vagal motor neurons.

A single preautonomic neuron receives on the order of one to three thousand synaptic contacts, a synapse being the junction where one neuron passes a chemical message to the next.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, under one micrometre in diameter for most of its length.

Antidromic latency measurements, which time how long a spike takes to travel backwards up the axon, give conduction velocities of roughly 0.4 to 1.5 metres per second.

That is walking pace, not the 60 metres per second of a large motor nerve, so a command from the hypothalamus needs a few hundred milliseconds to reach the lower spinal cord.

The axon branches sparsely along the way and forms terminal fields that are broad rather than pinpoint, so one cell influences a whole column of spinal targets.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The fast transmitter is glutamate, the brain's main excitatory chemical, packaged by the transporter VGLUT2.

Layered on top are peptides, which are short chains of amino acids that act more slowly and more diffusely: oxytocin, vasopressin, corticotropin-releasing hormone and thyrotropin-releasing hormone are all released from preautonomic terminals.

The peptide changes the meaning of the same spike train, so oxytocin released onto vagal neurons slows the heart while oxytocin released onto medullary sympathetic neurons after a heart attack speeds cardiac sympathetic drive.

Nitric oxide, a gas made inside the neuron by the enzyme neuronal nitric oxide synthase, acts as a local brake by strengthening GABA release onto the cell.

Angiotensin II, a blood-borne hormone of the salt and water system, excites these cells through the angiotensin type 1a receptor.

MYELINATION:

Most preautonomic axons are unmyelinated or only thinly myelinated, myelin being the fatty insulating wrap that speeds conduction.

This is a design choice, not a defect: autonomic commands operate on the timescale of seconds to minutes, so speed matters far less than the metabolic saving of leaving thousands of thin axons bare.

Where thin myelin does appear it is on the longest spinal branches, which is exactly where a modest speed gain is worth the cost.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Firing rates are low, so the spiking bill is small, but the peptide bill is large.

Making oxytocin, vasopressin or corticotropin-releasing hormone requires transcribing a gene, folding a precursor protein, cutting it into the active peptide inside vesicles, and shipping those vesicles up to 35 centimetres down the axon.

Axonal transport at roughly 50 to 400 millimetres per day means a vesicle made today may not arrive at the spinal terminal for one to seven days, so the cell must plan its supply chain far in advance.

Mitochondria, the cell's power plants, cluster densely at the terminals to fund transmitter release.

PLASTICITY:

These cells remodel themselves on a timescale of days when the body's demands change.

In sustained high blood pressure and in heart failure, inhibitory GABA input weakens, nitric oxide production falls, glutamate input strengthens, and the same cell fires several times faster for the same sensory input.

This is not damage, it is a gain change, and it is largely reversible if the underlying load is removed.

Chronic salt loading increases the number of glutamate synapses on preautonomic dendrites within a week.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here, astrocytes being star-shaped support cells, do something unusual: they physically retract their processes from neurons during dehydration and other sustained challenges.

Pulling back exposes the synapses to each other's spillover glutamate, so the whole nucleus becomes more excitable as a unit.

The same astrocytes carry the transporters that clear glutamate, so their retreat both raises excitation and slows its cleanup.

Microglia, the brain's resident immune cells, are unusually reactive in this nucleus during heart failure and hypertension, releasing inflammatory signals that further increase preautonomic firing.

Tanycytes, specialised ependymal cells lining the third ventricle, sit against the medial dendrites and regulate what passes from cerebrospinal fluid into the nucleus.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete these cells and the paraventricular nucleus becomes an endocrine gland with no nerve wiring.

The hormone-secreting magnocellular neurons would still pour oxytocin and vasopressin into the bloodstream, but the nucleus would lose its ability to act in seconds rather than minutes.

Blood pressure would drift, the fight-or-flight response would lose its hypothalamic accelerator, the reflex rise in heart rate on standing would be blunted, and stress would still raise cortisol while failing to raise sympathetic tone.

The region would keep its chemistry and lose its immediacy.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

These neurons release peptide from their dendrites, not only from their axon terminals, so a cell can chemically talk to its neighbours without firing a single spike.

Dendritically released oxytocin diffuses through the tissue and synchronises the surrounding population, a process called volume transmission because the message travels through the volume of tissue rather than along a wire.

Nitric oxide made in the cell escapes backwards across synapses as a retrograde messenger, telling the incoming GABA terminals to release more.

Back-propagating action potentials, meaning spikes that travel backwards from the cell body into the dendrites, trigger the calcium entry that drives that dendritic release.

The cells also gate local blood flow, and their sustained activation drives astrocytes into a reactive state that changes the whole nucleus.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate drive from the nucleus of the solitary tract encoding arterial baroreceptor error, 0 to 100 hertz; glutamate drive from the subfornical organ encoding plasma sodium and angiotensin II, 0 to 40 hertz; tonic GABA conductance from the perinuclear shell, 0.5 to 5 nanosiemens; circulating angiotensin II, 5 to 100 picomolar; circulating leptin and insulin as slow gain terms.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate plus peptide onto sympathetic preganglionic neurons of the intermediolateral column, onto bulbospinal neurons of the rostral ventrolateral medulla, and onto vagal motor neurons; spike output 0 to 20 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage; T-type calcium channel inactivation variable; intracellular calcium; releasable peptide pool; nitric oxide concentration; synaptic gain scalar.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential minus 60 millivolts; spike threshold minus 45 millivolts; input resistance 0.5 to 1.5 gigaohms; membrane capacitance 15 to 30 picofarads; conduction velocity 0.4 to 1.5 metres per second; baseline rate 0.5 to 5 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds; T-type calcium de-inactivation 100 to 300 milliseconds; peptide release and clearance 10 to 120 seconds; nitric oxide signalling 1 to 10 seconds; synaptic gain remodelling 1 to 14 days.

• FAILURE MODE: in chronic heart failure and in hypertension the GABA brake and the nitric oxide brake both weaken, the gain scalar climbs, and the cells fire tonically fast, producing sustained sympathetic overdrive, salt retention and arrhythmia; loss of the vagal branch removes the heart-slowing arm and raises resting heart rate.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert baroreceptor feedback, blood-borne angiotensin signal and local nitric oxide brake into a sympathetic drive rate for one preautonomic paraventricular neuron.
Create a number variable called baseline_rate with initial value 2.
Create a number variable called gaba_brake with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called nitric_oxide with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called gain_scalar with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called drive_trace with initial value empty list.
For each sample in sensor_stream, perform the following operations.
    Set gaba_brake to the product of nitric_oxide and the baro pressure error of sample.
    Check if gaba_brake is greater than 3.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set gaba_brake to 3.
    End the conditional block.
    Set firing_rate to the product of baseline_rate and gain_scalar.
    Set firing_rate to the sum of firing_rate and the angiotensin drive of sample.
    Set firing_rate to the difference of firing_rate and gaba_brake.
    Check if firing_rate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if both the chronic load of sample is true and gain_scalar is less than 3.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set gain_scalar to the sum of gain_scalar and 0.001.
        Set nitric_oxide to the product of nitric_oxide and 0.999.
    End the conditional block.
    Add firing_rate to the end of drive_trace.
    Display firing_rate to the console.
End the loop.
Return drive_trace to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the model is a slow-timescale control loop with
# state that drifts over days, and readability matters more than speed here.

def preautonomic_pvn(samples, dt=0.1):
    baseline_rate = 2.0      # spikes per second with no drive
    gain_scalar = 1.0        # synaptic gain, climbs under chronic load
    no_tone = 1.0            # nitric oxide brake strength, 1.0 is healthy
    trace = []
    for s in samples:
        # GABA brake is driven by baroreceptor error and scaled by NO tone.
        gaba_brake = min(no_tone * s["baro_error"], 3.0)
        rate = baseline_rate * gain_scalar
        rate += s["angiotensin"]          # blood-borne excitation, Hz
        rate -= gaba_brake                # inhibitory shell, Hz
        rate = max(0.0, min(rate, 20.0))  # cells saturate near 20 Hz
        # Chronic load (heart failure, salt) slowly raises gain, lowers NO.
        if s["chronic_load"]:
            gain_scalar = min(gain_scalar + 0.001 * dt, 3.0)
            no_tone = max(no_tone * (1.0 - 0.001 * dt), 0.2)
        trace.append(rate)
    return trace, gain_scalar, no_tone

if __name__ == "__main__":
    healthy = [{"baro_error": 1.0, "angiotensin": 0.5,
                "chronic_load": False}] * 100
    failing = [{"baro_error": 1.0, "angiotensin": 2.5,
                "chronic_load": True}] * 100000
    h, _, _ = preautonomic_pvn(healthy)
    f, g, n = preautonomic_pvn(failing)
    print("healthy steady rate: %.2f Hz" % h[-1])
    print("failing steady rate: %.2f Hz, gain %.2f, NO tone %.2f" %
          (f[-1], g, n))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only small cell in the brain that can hold a thin, slow, unmyelinated cable 30 centimetres long down to the spinal cord, release a hormone from its dendrites into its own neighbourhood while doing so, and rebound into a burst the instant you stop inhibiting it.

CHAPTER 109. OREXIGENIC AND THERMOREGULATORY NEURONS OF THE PREOPTIC AREA, INCLUDING WARM-SENSITIVE AND COLD-SENSITIVE CELLS (Body-Heat Thermostat Neuron) (NON-COG)

Warm a single cubic millimetre of this tissue by one degree and the whole body begins to sweat, even in a freezing room.

The existing label is a committee minute stringing together two functions, a region and two cell classes in one unspeakable line.

Body-Heat names the quantity regulated, which is core temperature rather than skin temperature.

Thermostat names the mechanism exactly, because the population contains a warm-sensing majority of about thirty percent that speeds up as blood temperature rises and drives sweating and skin vessel dilation, and a cold-sensing minority of about ten percent that drives shivering and brown fat heat production, the two arms working against each other around a set value.

Neuron marks it as the cell in which fever is this thermostat deliberately turned up, since prostaglandin released during infection silences the warm-sensing cells, so the body defends a higher number and the patient feels cold.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These neurons are the body's thermostat and part of its appetite switchboard, packed into a sheet of tissue just in front of and above the crossing of the optic nerves.

Orexigenic means appetite-promoting, from the Greek word for appetite, and thermoregulatory means temperature-controlling.

A warm-sensitive neuron is a cell whose own firing rate rises when the tissue around it gets warmer, so it is a thermometer and a controller in the same object.

A cold-sensitive neuron does the opposite, firing faster as the tissue cools, although most cold-sensitive cells achieve this indirectly by receiving inhibition from a nearby warm-sensitive cell rather than by sensing temperature themselves.

Together they compare the body's actual temperature with a target, and dispatch commands that shiver you, sweat you, redirect blood to or from the skin, burn brown fat, and change how much you want to eat.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cells are small and unremarkable to look at, with an oval or triangular body and four to seven modestly branched dendrites.

Warm-sensitive cells characteristically extend their dendrites in a flattened plane parallel to the wall of the third ventricle, so they sample a sheet of tissue rather than a sphere.

The absence of dramatic morphology is itself informative: the thermometer lives in the membrane channels, not in the shape.

Axons are thin and mostly local or short-range, running caudally into the dorsomedial hypothalamus and downward into the brainstem.

SIZE:

Cell bodies measure roughly 10 to 20 micrometres across, with warm-sensitive cells clustering at the smaller end.

Dendritic fields span about 150 to 350 micrometres in the plane parallel to the ventricle, and only 50 to 100 micrometres perpendicular to it.

Membrane capacitance, the electrical measure of surface area, is about 15 to 40 picofarads.

The longest axons, those reaching the rostral raphe pallidus in the brainstem, run roughly 3 to 5 centimetres in an adult human.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Warm-sensitive neurons, defined by a firing rate that rises by at least 0.8 spikes per second for every degree Celsius of local warming; these are about a quarter to a third of preoptic neurons tested.

• Temperature-insensitive neurons, the majority, which supply steady reference input against which the warm-sensitive rate is compared.

• Cold-sensitive neurons, a small minority of roughly 5 percent, most of which are silent partners inhibited by warm-sensitive neighbours.

• Prostaglandin EP3 receptor-expressing neurons, which are GABA-releasing and hold a constant brake on the fever pathways; prostaglandin E2 switches this brake off.

• Peptide-defined warm-responsive populations carrying pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, or the peptide QRFP.

• Galanin-expressing and leptin-receptor-expressing preoptic neurons, which link temperature control to feeding and to torpor-like energy saving.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They occupy the preoptic area of the hypothalamus, specifically the median preoptic nucleus which straddles the midline at the front wall of the third ventricle, the medial preoptic area on either side of it, the ventromedial preoptic nucleus, and the neighbouring anterior hypothalamic nucleus.

The median preoptic nucleus is an interface structure in the strictest sense: it lies in the lamina terminalis, the thin front wall of the third ventricle, sandwiched between two leaky blood-sampling organs, the subfornical organ above and the organum vasculosum below.

That position lets it read blood chemistry through its neighbours while sitting safely behind the blood-brain barrier itself.

Their axons reach the dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus and the rostral raphe pallidus of the medulla.

NUMBER:

The preoptic area of one human hypothalamus contains on the order of 200 thousand to 500 thousand neurons, and both sides together perhaps 400 thousand to 1 million.

Applying the measured fraction of thermally classified cells, warm-sensitive neurons number roughly 100 thousand to 250 thousand and cold-sensitive neurons roughly 20 thousand to 50 thousand across both sides.

Confidence is low, because these figures combine a rough human volume estimate with electrophysiological proportions measured in rodents, and no direct human count of thermosensitive neurons exists.

The honest bound is that the thermoregulatory population is certainly larger than ten thousand and certainly smaller than one million.

Against 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system, this is about 0.0002 percent.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Warm-sensitive neurons fire spontaneously without any input, typically 2 to 10 spikes per second at normal body temperature.

Between spikes the membrane does not sit flat; it climbs steadily upward in a depolarising prepotential, and the slope of that climb sets the firing rate.

Warming speeds the climb, so the next spike arrives sooner, which is the entire mechanism of thermosensitivity in its simplest form.

The climb is shaped by a potassium current that switches off with warmth and by warmth-gated channels including TRPM2, a channel protein that opens above about 37 degrees Celsius.

The formal criterion for calling a cell warm-sensitive is a regression coefficient of at least 0.8 spikes per second per degree Celsius, and strong examples reach 2 to 5 spikes per second per degree.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Skin temperature reaches these cells by a well-mapped relay: skin thermoreceptors to the spinal dorsal horn, then to the lateral parabrachial nucleus of the pons, then to the median preoptic nucleus.

Blood-borne signals arrive from the organum vasculosum and subfornical organ next door, and from local production of prostaglandin D2 and prostaglandin E2 in the surrounding membranes.

Outputs are mostly inhibitory: preoptic neurons release GABA onto the dorsomedial hypothalamus and the rostral raphe pallidus, holding the heat-generating machinery switched off by default.

Warm-responsive glutamate-releasing populations project onward to drive heat loss actively.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin, generally 0.2 to 1 micrometre across, and branch heavily near their targets.

Conduction velocity is slow, roughly 0.3 to 2 metres per second.

A single warm-sensitive neuron typically contacts both the dorsomedial hypothalamus and the raphe, so one cell can release the brake on brown fat burning and on skin blood vessel constriction together.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The fever-relevant EP3 receptor population releases GABA, so its constant firing is a constant inhibition.

Warm-responsive projection neurons are largely glutamatergic, using VGLUT2.

Peptide co-transmitters include pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, QRFP, galanin, neurotensin and cholecystokinin.

The prostaglandins are not classical transmitters but local lipid messengers: prostaglandin E2, made in the membranes around brain blood vessels during infection, binds the EP3 receptor and silences the GABA brake, which is exactly how a fever starts.

Leptin, the hormone released by fat tissue, and the appetite peptides of the melanocortin system act on the orexigenic subsets, linking body fat stores to both feeding and heat production.

MYELINATION:

These axons are almost entirely unmyelinated, and the few myelinated fibres are the longest descending ones.

That is appropriate for the physics of the job: body temperature changes over minutes, so a conduction delay of tens of milliseconds is irrelevant.

The absence of myelin also means oligodendrocytes, the myelin-making cells, play little role here, and the local white matter is sparse.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Constant pacemaking is expensive because the sodium-potassium pump must run continuously to reset the ion gradients after every spike.

At 5 spikes per second, a warm-sensitive neuron fires over 400 thousand times a day and never rests.

The cell is also physically warmed by its own neighbourhood's blood flow, and it must keep sensing accurately across the narrow 35 to 41 degree Celsius range that matters, which requires stable enzyme and channel function at exactly the temperature it is measuring.

PLASTICITY:

The set point itself is adjustable, which is unusual for a sensor.

Fever is a deliberate upward reset of the target, achieved chemically rather than by rewiring.

Heat acclimatisation over one to two weeks shifts the threshold for sweating downward, and cold acclimatisation strengthens the brown fat pathway.

In pregnancy and across the menstrual cycle, progesterone raises the set point by a few tenths of a degree, which is why basal body temperature tracks ovulation.

Long-term synaptic strengthening also occurs on the skin-temperature input pathway, letting the system learn typical environmental patterns.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here do something they do almost nowhere else: they are themselves the main source of prostaglandin D2 in this region, and their production rises with temperature.

That makes the local glia part of the sensor, not merely its support staff.

The meninges and blood vessel walls overlying the preoptic area contain the enzymes cyclooxygenase-2 and microsomal prostaglandin E synthase, which manufacture the prostaglandin E2 of fever on demand when immune signals arrive from the blood.

Microglia in this region respond quickly to circulating inflammatory signals, amplifying the fever message.

Tanycytes lining the nearby third ventricle control the passage of leptin and other hormones from blood into this tissue.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the preoptic area becomes a sleep centre and a reproductive centre with no thermostat.

The region would still initiate non-rapid-eye-movement sleep and still house the sexually dimorphic nucleus, but the body would become effectively cold-blooded, drifting with ambient temperature.

There would be no fever during infection, no sweating in heat, no shivering in cold, and no seasonal or circadian temperature rhythm.

The flavour lost is homeostatic anticipation: the ability to act on a temperature change before it becomes dangerous.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The pacemaker mechanism means these cells compute a temperature reading in the slope of a subthreshold voltage ramp, before any spike exists, so the computation is analogue and continuous rather than digital.

They are directly modulated by lipid messengers made outside the neuron by glia and by vascular cells, which is a form of chemical computation performed by the tissue rather than the cell.

Warm-sensitive neurons release GABA tonically, meaning their default output is a brake, so the system computes by disinhibition: heat generation is produced by removing inhibition, not by adding excitation.

They participate in volume transmission through prostaglandins and peptides, and their activity shapes local blood flow, which in turn changes local temperature, creating a genuine physical feedback loop between the neuron and the tissue it measures.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: local tissue temperature, 33 to 42 degrees Celsius; skin temperature signal via the lateral parabrachial nucleus, 0 to 50 hertz; prostaglandin E2 concentration, 0 to 50 nanomolar; prostaglandin D2 from astrocytes; leptin, 1 to 50 nanograms per millilitre; glutamate and GABA synaptic input.

• OUTPUTS: tonic GABA onto the dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus and the rostral raphe pallidus; glutamate onto heat-loss effector pathways; spike rate 0 to 30 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage; prepotential slope; potassium conductance; TRPM2 open fraction; current set point in degrees Celsius; acclimatisation offset.

• PARAMETERS: thermosensitivity coefficient 0.8 to 5.0 spikes per second per degree Celsius; baseline rate at 37 degrees, 2 to 10 hertz; set point 36.8 degrees Celsius with a circadian swing of about 0.5 degrees; EP3 receptor sensitivity, half-maximal effect near 10 nanomolar prostaglandin E2.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 40 milliseconds; prepotential ramp 100 to 500 milliseconds; prostaglandin action 30 seconds to 10 minutes; whole-body thermal response 5 to 60 minutes; acclimatisation 7 to 14 days.

• FAILURE MODE: runaway loss of the brake gives fever and, in extreme form, malignant hyperthermia or heat stroke; loss of the cells gives poikilothermia, meaning body temperature drifts with the environment, as seen after hypothalamic surgery, stroke or Wernicke encephalopathy; blunted thermosensitivity in old age is a major reason elderly people die in heat waves.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the firing rate of one warm-sensitive preoptic neuron from local temperature and to release its inhibitory brake on heat generation when the body is too warm.
Create a number variable called set_point with initial value 36.8.
Create a number variable called thermosensitivity with initial value 1.6.
Create a number variable called baseline_rate with initial value 5.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called brake_strength with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called heat_production with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called temperature_log with initial value empty list.
For each sample in thermal_stream, perform the following operations.
    Set set_point to the sum of 36.8 and the prostaglandin shift of sample.
    Set firing_rate to the difference of the core temperature of sample and set_point.
    Set firing_rate to the product of firing_rate and thermosensitivity.
    Set firing_rate to the sum of firing_rate and baseline_rate.
    Set firing_rate to the sum of firing_rate and the skin warm signal of sample.
    Check if firing_rate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set brake_strength to the quotient of firing_rate divided by 20.
    Check if brake_strength is greater than 1.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set brake_strength to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set heat_production to the difference of 1 and brake_strength.
    Add heat_production to the end of temperature_log.
    Display heat_production to the console.
End the loop.
Return temperature_log to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the core idea is a simple linear sensor feeding a
# disinhibition stage, and NumPy-free arithmetic keeps the logic visible.

def warm_sensitive_neuron(core_temp, skin_warm, pge2_nM,
                          set_point=36.8, coeff=1.6, base=5.0):
    """Return (firing_rate_Hz, brake_0to1, heat_drive_0to1)."""
    # Prostaglandin E2 silences the GABA brake by raising the set point.
    # Half-maximal shift near 10 nM, saturating at about +2.5 degrees C.
    shift = 2.5 * pge2_nM / (10.0 + pge2_nM)
    effective_set_point = set_point + shift
    rate = base + coeff * (core_temp - effective_set_point) + skin_warm
    rate = max(0.0, min(rate, 30.0))     # cells saturate near 30 Hz
    brake = min(rate / 20.0, 1.0)        # tonic GABA onto DMH and rRPa
    heat_drive = 1.0 - brake             # brown fat and vasoconstriction
    return rate, brake, heat_drive

if __name__ == "__main__":
    cases = [("cold room, healthy", 36.4, 0.0, 0.0),
             ("hot room, healthy",  37.6, 3.0, 0.0),
             ("infection, 37.0 C",  37.0, 0.0, 20.0)]
    for label, t, skin, pge2 in cases:
        r, b, h = warm_sensitive_neuron(t, skin, pge2)
        print("%-20s rate %5.2f Hz  brake %.2f  heat drive %.2f"
              % (label, r, b, h))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron in the body reads its own temperature in the slope of the voltage ramp between two spikes, holds the furnace switched off by firing rather than by falling silent, and can have its target value moved by two degrees in twenty minutes by a fat molecule made in the wall of a nearby blood vessel.

CHAPTER 110. MAMMILLARY BODY NEURONS (Memory-Circuit Relay Neuron) (COG)

Two pea-sized bumps on the underside of the brain, so distinct that anatomists named them after breasts, are the reason a bottle of vodka a day can erase the ability to form new memories.

The old name is an address borrowed from a shape resemblance to small breasts and says nothing about function.

Memory-Circuit names the stake, since destroying these cells or cutting their single output tract produces a lasting amnesia, and their shrinkage is the classic finding in Korsakoff syndrome after thiamine deficiency.

Relay names the position, because these cells receive the output of the hippocampal formation through the fornix and pass it up the mammillothalamic tract to the anterior thalamus, forming one link of the loop that carries autobiographical memory.

Neuron marks it as a cell that is not a passive wire, since a large proportion of its spikes lock to the hippocampal theta rhythm and its firing tracks running speed and head-turning speed.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The mammillary bodies are a pair of small round nuclei at the back floor of the hypothalamus, and their neurons are relay and rhythm cells for memory.

They receive an enormous bundle of fibres from the hippocampus, the seahorse-shaped structure that builds new memories, and they pass that information onward to the thalamus, the brain's central switchboard.

Calling them a relay undersells them, because they do not simply copy their input.

They impose a rhythm on it, they sharpen the sense of which direction the head is facing, and they hold information across the seconds-long gap between seeing something and needing to act on it.

WHAT THEY DO NOT DO, despite their location, is any hormonal or autonomic work; they are a cognitive island inside an otherwise visceral hypothalamus.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The neurons are packed densely and evenly, with round or oval cell bodies and four to eight dendrites radiating outward like a starburst.

Dendrites are largely smooth, meaning they carry few of the small mushroom-shaped spines that most excitatory neurons use to receive contacts, so incoming fibres synapse directly onto the dendritic shaft.

The defining structural feature is the axon, which leaves the cell body and almost immediately splits in two: one branch turns upward as the mammillothalamic tract, and the other turns backward and downward as the mammillotegmental tract.

Both branches carry the same spike train, so every mammillary neuron speaks to the thalamus and the brainstem simultaneously and identically.

SIZE:

Cell bodies range from about 12 to 25 micrometres across, with medial mammillary neurons at the smaller end and lateral mammillary neurons somewhat larger.

Dendritic fields span 200 to 400 micrometres, and because packing density is high, neighbouring dendritic trees overlap heavily.

The mammillothalamic tract branch runs roughly 1 to 2 centimetres in an adult human to reach the anterior thalamic nuclei.

The whole mammillary body is only about 4 to 5 millimetres in diameter, small enough that its shrinkage on a magnetic resonance imaging scan is a recognised radiological sign.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Medial mammillary nucleus neurons, the large majority, which project to the anteromedial and anteroventral thalamic nuclei and carry theta-rhythm and spatial-context information.

• Lateral mammillary nucleus neurons, a small minority, which project to the anterodorsal thalamic nucleus and carry head direction information, meaning a signal that reports which compass bearing the head is pointing.

• Within the medial nucleus, calbindin-expressing neurons and parvalbumin-expressing neurons occupy complementary territories and form segregated subcircuits; work published in 2025 showed that activating the calbindin cells, but not the parvalbumin cells, produces place aversion and increased movement.

• A pars medialis and pars lateralis division of the medial nucleus maps onto the front-to-back topography of its subicular input, so position along the hippocampus is preserved as position within the mammillary body.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The mammillary bodies sit in the posterior hypothalamus, on the ventral surface of the brain, immediately behind the tuber cinereum and immediately in front of the interpeduncular fossa between the two cerebral peduncles.

The two nuclei are the medial mammillary nucleus and the lateral mammillary nucleus, with a small intercalated nucleus between them.

They are an interface structure by definition: they mark the junction of the hypothalamus with the limbic memory system, receiving the fornix, which is the great fibre bundle leaving the hippocampus, and feeding the anterior thalamus.

They also sit at the interface between forebrain and midbrain, since the mammillotegmental tract runs straight into the ventral and dorsal tegmental nuclei of Gudden in the brainstem.

NUMBER:

The two mammillary bodies together hold about 800 thousand neurons in the adult human.

The medial mammillary nucleus accounts for the great majority, roughly 600 thousand to 750 thousand, with the lateral mammillary nucleus holding perhaps 40 thousand to 80 thousand.

Confidence in the total is moderate, since the mammillary bodies are among the few hypothalamic structures with published human stereological cell counts; confidence in the medial-to-lateral split is lower and is inferred from relative volumes.

This is roughly 8 percent of all hypothalamic neurons and about 0.0009 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

In Korsakoff syndrome the medial mammillary nucleus loses a substantial fraction of these neurons and shrinks visibly.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Almost every neuron in the medial mammillary nucleus modulates its firing at theta frequency, meaning it rides a 4 to 12 hertz oscillation generated in the hippocampal system.

In an awake, moving animal, firing rates are high for a hypothalamic cell, commonly 10 to 40 spikes per second, and they climb during exploration.

The cells show a prominent hyperpolarisation-activated current, a slow inward current that switches on when the cell is pushed negative and pulls it back up, which makes them natural rhythm followers and gives them a strong rebound after inhibition.

Resting potential is around minus 60 to minus 65 millivolts and spikes are brief, under one millisecond at half height, consistent with fast, reliable relay.

Lateral mammillary neurons additionally show firing that depends on angular head velocity, meaning how fast the head is turning.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The dominant input is the postcommissural fornix, an excitatory glutamate pathway from the subiculum, which is the output gate of the hippocampus.

A second major input is inhibitory and comes from the ventral and dorsal tegmental nuclei of Gudden in the brainstem, forming a closed loop, since mammillary axons run back down to those same nuclei.

Outputs go to the anterior thalamic nuclei via the mammillothalamic tract and back to Gudden's nuclei via the mammillotegmental tract.

There are essentially no long-range outputs to anywhere else, which is remarkable: this is a structure with one great input and two destinations.

Within the nucleus, local inhibitory interneurons are sparse, so most inhibition arrives from outside.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The mammillothalamic tract, also called the bundle of Vicq d'Azyr, is a compact, heavily myelinated white matter bundle visible to the naked eye in a dissected brain.

Individual axons are 1 to 3 micrometres in diameter with myelin, giving conduction velocities of roughly 5 to 20 metres per second.

The collateral to the tegmentum is thinner and slower.

Because the branch point is close to the cell body, the two targets receive spikes within a few milliseconds of each other, effectively simultaneously.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Mammillary body neurons are glutamatergic, releasing glutamate, the brain's main excitatory chemical, at both of their targets.

They express the vesicular glutamate transporter VGLUT2.

The two main molecular subtypes are marked by calcium-binding proteins, calbindin and parvalbumin, which buffer calcium inside the cell and are used by scientists as labels rather than being transmitters themselves.

The inhibitory input from Gudden's nuclei uses GABA.

Cholinergic and histaminergic fibres, meaning fibres releasing acetylcholine and histamine, arrive from the brainstem and posterior hypothalamus and set the overall arousal gain.

MYELINATION:

This is one of the most heavily myelinated outputs in the entire hypothalamus, in sharp contrast to almost every other cell type in the region.

Oligodendrocytes, the cells that wrap axons in myelin, are abundant along the mammillothalamic tract.

The reason is timing: a head direction signal or a theta phase code is only useful if it arrives at the thalamus with millisecond precision, so the mammillary bodies pay for speed where the rest of the hypothalamus does not.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

These cells are the most metabolically vulnerable neurons in the hypothalamus and possibly one of the most vulnerable populations in the brain.

Sustained firing at 20 to 40 spikes per second requires continuous oxidative metabolism, and the key enzymes involved, including transketolase and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, all require thiamine, which is vitamin B1, as a helper molecule.

The human body stores only about two to three weeks of thiamine.

When thiamine runs out, in chronic alcohol misuse, prolonged vomiting, bariatric surgery or starvation, the mammillary bodies are among the very first structures to develop visible haemorrhagic damage, precisely because their energy demand is so high and so constant.

PLASTICITY:

Synapses from the subiculum onto mammillary neurons can be strengthened and weakened in the ordinary way, and theta-patterned stimulation is particularly effective at strengthening them, which fits their rhythm.

The structure is not, however, a major site of experience-dependent rewiring in adulthood; it behaves more like a precisely tuned instrument than a learning surface.

Recovery after damage is poor, and the mammillothalamic tract shows little capacity to regrow, which is why Korsakoff amnesia is usually permanent.

Mammillary neurons also atrophy in a graded way after loss of their hippocampal input, so upstream damage causes downstream shrinkage over months.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here are unusually rich in thiamine-dependent transketolase and in the thiamine transporter, and in thiamine deficiency it is the astrocytes that fail first, losing their glutamate transporters.

That failure lets glutamate accumulate outside the neurons and kill them by overexcitation, so the glia are the proximate cause of death, not merely bystanders.

The mammillary bodies also have an exceptionally dense capillary network, and it is the endothelium of those capillaries that breaks down to produce the small haemorrhages that pathologists find at autopsy in Wernicke encephalopathy.

Oligodendrocytes are abundant, as noted, and their myelin is also thiamine-sensitive.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these neurons and the hypothalamus loses its only cognitive voice.

The rest of the hypothalamus would still run temperature, hunger, thirst, hormones and sleep, and none of that would change.

What would vanish is the ability to lay down new episodic memories, meaning memories of specific events with a time and place attached, and the ability to keep a stable internal compass while navigating.

The affected person can still hold a conversation, still knows who they are, still remembers their childhood, and yet cannot remember the conversation five minutes later.

The mammillary bodies give the hypothalamus a role in the story of a life rather than only in the maintenance of a body.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

These cells do phase coding, meaning the information is carried not only in how fast they fire but in exactly when in the theta cycle they fire, so the same rate can mean different things at different phases.

Axon collateralisation is itself a computation: by broadcasting an identical spike train to the thalamus and to a brainstem nucleus that inhibits it back, the cell builds a delayed negative feedback loop that helps generate the rhythm it is riding.

Work published in 2025 shows the two molecular subtypes participate in different temporal windows of working memory maintenance, so the population divides labour in time.

They are strongly modulated by arousal transmitters, which effectively multiplies their gain according to how awake the animal is.

Their unusual dependence on thiamine also means their transcriptional and metabolic state, not just their wiring, is functionally load-bearing.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from the subiculum via the postcommissural fornix, 0 to 60 hertz, carrying spatial and contextual information with theta phase; GABA from the ventral and dorsal tegmental nuclei of Gudden, 0 to 40 hertz; angular head velocity signal to the lateral nucleus; acetylcholine and histamine as arousal gain terms; thiamine availability as a metabolic scalar from 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate to the anteromedial, anteroventral and anterodorsal thalamic nuclei via the mammillothalamic tract; glutamate to Gudden's tegmental nuclei via the mammillotegmental tract; spike output 0 to 60 hertz, theta phase locked.

• STATE: membrane voltage; hyperpolarisation-activated current activation; theta phase estimate in radians; head direction estimate in degrees; working memory content held over seconds; thiamine-dependent energy reserve.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential minus 62 millivolts; spike width under 1 millisecond; baseline rate 10 to 40 hertz awake; theta frequency 4 to 12 hertz; conduction velocity 5 to 20 metres per second; population 800 thousand across both bodies.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; hyperpolarisation-activated current 100 to 400 milliseconds; theta cycle 80 to 250 milliseconds; working memory maintenance 2 to 20 seconds; thiamine depletion 14 to 21 days.

• FAILURE MODE: thiamine depletion causes Wernicke encephalopathy, with confusion, eye movement paralysis and unsteady gait, progressing to Korsakoff syndrome with dense anterograde amnesia and confabulation; fornix or mammillothalamic tract section produces the same memory failure without the metabolic crisis; lateral nucleus loss degrades the head direction compass and causes disorientation.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to relay hippocampal input to the anterior thalamus while locking the output to the theta rhythm and while tracking the thiamine reserve that keeps the cell alive.
Create a number variable called theta_phase with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called theta_step with initial value 0.4.
Create a number variable called preferred_phase with initial value 1.6.
Create a number variable called thiamine_reserve with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called phase_gate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called thalamic_output with initial value empty list.
For each sample in subicular_stream, perform the following operations.
    Set theta_phase to the sum of theta_phase and theta_step.
    Check if theta_phase is greater than 6.28.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set theta_phase to the difference of theta_phase and 6.28.
    End the conditional block.
    Set phase_gate to the difference of theta_phase and preferred_phase.
    Check if phase_gate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set phase_gate to the product of phase_gate and -1.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if phase_gate is less than 1.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to the product of the subicular drive of sample and thiamine_reserve.
        Set firing_rate to the difference of firing_rate and the gudden inhibition of sample.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if firing_rate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set thiamine_reserve to the difference of thiamine_reserve and the thiamine drain of sample.
    Check if thiamine_reserve is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set thiamine_reserve to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Add firing_rate to the end of thalamic_output.
End the loop.
Return thalamic_output to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the essential behaviour is phase-gated relay plus a
# slowly draining metabolic reserve, both of which read clearly as plain loops.

import math

def mammillary_neuron(steps, subicular_drive, gudden_inhib,
                      thiamine_drain=0.0, theta_hz=8.0, dt=0.005):
    """Relay subicular drive to thalamus, gated by theta phase."""
    phase = 0.0
    preferred = 1.6          # radians; cell prefers a fixed theta phase
    reserve = 1.0            # thiamine-dependent energy reserve, 1.0 = full
    out = []
    for _ in range(steps):
        phase = (phase + 2 * math.pi * theta_hz * dt) % (2 * math.pi)
        # von Mises style phase gate: sharp preference for one theta phase.
        gate = math.exp(2.0 * math.cos(phase - preferred) - 2.0)
        rate = subicular_drive * reserve * gate - gudden_inhib
        rate = max(0.0, min(rate, 60.0))
        reserve = max(0.0, reserve - thiamine_drain * dt)
        out.append(rate)
    return out, reserve

if __name__ == "__main__":
    healthy, r1 = mammillary_neuron(2000, 40.0, 5.0, thiamine_drain=0.0)
    starved, r2 = mammillary_neuron(2000, 40.0, 5.0, thiamine_drain=0.09)
    print("healthy peak %.1f Hz, mean %.1f Hz, reserve %.2f"
          % (max(healthy), sum(healthy) / len(healthy), r1))
    print("starved peak %.1f Hz, mean %.1f Hz, reserve %.2f"
          % (max(starved), sum(starved) / len(starved), r2))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron in the hypothalamus that fires in time with the hippocampal theta rhythm, sends one identical heavily myelinated message to both the thalamus and the midbrain, cares nothing for hormones or body temperature, and will die within three weeks of a vitamin running out.

CHAPTER 111. BLOOD-SAMPLING THIRST NEURON (NON-COG) (PUC)

There is a small window in the wall of your brain where the blood-brain barrier simply does not exist, and a few thousand naked neurons lean out of it and taste your blood directly.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a Previously Unnamed Construct, meaning a functional cell type that the scientific literature describes in pieces under several different labels but has never named as one thing.

We name it here as the blood-sampling thirst neuron: an excitatory neuron that sits inside a circumventricular organ, meaning a small region of brain where the usual protective barrier between blood and brain tissue is deliberately absent, and whose job is to measure how salty and how depleted your blood is and turn that measurement into the conscious feeling of thirst.

The blood-brain barrier is a tight seal made of blood vessel walls that keeps most blood-borne molecules out of brain tissue; without it, brain function would be at the mercy of every meal.

These particular neurons trade that protection for information.

They are the reason you feel thirsty within about a minute of eating something salty, long before the salt could possibly have changed the water content of your cells.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is small and round or fusiform, meaning spindle-shaped, with two to five sparse dendrites.

The morphological signature is the relationship with blood vessels: dendrites and cell bodies press directly against a wide, leaky perivascular space, the fluid-filled sleeve around a capillary, so plasma-derived fluid bathes the membrane.

Some cells extend a short process to the ventricular surface, sampling cerebrospinal fluid as well as blood.

The cells sit in a dense, glia-rich neuropil with unusually little myelin, so the tissue looks pale and grainy under the microscope compared with surrounding brain.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are among the smallest in the hypothalamic region, roughly 8 to 15 micrometres across.

Dendritic fields are short, typically 50 to 150 micrometres, because the whole organ they live in is only about 0.5 to 1.5 millimetres across in a human.

Axons are correspondingly short, running 2 to 12 millimetres to their targets in the median preoptic nucleus, the supraoptic nucleus and the paraventricular nucleus.

Membrane capacitance is low, around 8 to 20 picofarads, which is part of why a small current changes their firing so much.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Subfornical organ excitatory neurons expressing the angiotensin type 1a receptor, which drive water drinking; these mostly also express neuronal nitric oxide synthase.

• Subfornical organ excitatory neurons of a separate population that drive salt appetite rather than water appetite; the two populations are anatomically intermingled but functionally opposite.

• Subfornical organ inhibitory neurons, which release GABA and actively suppress thirst when the body is already well hydrated.

• Organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis neurons, which are the most strongly intrinsically osmosensitive of the group, meaning they detect saltiness in their own membrane rather than being told about it.

• Median preoptic nucleus integrator neurons, which are behind the barrier and combine the two sensor readings with signals from the mouth and gut.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The population is distributed across the lamina terminalis, the thin front wall of the third ventricle, in three linked structures.

The subfornical organ sits at the roof of the third ventricle just beneath the fornix, at the level of the interventricular foramen.

The organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis sits at the bottom of the same wall, just above the optic chiasm.

The median preoptic nucleus lies between them.

This is an interface in the most literal anatomical sense: the subfornical organ and organum vasculosum straddle the boundary between the bloodstream, the cerebrospinal fluid of the third ventricle, and the protected brain tissue behind them, and they belong fully to none of the three.

Their axons cross into protected brain to reach the supraoptic nucleus, the paraventricular nucleus, the median preoptic nucleus, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and the ventral tegmental area.

NUMBER:

The human subfornical organ and organum vasculosum are tiny, together occupying only a few cubic millimetres.

The best available estimate places the combined neuron population at roughly 5 thousand to 30 thousand across both organs.

Confidence is low: this is a bound derived from human volume measurements combined with rodent packing densities, and no unbiased stereological count of human subfornical organ neurons has been published, so any single figure quoted with more precision than this should be treated with suspicion.

The defensible statement is that the population is larger than one thousand and smaller than one hundred thousand.

That places it at roughly 0.00002 percent of the nervous system's 86 billion neurons, which means the entire conscious sensation of thirst is generated by fewer neurons than sit in one cubic millimetre of cerebral cortex.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These neurons are intrinsically osmosensitive, meaning that if you shrink the cell by putting it in saltier fluid, its own membrane opens stretch-sensitive channels and it depolarises without any synaptic input at all.

The molecular osmosensor identified for this job is the channel TMEM63B.

Firing rate scales with plasma osmolality across the physiological range, climbing from roughly 1 to 3 spikes per second at 285 milliosmoles per kilogram to 10 to 20 spikes per second at 305 milliosmoles per kilogram.

Angiotensin II, acting on the angiotensin type 1a receptor, depolarises them further, adding a second, hormonal dimension to the same output.

Nitric oxide inhibits them through cyclic guanosine monophosphate, and in one classic study 96 percent of responsive subfornical organ neurons were silenced by a nitric oxide donor, making this one of the most reliable inhibitory actions recorded anywhere.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are unusual because the most important ones are not synaptic at all: angiotensin II, relaxin, sodium concentration, osmolality, and hormones such as leptin, ghrelin and amylin arrive through the blood.

Synaptic inputs do exist, arriving from the median preoptic nucleus and from ascending pathways carrying gut and oropharyngeal information, meaning signals from the mouth and throat that report swallowing.

Outputs are glutamatergic onto the median preoptic nucleus, the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei where vasopressin is made, and onward to the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and the ventral tegmental area, the latter connection recruiting the dopamine reward system so that drinking feels good.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin, 0.2 to 0.8 micrometres, unmyelinated, and short.

Conduction velocity is roughly 0.3 to 1 metre per second, so a signal reaches the supraoptic nucleus in tens of milliseconds.

They branch to contact multiple downstream nuclei, so a single sensor neuron can simultaneously trigger vasopressin release, thirst motivation and reward anticipation.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The thirst-driving neurons are glutamatergic.

Many co-express neuronal nitric oxide synthase, so they both make and are inhibited by nitric oxide, giving a built-in self-limiting brake.

The thirst-suppressing neurons are GABAergic.

Receptors that matter functionally include the angiotensin type 1a receptor, the relaxin family peptide receptor 3, the secretin receptor, the leptin receptor and the amylin receptor.

The glial protein Nax, a sodium-concentration-sensing channel expressed in the surrounding glia rather than in the neurons, sets how the tissue as a whole reads sodium, and autoantibodies against Nax in humans cause a disease of absent thirst.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none.

The circumventricular organs are among the least myelinated grey matter in the brain, which is one of the features that lets pathologists recognise them.

Because the pathway is short and the physiological event, drinking, unfolds over minutes, there is no advantage to insulation, and the absence of myelin also keeps the tissue permeable to the diffusing signals it exists to sense.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest in absolute terms, since the cells are small and fire slowly most of the time.

The unusual cost is chemical defence: living outside the blood-brain barrier means being continuously exposed to circulating toxins, immune cells and antibodies, so these neurons and their glia invest heavily in detoxification and in efflux transporters that pump unwanted molecules back out.

During dehydration, firing rates rise several-fold for hours or days, and local blood flow increases accordingly.

PLASTICITY:

The osmotic set point can be reset, and it is reset routinely in pregnancy, when the threshold for thirst and for vasopressin release falls by about 5 to 10 milliosmoles per kilogram, which is why pregnant women run a slightly lower blood sodium.

Chronic dehydration and chronic heart failure both shift the angiotensin sensitivity of these neurons upward.

Structural plasticity occurs too: synaptic and glial coverage of the cells changes measurably within hours of a salt load, a remodelling shared with their downstream partners in the supraoptic nucleus.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here are genuinely different from glia elsewhere and are part of the sensor, not merely its scaffolding.

Specialised ependymal cells and astrocytes express Nax, the sodium-level-sensing channel, and it is these glia, not the neurons, that perform the primary reading of blood sodium; they then pass the message to neurons by releasing lactate, a small metabolic molecule that changes neuronal firing.

Tanycytes form a tight barrier on the brain side of these organs, sealing the leak so that blood-borne molecules do not spread into the rest of the brain, which means the glia define the very window that makes the organ possible.

Microglia here are exposed to the circulation permanently and are constitutively more active than elsewhere.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the lamina terminalis becomes a wall with a window that nobody looks through.

The body would still make vasopressin and would still respond to a drop in blood volume through the kidney, but the conscious urge to drink would be gone, and with it the ability to correct a rising blood sodium by behaviour.

This is not hypothetical: patients with autoantibodies against Nax or with tumours destroying the subfornical organ develop adipsic hypernatremia, meaning chronically high blood sodium with no thirst at all, and they must be told to drink by a clock because they will otherwise dehydrate to the point of coma without ever feeling anything is wrong.

The flavour these neurons give the region is felt need.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The primary transduction is performed by glia and handed to neurons metabolically through lactate, so the computation is genuinely distributed across cell types.

The neurons are directly hormone-gated by molecules in the blood, which means part of their input arrives without any presynaptic partner existing.

Nitric oxide made by the neurons themselves diffuses locally and inhibits neighbours, which is volume transmission acting as automatic gain control.

Their output to the ventral tegmental area recruits phasic dopamine signalling, so the same cells that generate a deficit signal also generate the anticipation of its relief, and drinking becomes rewarding before a single molecule of water has been absorbed.

Perhaps most striking, their signal is switched off by the act of swallowing itself, within seconds and before blood sodium has changed at all, which means the system runs a predictive feedforward model of what drinking will accomplish.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: plasma osmolality, 270 to 330 milliosmoles per kilogram; plasma sodium, 130 to 160 millimoles per litre; circulating angiotensin II, 5 to 100 picomolar; relaxin, leptin, ghrelin and amylin as slower modulators; oropharyngeal swallow signal, a fast negative pulse; nitric oxide concentration as a local brake.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate to the median preoptic nucleus, supraoptic nucleus, paraventricular nucleus, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and ventral tegmental area; spike output 0 to 25 hertz; behavioural correlate is a scalar thirst drive from 0 to 1.

• STATE: membrane voltage; TMEM63B open fraction; glial lactate signal; osmotic set point in milliosmoles per kilogram; recent-swallow trace; angiotensin sensitivity gain.

• PARAMETERS: set point 285 milliosmoles per kilogram, falling by 5 to 10 in pregnancy; osmotic gain about 0.5 to 1.0 hertz per milliosmole per kilogram; angiotensin gain about 0.1 hertz per picomolar; input resistance 1 to 3 gigaohms; capacitance 8 to 20 picofarads.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 to 40 milliseconds; osmosensor 1 to 10 seconds; swallow-triggered suppression 1 to 60 seconds; hormonal modulation 1 to 30 minutes; set point resetting in pregnancy, weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: destruction or autoimmune attack causes adipsic hypernatremia, with chronic dangerous elevation of blood sodium and complete absence of thirst; over-activity contributes to the excessive drinking and salt appetite of heart failure and of some psychiatric conditions; failure of the swallow-triggered brake produces overdrinking and dangerously low blood sodium.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert plasma osmolality, circulating angiotensin and recent swallowing into a thirst drive signal for one blood-sampling thirst neuron.
Create a number variable called set_point with initial value 285.
Create a number variable called osmotic_gain with initial value 0.7.
Create a number variable called angiotensin_gain with initial value 0.1.
Create a number variable called swallow_brake with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called thirst_drive with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called thirst_log with initial value empty list.
For each sample in plasma_stream, perform the following operations.
    Set firing_rate to the difference of the osmolality of sample and set_point.
    Set firing_rate to the product of firing_rate and osmotic_gain.
    Set firing_rate to the sum of firing_rate and the product of the angiotensin of sample and angiotensin_gain.
    Check if the swallow signal of sample is true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set swallow_brake to 8.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set swallow_brake to the product of swallow_brake and 0.97.
    End the conditional block.
    Set firing_rate to the difference of firing_rate and swallow_brake.
    Set firing_rate to the difference of firing_rate and the nitric oxide of sample.
    Check if firing_rate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if firing_rate is greater than 25.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to 25.
    End the conditional block.
    Set thirst_drive to the quotient of firing_rate divided by 25.
    Add thirst_drive to the end of thirst_log.
    Display thirst_drive to the console.
End the loop.
Return thirst_log to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the interesting part is a feedforward swallow brake
# decaying over seconds, which is clearest as an explicit stateful loop.

def thirst_neuron(samples, dt=0.1, set_point=285.0):
    """samples: dicts with osmolality (mOsm/kg), angII (pM), swallow (bool)."""
    osmotic_gain = 0.7        # Hz per mOsm/kg above set point
    ang_gain = 0.10           # Hz per pM angiotensin II
    brake = 0.0               # oropharyngeal swallow signal, Hz subtracted
    tau_brake = 5.0           # seconds; predictive brake decays over ~5 s
    log = []
    for s in samples:
        rate = osmotic_gain * (s["osmolality"] - set_point)
        rate += ang_gain * s["angII"]
        if s["swallow"]:
            brake = 8.0       # swallowing suppresses thirst before absorption
        else:
            brake *= (1.0 - dt / tau_brake)
        rate -= brake
        rate -= s.get("no_tone", 0.0)      # nitric oxide self-limiting brake
        rate = max(0.0, min(rate, 25.0))
        log.append(rate / 25.0)            # normalised thirst drive, 0 to 1
    return log

if __name__ == "__main__":
    dehydrated = [{"osmolality": 305.0, "angII": 40.0, "swallow": False}] * 20
    drinking = [{"osmolality": 305.0, "angII": 40.0, "swallow": True}] * 5
    after = [{"osmolality": 304.0, "angII": 35.0, "swallow": False}] * 100
    out = thirst_neuron(dehydrated + drinking + after)
    print("thirsty      %.2f" % out[19])
    print("mid-swallow  %.2f" % out[24])
    print("10 s later   %.2f" % out[124])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron in the human brain that sits outside the blood-brain barrier on purpose, has its primary measurement taken for it by the glial cell next door and delivered as lactate, and is switched off by the act of swallowing seconds before the water it wanted has reached the blood.

CHAPTER 112. PUSH-AND-PULL NOVELTY NEURON (COG) (PUC)

One neuron, one axon, one message, and at the far end it hits the accelerator and the brake in the same thousandth of a second.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a Previously Unnamed Construct, meaning a real and well-documented cell type that the literature has never given a single working name.

We name it here as the push-and-pull novelty neuron: a cell of the supramammillary nucleus, a thin sheet of neurons draped over the top of the mammillary bodies, which releases two opposite chemicals from the very same nerve ending.

Glutamate is the brain's main excitatory chemical, the push, and GABA is the brain's main calming chemical, the pull.

Releasing both together is rare and, on the face of it, absurd, because the two effects partly cancel.

The purpose becomes clear when you see what these cells signal: novelty, arousal and the beginning of movement.

When you walk into a room you have never seen before, these cells fire, and they hand the memory-forming machinery of the hippocampus a message that says, simultaneously, pay attention now and keep the noise down.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cells are medium-sized with a triangular or multipolar cell body, meaning several processes leave it in different directions.

Three to seven dendrites radiate outward and stay mostly within the thin plate of the nucleus, so the population is wide and flat rather than globular.

The axon ascends in a long arc through the medial forebrain bundle and the fornix system to reach the hippocampal formation, branching profusely at its destination.

At the terminal, the extraordinary feature is invisible without an electron microscope: single boutons, the swellings where transmitter is released, contain both round vesicles typical of excitation and flattened vesicles typical of inhibition, and they carry both the glutamate transporter VGLUT2 and the GABA transporter VGAT.

SIZE:

Cell bodies measure roughly 15 to 25 micrometres across.

Dendritic fields span 250 to 500 micrometres within the plane of the nucleus.

The ascending axon in a human brain runs approximately 4 to 7 centimetres from the posterior hypothalamus to the dentate gyrus and area CA2 of the hippocampus.

A single axon can form several thousand terminal boutons, so one neuron addresses a wide swathe of hippocampal tissue at once.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Dual-transporter neurons expressing both VGLUT2 and VGAT, the true push-and-pull cells, which project to the dentate gyrus and to area CA2 of the hippocampus.

• Purely glutamatergic supramammillary neurons, which project to the medial septum and are a key node of the arousal system that wakes the cortex.

• Purely GABAergic supramammillary neurons, which project locally and to the septum and help set the theta rhythm.

• Substance P-expressing and thyrotropin-releasing hormone-expressing subsets, which overlap the above and add slow peptide modulation.

• A lateral and a medial division, with the lateral division biased toward the dentate gyrus and the medial division toward CA2 and the septum.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The supramammillary nucleus occupies the caudal, meaning rearmost, hypothalamus, forming a thin sheet immediately above and around the mammillary bodies and extending laterally on both sides of the midline.

It borders the posterior hypothalamic area above, the mammillary bodies below, and the ventral tegmental area behind.

This is a genuine interface region: the supramammillary nucleus is the anatomical seam where the hypothalamus, the midbrain arousal system and the limbic memory system meet, and it is regularly assigned to different systems by different textbooks for exactly that reason.

Its axons terminate in the dentate gyrus, area CA2, the medial septum and the diagonal band of Broca, and it receives from the ventral tegmental area, the raphe nuclei, the septum and the lateral hypothalamus.

NUMBER:

The human supramammillary nucleus is small, and the best available estimate places its neuron population at roughly 30 thousand to 80 thousand across both sides.

Of these, the dual-transporter push-and-pull subtype is probably the largest single class, perhaps 15 thousand to 40 thousand neurons.

Confidence is low, since these figures are scaled from rodent counts using human-to-rodent volume ratios, and there is no published unbiased stereological count of the human supramammillary nucleus; the honest bound is more than ten thousand and fewer than two hundred thousand.

That is roughly 0.5 percent of the hypothalamus's approximately 10 million neurons and about 0.00006 percent of the nervous system's roughly 86 billion.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These neurons fire spontaneously and fast for hypothalamic cells, often 5 to 25 spikes per second at rest, rising sharply to 30 to 60 spikes per second on entering a novel environment.

Many are theta-rhythmic, firing in step with the 4 to 12 hertz hippocampal rhythm, and a subset fires at every theta cycle with remarkable reliability.

They show short spike durations and modest spike frequency adaptation, meaning they can sustain a high rate without fading, which suits a signal that must persist for the whole duration of an exploratory bout.

Resting potential is around minus 55 to minus 62 millivolts, and many cells sit close enough to threshold that they need no synaptic input to fire at all.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from the ventral tegmental area carrying reward and salience information, from the raphe nuclei carrying serotonin, from the medial septum, from the lateral hypothalamus and orexin neurons carrying arousal, and from the ventral hippocampus itself, closing a loop.

Outputs contact dentate granule cells, the small densely packed neurons that form the input stage of the hippocampus, and they also contact the inhibitory interneurons among them.

That double targeting is the second half of the push-and-pull trick: the cell excites the principal neuron directly while also driving the local inhibitory network, sharpening which granule cells win.

Despite the co-released GABA, the measured net effect on granule cells is excitatory, and supramammillary input can convert a subthreshold cortical input into a fired spike when the two arrive together.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons are thin, roughly 0.3 to 1 micrometre, lightly myelinated at best.

Conduction velocity is estimated at 0.5 to 3 metres per second, so the hypothalamus-to-hippocampus delay is on the order of 20 to 100 milliseconds, comfortably within a single theta cycle.

The terminal arbor is very large relative to the parent axon, a broadcast architecture rather than a point-to-point one.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate and GABA, released from the same terminal, packaged by VGLUT2 and VGAT in the same or in adjacent vesicles.

The two components behave differently under repeated firing, which is the key to the design: glutamate release depresses in a frequency-dependent way while GABA release depresses steadily regardless of frequency, so the ratio of push to pull changes with how fast the cell is firing.

At low firing rates the synapse is relatively balanced, and at high firing rates it becomes net excitatory, so the cell acts as a frequency-dependent filter that only lets strong novelty signals through as excitation.

Peptide co-transmitters in subsets include substance P and thyrotropin-releasing hormone.

Serotonin and dopamine from the brainstem modulate the cells rather than being released by them.

MYELINATION:

Light and patchy.

Some ascending fibres pick up thin myelin as they run through the medial forebrain bundle, and the terminal branches are bare.

The timing requirement here is only that the message land within the right theta cycle, a window of roughly 100 milliseconds, which thin myelin comfortably achieves without the metabolic expense of heavy insulation.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High for a hypothalamic neuron, because of sustained fast firing combined with a very large terminal field.

Maintaining two separate vesicle-filling machineries in the same terminal doubles part of the housekeeping cost, since the cell must run both the glutamate transporter and the GABA transporter, each with its own proton gradient requirement, and must synthesise GABA using the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase from the very glutamate it also packages as an excitatory signal.

Mitochondria are densely packed in the terminal boutons.

PLASTICITY:

The push-and-pull ratio is itself plastic and is a likely substrate for state-dependent learning.

Repetitive activation shifts the balance toward inhibition within seconds through short-term depression, and this is reversible within a second of rest.

Longer-term changes follow chronic stress and chronic arousal states, and the pathway is strongly engaged during the enhancement of memory by novelty, the well-documented effect in which encountering something new improves memory for unrelated things learned around the same time.

These cells also drive adult-born granule cells in the dentate gyrus preferentially, linking them to the brain's ongoing production of new neurons.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes at the supramammillary terminal field face an unusual problem, because they must clear two opposite transmitters from the same synaptic cleft at the same instant.

They therefore express both the glutamate transporters and the GABA transporters at high density at these specific contacts, a combination less commonly required elsewhere, and the balance of those two transporters helps set the push-to-pull ratio the postsynaptic cell actually experiences.

In the cell body region, the supramammillary nucleus sits within a dense vascular bed shared with the mammillary bodies and inherits some of their thiamine vulnerability, though less severely.

Otherwise the glia here are unremarkable, and the myelinating cells do comparatively little.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these neurons and the caudal hypothalamus loses its ability to tell the rest of the brain that something is new.

The mammillary bodies would still relay memories and the posterior hypothalamus would still support wakefulness, but the hippocampus would lose the signal that flags a moment as worth recording, and the theta rhythm would lose one of its principal drivers.

Behaviourally, the loss shows as flattened exploration: an animal enters a new environment and does not increase its activity, does not sample the space, and forms weaker memories of it.

The flavour lost is the physiological equivalent of curiosity, the spontaneous upward gear change that novelty produces in an intact brain.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Co-transmission of an excitatory and an inhibitory chemical from one bouton is a computation performed at the synapse rather than in the cell body, since the meaning of a spike depends on the recent firing history of that same axon.

The frequency-dependent divergence between glutamate and GABA release makes the terminal a genuine high-pass filter implemented in vesicle biophysics, with different calcium channel coupling for the two transmitters.

The cells simultaneously excite principal neurons and feedforward interneurons, implementing gain control and contrast enhancement in one stroke.

They also entrain the theta oscillation, so their effect is temporal as well as amplitude-based, positioning granule cell spikes at a particular phase where those spikes are most likely to strengthen synapses.

Volume transmission by substance P adds a slow arousal-linked layer on top, and the pathway preferentially targets newly born neurons, coupling an electrical signal to a structural, developmental process.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate and dopamine-linked salience input from the ventral tegmental area, 0 to 40 hertz; serotonin from the raphe as a slow negative gain term; orexin from the lateral hypothalamus as an arousal gain term, 0 to 20 hertz; feedback from the ventral hippocampus; a novelty scalar from 0 to 1 derived from mismatch between expectation and input.

• OUTPUTS: co-released glutamate and GABA onto dentate granule cells, dentate interneurons and area CA2; glutamate onto the medial septum; spike output 0 to 60 hertz, theta phase locked.

• STATE: membrane voltage; theta phase; readily releasable glutamate pool; readily releasable GABA pool; short-term depression variable for each transmitter separately; novelty adaptation trace.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential minus 58 millivolts; baseline rate 5 to 25 hertz; novelty-evoked rate 30 to 60 hertz; glutamate-to-GABA release ratio at rest near 1.0, rising above 2.0 at high rates; conduction velocity 0.5 to 3 metres per second; population 30 thousand to 80 thousand.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; glutamate short-term depression 200 to 800 milliseconds; GABA short-term depression 500 to 2000 milliseconds; recovery from depression 1 to 3 seconds; novelty adaptation 30 seconds to 10 minutes; theta cycle 80 to 250 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of these neurons blunts novelty-driven memory enhancement and flattens exploratory behaviour; excessive drive is implicated in the hyperarousal and intrusive memory formation of post-traumatic states; degradation of the push-and-pull balance toward pure excitation is a plausible contributor to seizure spread from the dentate gyrus, since the GABA component normally caps how much the hippocampal input stage can be driven.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the net effect of one push-and-pull novelty neuron on a dentate granule cell, given that its glutamate and its GABA components depress at different rates during repeated firing.
Create a number variable called glutamate_pool with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called gaba_pool with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called push with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called pull with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called net_effect with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called output_trace with initial value empty list.
For each sample in novelty_stream, perform the following operations.
    Set firing_rate to the sum of 8 and the product of the novelty of sample and 45.
    Set firing_rate to the sum of firing_rate and the orexin gain of sample.
    Set push to the product of glutamate_pool and 1.2.
    Set pull to the product of gaba_pool and 1.0.
    Set net_effect to the difference of push and pull.
    Check if net_effect is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set net_effect to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set glutamate_pool to the difference of glutamate_pool and the product of firing_rate and 0.004.
    Set gaba_pool to the difference of gaba_pool and the product of firing_rate and 0.001.
    Check if glutamate_pool is less than 0.05.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set glutamate_pool to 0.05.
    End the conditional block.
    Set glutamate_pool to the sum of glutamate_pool and 0.02.
    Set gaba_pool to the sum of gaba_pool and 0.02.
    Add net_effect to the end of output_trace.
    Display net_effect to the console.
End the loop.
Return output_trace to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the point is two independent depressing pools with
# different rate constants, which is easiest to read as an explicit loop.

def push_pull_novelty(novelty_series, dt=0.01):
    """Return per-step net drive onto a dentate granule cell."""
    glu, gab = 1.0, 1.0        # normalised releasable pools
    w_glu, w_gab = 1.2, 1.0    # postsynaptic weights of push and pull
    d_glu, d_gab = 0.004, 0.001  # depletion per spike (glutamate depresses more)
    recover = 1.0              # pool recovery rate, per second
    out = []
    for nov in novelty_series:
        rate = 8.0 + 45.0 * nov            # Hz: baseline plus novelty drive
        spikes = rate * dt                 # expected spikes this step
        push = w_glu * glu
        pull = w_gab * gab
        out.append(max(0.0, push - pull))  # net excitation onto granule cell
        glu = max(0.05, glu - d_glu * spikes) + recover * (1 - glu) * dt
        gab = max(0.05, gab - d_gab * spikes) + recover * (1 - gab) * dt
    return out

if __name__ == "__main__":
    familiar = [0.05] * 200                # quiet, well-known environment
    novel = [1.00] * 200                   # brand new environment
    seq = push_pull_novelty(familiar + novel)
    print("familiar steady net drive %.3f" % seq[199])
    print("novel onset net drive     %.3f" % seq[205])
    print("novel sustained net drive %.3f" % seq[399])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other cell in the hypothalamus ships excitation and inhibition down the same axon into the same bouton, lets the two decay at different speeds so that the message flips from balanced to excitatory purely as a function of how excited the sender is, and uses that trick to tell the memory system that the world just changed.


PART EIGHT: CEREBELLUM - COORDINATION AND TIMING

CHAPTER 113. PURKINJE CELLS (COG)

Flatten a great oak tree until it is as thin as a sheet of paper, stand it upright, and you have the shape of the only cell allowed to speak for the cerebellum.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The Purkinje cell is the sole output neuron of the cerebellar cortex, which means every calculation the cerebellar surface performs must leave through these cells or not leave at all.

It is an inhibitory neuron, so its message is always a form of "less", never "more".

It fires continuously, tens of times a second, all day and all night, and it carries information by speeding up and slowing down around that steady beat.

Its job is to shape the timing and the size of movements, and in the human brain also to shape the timing of thought, by releasing and reapplying a brake on the deep cerebellar nuclei beneath it.

Jan Evangelista Purkyne described the cell in 1837, which makes it one of the first neurons ever drawn.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is shaped like a small flask, and from its top rises one thick primary dendrite, or in humans often two or three, which then divides again and again into a fan.

A dendrite is the receiving branch of a neuron, the part that collects incoming signals.

The extraordinary thing is that the fan is almost perfectly flat, like a leaf pressed in a book, and every Purkinje cell in the cerebellum is pressed in the same plane.

The parallel fibres, which are the axons of granule cells, run at right angles through that plane, so each Purkinje cell fan is a comb that the fibres must pass through.

The thin outer branches are called spiny branchlets and they are studded with tens of thousands of tiny knobs called spines, each of which is one synapse.

A single climbing fibre from the inferior olive in the brainstem winds up the thick inner branches like ivy on a trunk.

SIZE:

In humans the cell body is about 33 micrometres across, measured as 32.8 plus or minus 3.07 micrometres, which is roughly twice the mouse value of 16.5 plus or minus 0.78 micrometres.

A micrometre is one millionth of a metre, so this soma is about one third the width of a human hair.

The human primary dendrite is about 6.5 micrometres thick, roughly 2.1 times thicker than in mouse.

The total length of dendrite in one human Purkinje cell is 6 to 7 centimetres, which is the largest dendritic arbor of any neuron in the human brain.

Multiply that by 15 million cells and the human cerebellum contains roughly 900 to 1,050 kilometres of Purkinje dendrite.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The population is split into parasagittal stripes by a protein called zebrin II, which is the enzyme aldolase C, and the stripes run front to back like the stripes on a zebra.

Zebrin-positive Purkinje cells fire slower simple spikes, near 60 hertz, and zebrin-negative cells fire faster, near 90 hertz, so the stripes are also speed zones.

Human Purkinje cells add a further split by dendrite architecture, with single-primary, split and poly-primary forms, the multi-branched forms being far more common in humans than in rodents.

Purkinje cells of the flocculonodular lobe are a functional subtype because they bypass the deep nuclei and project straight to the vestibular nuclei in the brainstem.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell bodies form the Purkinje cell layer, a sheet exactly one cell thick that lies at the interface between the molecular layer above and the granular layer below.

That single-cell interface is the most sharply defined boundary in the whole nervous system, and it exists everywhere the cerebellar cortex exists.

That means all ten lobules, numbered I to X, across the vermis in the midline, the paravermis beside it, the great lateral hemispheres, and the flocculonodular lobe underneath.

Their axons run down through the granular layer and the white matter to reach the fastigial nucleus, the interposed nuclei called globose and emboliform, and the dentate nucleus, with the flocculonodular group reaching the vestibular nuclei instead.

NUMBER:

About 15 million per human cerebellum, from a careful stereological count that found 15.4 million Purkinje cell nucleoli.

Confidence is high, because this is one of the few neuron types counted by an unbiased sampling method rather than estimated.

That is about 0.022 percent of the 69.03 billion neurons in the cerebellum, and about 0.017 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole brain.

So the cell that carries every cerebellar answer is fewer than one neuron in four thousand of the cerebellum.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The Purkinje cell is a pacemaker, which means that if you cut away every input it still fires, at 20 to 100 hertz, forever.

Its two spike types are utterly different and this is its signature.

Simple spikes are ordinary fast spikes at tens to over 100 hertz, and up to about 200 hertz when driven.

Complex spikes happen only 1 to 2 times a second, are triggered by the single climbing fibre, and consist of one big depolarisation carrying a burst of small spikelets at around 600 hertz.

The pacemaking depends on a resurgent sodium current carried by the Nav1.6 channel, and on large-conductance and small-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels.

Input resistance is unusually low, in the tens of megaohms, because the vast dendritic surface leaks current.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are parallel fibres, about 175,000 in rodent and up to roughly 1 million in humans against 30,000 to 40,000 in mouse.

One climbing fibre from the inferior olive makes several hundred release sites on the proximal dendrites, an all-or-nothing input of overwhelming strength.

Basket cells wrap the soma and axon initial segment, stellate cells contact the dendritic shafts, Lugaro and candelabrum cells act indirectly, and recurrent Purkinje axon collaterals inhibit neighbours.

Diffuse inputs arrive from noradrenaline neurons in the locus coeruleus and serotonin neurons in the raphe nuclei.

Outputs go to deep cerebellar nuclear neurons, with roughly 40 Purkinje cells converging onto one large nuclear neuron.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon leaves the base of the soma, is about 1 micrometre thick, and is the only myelinated axon carrying information out of the cerebellar cortex.

Its initial segment is packed with Nav1.6 sodium channels and is enclosed by a dense basket cell structure called the pinceau, French for paintbrush.

Recurrent collaterals branch back before the axon leaves, spreading inhibition to neighbouring Purkinje cells and to Lugaro, globular and candelabrum interneurons.

Conduction velocity is a few metres per second, so a signal crosses the human cerebellum in a handful of milliseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter is gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the main inhibitory chemical messenger of the brain.

It is made by the enzymes glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 and 67 and loaded into vesicles by the vesicular GABA transporter.

On the receiving side the cell carries alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors containing the GluA2 subunit, the unusual delta-2 receptor, and metabotropic glutamate receptor type 1, which is essential for learning.

Purkinje cells are famously rich in the calcium-binding protein calbindin D-28k, which is the standard stain used to find them.

MYELINATION:

Yes, and heavily.

Oligodendrocytes, the cells that make myelin in the brain, wrap the axon in a fatty sheath from just below the granular layer onward.

Myelin is electrical insulation, and it lets the signal jump between gaps called nodes of Ranvier instead of crawling along.

Purkinje axons are among the earliest cerebellar axons myelinated, which matters because an infant cannot sit upright until this wiring is insulated.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Enormous, and this is why the Purkinje cell dies first in so many diseases.

It must run sodium and potassium pumps continuously to support 50 to 100 spikes a second, and it must maintain up to a million synapses on a hundredth of a kilometre of dendrite.

Each pump cycle costs adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the energy currency of the cell, so mitochondria crowd the soma and the dendritic trunks.

Purkinje cells are the classic casualty of oxygen starvation, thiamine deficiency, chronic alcohol exposure and mitochondrial failure.

PLASTICITY:

Long-term depression (LTD) at the parallel fibre synapse is the most studied learning rule in the cerebellum, and it requires parallel fibre activity and a climbing fibre complex spike within a narrow time window.

Depression means the synapse gets permanently weaker, and it works through metabotropic glutamate receptor type 1, protein kinase C and the physical removal of AMPA receptors from the membrane.

The same synapses can also undergo long-term potentiation (LTP), which strengthens them, so the cell can learn in both directions.

Inhibitory synapses show rebound potentiation, and the cell also changes its own excitability by adjusting potassium channels.

During development each Purkinje cell starts with many climbing fibres and prunes them down to exactly one, a famous example of winner-takes-all wiring.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The specialised glial partner is the Bergmann glial cell, a radial astrocyte whose body sits in the Purkinje cell layer and whose fibres rise to the surface.

Bergmann glia wrap about 87 percent of climbing fibre synapses and about 65 percent of parallel fibre synapses, a level of intimacy no other brain region matches.

They express very high levels of the glutamate aspartate transporter (GLAST), which vacuums up escaping glutamate so that neighbouring synapses stay private.

Unusually for astrocytes, they carry calcium-permeable AMPA receptors lacking the GluA2 subunit, so they respond to the Purkinje cell's own inputs with calcium signals.

Their fibres are also the rails along which granule cells migrate, and damage to Bergmann glia alone, as in spinocerebellar ataxia type 7, kills Purkinje cells indirectly.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the Purkinje cell and the cerebellar cortex becomes a magnificent calculation with no way to publish its answer.

The molecular layer would still be a dense weave of parallel fibres, the granular layer would still expand mossy fibre input into billions of sparse codes, and none of it would reach a muscle or a thought.

The deep nuclei would fire unbraked and unshaped, and every movement would become a coarse, overshooting lunge.

Concretely, the region would lose its sense of when to stop.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The dendrite computes on its own, generating local calcium spikes through P and Q type calcium channels that stay confined to single branches, so one cell can hold many semi-independent computations at once.

Back-propagation of the spike into the dendrite is weak and decremental here, unlike in cortical pyramidal cells, so the dendrite is not simply told what the axon did.

The climbing fibre synapse inhibits neighbouring Purkinje cells electrically, without any transmitter, by dragging current through the shared extracellular space, an effect called ephaptic coupling.

The basket cell pinceau does the same trick at the axon initial segment, silencing the cell by pure electrical field.

Purkinje cells release endocannabinoids backwards across the synapse to tell their own inputs to quieten, make nitric oxide, synthesise proteins locally inside dendrites during learning, and are wrapped in perineuronal nets that lock their connections in place in adulthood.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Parallel fibres, count 175,000 in rodent to about 1,000,000 in human, each firing 0 to 200 hertz, excitatory.

◦ Climbing fibre, exactly 1 from the inferior olive, firing 0.5 to 2 hertz, treated as an all-or-nothing event flag.

◦ Molecular layer interneurons, basket and stellate, inhibitory, 0 to 50 hertz.

◦ Neuromodulators, noradrenaline from locus coeruleus and serotonin from raphe, as slow scalar gains.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Inhibitory spike train, 20 to 200 hertz, to deep cerebellar nuclear neurons and, from the flocculonodular lobe, to vestibular nuclei.

◦ Recurrent inhibition to neighbouring Purkinje cells and to Lugaro, globular and candelabrum cells.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, dendritic calcium concentration, per-branch calcium, parallel fibre synaptic weight vector, recent-input eligibility trace, complex spike pause timer.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting potential about minus 63 millivolts, threshold about minus 50 millivolts, pacemaker drive equivalent to about 18 millivolts, zebrin identity as a boolean setting baseline rate to 60 or 90 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane about 20 milliseconds, dendritic calcium decay about 200 milliseconds, complex spike pause 10 to 30 milliseconds, LTD induction window about 100 to 200 milliseconds, consolidation of learning minutes to hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In spinocerebellar ataxias the cell first loses its dendrites and its regular firing, and only later dies, so ataxia begins as dysfunction rather than loss.

◦ In essential tremor Purkinje cell density falls and axonal swellings called torpedoes appear.

◦ Autoantibodies against Purkinje cells cause paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration, and loss of the P and Q type calcium channel causes episodic ataxia type 2 and familial hemiplegic migraine.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert steady parallel fibre input and a rare climbing fibre event into simple spikes, complex spikes, and a lasting reduction in parallel fibre gain.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -63.
Create a number variable called parallel fibre gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called dendritic calcium with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called recent input trace with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called synaptic drive with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spike record with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 30000 times.
    Set synaptic drive to the product of parallel fibre gain and the count of active parallel fibres.
    Set recent input trace to the sum of the product of recent input trace and 0.99 and the count of active parallel fibres.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of the sum of synaptic drive and the pacemaker drive divided by 200.
    Check if a climbing fibre event has arrived on this step.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the text complex spike to the end of spike record.
        Set dendritic calcium to 1.
        Set membrane voltage to -58.
    Else if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -50 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the text simple spike to the end of spike record.
        Set membrane voltage to -58.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if both dendritic calcium is greater than 0.2 and recent input trace is greater than 0.2 are true.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set parallel fibre gain to the difference of parallel fibre gain and 0.00002.
    End the conditional block.
    Set dendritic calcium to the product of dendritic calcium and 0.9995.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in spike record.
Display parallel fibre gain to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python was chosen because no libraries are needed, the units stay visible, and the learning rule reads like the biology.
DT = 0.1              # milliseconds per step
TAU_M = 20.0          # membrane time constant, milliseconds
V_REST = -63.0        # millivolts
V_THRESH = -50.0      # millivolts, simple spike threshold
V_RESET = -58.0       # millivolts
PACEMAKER = 18.0      # standing intrinsic drive, millivolts
PF_GAIN = 0.0013      # millivolts per parallel fibre per hertz
LTD_RATE = 0.00002    # depression per step when calcium and input coincide
CF_EVERY = 10000      # one climbing fibre event every 1000 ms
def run(steps=30000, n_pf=100, pf_rate_hz=60.0):
    v, weight, ca, pf_trace = V_REST, 1.0, 0.0, 0.0
    simple_spikes = complex_spikes = 0
    for i in range(steps):
        pf_drive = weight * n_pf * pf_rate_hz * PF_GAIN
        pf_trace = pf_trace * 0.99 + pf_rate_hz * DT * 0.001
        v += DT * ((V_REST - v) + PACEMAKER + pf_drive) / TAU_M
        if i > 0 and i % CF_EVERY == 0:      # climbing fibre, all or nothing
            complex_spikes += 1
            ca = 1.0                         # global dendritic calcium transient
            v = V_RESET                      # the complex spike ends in a pause
        elif v >= V_THRESH:
            simple_spikes += 1
            v = V_RESET
        if ca > 0.2 and pf_trace > 0.2:      # the conjunction rule of long term depression
            weight = max(0.2, weight - LTD_RATE * ca * pf_trace)
        ca *= 0.9995                         # calcium decays with a 200 ms time constant
    seconds = steps * DT / 1000.0
    print("simple spikes per second:", round(simple_spikes / seconds, 1))
    print("complex spikes per second:", round(complex_spikes / seconds, 1))
    print("parallel fibre gain after learning:", round(weight, 4))
run()

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else in the body is a flat fan.

Nothing else fires two completely different kinds of spike, one a hundred times a second and the other once a second.

Nothing else receives exactly one input that can never be ignored.

If you see a giant flask-shaped cell in a single-cell-thick row, stained brown for calbindin, with a leaf of dendrite rising above it, you are looking at a Purkinje cell.

CHAPTER 114. CEREBELLAR GRANULE CELLS (COG)

Four out of every five neurons you own are this one cell, and it is so small that a hundred of them would fit inside a single Purkinje cell body.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The cerebellar granule cell is the smallest and by far the most numerous neuron in the human nervous system.

It is excitatory, meaning it pushes its targets towards firing, and its transmitter is glutamate.

Its job is expansion recoding: it takes a few thousand incoming mossy fibre channels and re-expresses them as billions of sparse, highly specific combinations.

Think of it as turning a short word into an enormous alphabet, so that the Purkinje cell above can learn to respond to one exact situation and ignore everything else.

Because each granule cell needs several of its inputs to be active at the same moment, it is also a coincidence detector, and coincidence in the cerebellum means timing.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell is almost nothing but a nucleus with a thin rim of cytoplasm, and four or five short dendrites splay out from it like the claws of a bird's foot.

Each dendrite ends in a small tuft called a dendritic digit, and each tuft plunges into a structure called a glomerulus.

A glomerulus is a shared synaptic ball, wrapped in glia, containing one mossy fibre ending, about fifty granule cell dendrites, and the inhibitory endings of Golgi cells.

The axon rises straight up through the Purkinje cell layer into the molecular layer, then splits into a perfect T, and the two arms of the T become the parallel fibre.

SIZE:

The cell body is 5 to 8 micrometres across, making it one of the smallest neurons in the vertebrate body.

The dendrites are only 10 to 30 micrometres long, so short that the whole cell behaves as a single electrical point, a property called electrotonic compactness.

The parallel fibre, by contrast, is enormous relative to its owner: 4.2 to 4.7 millimetres long in the human cerebellum.

Multiply that length by 68.5 billion cells and the human cerebellum holds roughly 308,000 kilometres of parallel fibre, which is about four fifths of the distance to the Moon, an arithmetic product of the two measured figures rather than a directly measured value.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Granule cells are strikingly uniform, which is part of why there are so many of them.

The main structural distinction is depth: cells whose bodies sit deep in the granular layer send their parallel fibres to the bottom of the molecular layer, while superficial cells send theirs to the top, so the molecular layer is layered by granule cell birth date.

A second distinction is functional rather than anatomical, between the ascending segment of the axon, which contacts the Purkinje cell directly above, and the parallel fibre segment, which contacts hundreds of Purkinje cells sideways.

Molecular profiling now separates granule cells by lobule and by the mossy fibre systems they serve, but no classical named subtypes exist.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The granular layer of the cerebellar cortex, the deep dark layer beneath the Purkinje cell row, throughout every lobule from I to X, in the vermis, the paravermis, the hemispheres and the flocculonodular lobe.

The cell body sits in the granular layer but the axon lives in the molecular layer, so this single cell physically spans the interface between the two layers and stitches them together.

Its dendrites sit inside cerebellar glomeruli, which are themselves interfaces where incoming mossy fibres from the pons, spinal cord and vestibular nuclei meet local circuitry.

NUMBER:

About 68.5 billion in the human cerebellum, derived from the isotropic fractionator count of roughly 69 billion cerebellar neurons, of which granule cells are the overwhelming majority.

Confidence in the total cerebellar figure is high; confidence in the exact granule share is moderate, because the count does not separate granule cells from their few neighbours directly.

That is about 99.2 percent of all cerebellar neurons and about 80 percent of all the neurons in the human brain.

If you picked a neuron at random from your own head, four times out of five you would be holding a cerebellar granule cell.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The granule cell is quiet at rest and has a very high input resistance, so a small current makes a large voltage change.

It needs roughly two to four of its four dendrites to receive input at nearly the same time before it fires, and that threshold is not fixed.

The threshold is set from outside by a standing curtain of inhibition called tonic inhibition, produced by GABA leaking out of Golgi cell synapses and activating extrasynaptic GABA type A receptors that contain the alpha-6 subunit.

An ambient GABA concentration of only 0.1 to 0.2 micromolar is enough to switch this curtain on.

When it fires it can fire in short high-frequency bursts, up to several hundred hertz, because its tiny capacitance lets the voltage move fast.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are four or five mossy fibre synapses, one per dendrite, from the pontine nuclei carrying cortical commands, from the spinal cord carrying limb position, from the vestibular nuclei carrying head motion, and from unipolar brush cells.

Inhibitory input comes from Golgi cells, both as fast synaptic events and as the tonic curtain, and each granule cell dendrite typically receives contact from two or three Golgi cells.

Outputs go to Purkinje cells, Golgi cells, molecular layer interneurons, Lugaro cells and candelabrum cells, with each parallel fibre making a few hundred synapses along its length.

A single Purkinje cell receives up to a million of these, and a single Golgi cell is contacted by thousands.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is one of the thinnest in the nervous system, about 0.2 micrometres in diameter, which is close to the physical limit for reliable signalling.

It ascends vertically, then bifurcates into two arms that run in the transverse plane, at right angles to every Purkinje cell fan.

Conduction is slow, around 0.3 to 0.5 metres per second, so a signal takes several milliseconds to reach the far end of a parallel fibre, and that delay is thought to be used as a timing resource.

The ascending segment makes stronger, more reliable synapses on the Purkinje cell directly above it than the parallel fibre segment makes sideways.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the main excitatory transmitter of the brain, packaged by vesicular glutamate transporter 1.

On the receiving side the granule cell carries AMPA receptors and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors containing the developmentally distinctive GluN2C subunit.

It also carries the alpha-6 containing GABA type A receptors mentioned above, which exist almost nowhere else in the brain and are the reason certain drugs act selectively on the cerebellum.

Metabotropic glutamate receptor type 4 sits on the presynaptic mossy fibre terminal and turns the input down when activity is high.

MYELINATION:

Almost none, and this is a deliberate design choice by evolution.

Parallel fibres are unmyelinated, which is why they are slow, but it is also why 300,000 kilometres of them can be packed into an organ the size of a fist.

Myelin would multiply the volume of the molecular layer many times over and the cerebellum would not fit inside the skull.

A small amount of myelination occurs on the initial ascending portion of some granule cell axons, but the parallel fibre proper is bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low per cell and gigantic in total.

Each granule cell is tiny, quiet most of the time, and cheap to run, which is exactly what allows there to be 68.5 billion of them.

But because there are so many, the granular layer as a whole is one of the densest capillary beds in the brain, and cerebellar glucose consumption tracks granule cell activity closely.

Granule cells depend on trophic support from mossy fibres and on brain-derived neurotrophic factor during development, and they are exquisitely sensitive to loss of potassium gradient.

PLASTICITY:

The mossy fibre to granule cell synapse shows both long-term potentiation and long-term depression, so the very first stage of cerebellar processing is itself adjustable.

The granule cell to Purkinje cell synapse is the classic site of cerebellar learning, and the granule cell is the presynaptic partner in that famous rule.

Presynaptic long-term potentiation at the parallel fibre terminal increases the probability of transmitter release, which is a change made on the granule cell side of the synapse.

Granule cells also change their intrinsic excitability by adjusting potassium and calcium-activated potassium channels after strong mossy fibre input.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glomerulus is sealed by a specialised astrocyte process, sometimes called a velate astrocyte because it is thin and veil-like, and its job is genuinely unusual: it does not seal tightly.

By allowing GABA to escape the synaptic cleft it creates the ambient GABA that produces tonic inhibition, so the glial cell here is an active part of the computation rather than a mere housekeeper.

Bergmann glia guide granule cells during their long developmental migration from the surface of the cerebellum down past the Purkinje cells to their adult position.

Microglia prune excess granule cells during development, and the granular layer is one of the most heavily pruned tissues in the body.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove granule cells and the cerebellar cortex loses all of its detail and all of its capacity to learn specifics.

Purkinje cells would still receive climbing fibres, so they would still be told that an error occurred, but they would have no rich context to attach that error to.

Concretely, the region would lose the ability to distinguish one moment from the next.

The cerebellum could still register "something went wrong" and could never learn "something goes wrong at this exact instant of this exact movement".

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Because the cell is electrotonically compact, it does no dendritic computation at all, and this is itself a computational choice: it is a pure, honest coincidence detector with no hidden internal logic.

Its parallel fibre performs computation by geometry rather than biochemistry, using pure conduction delay along millimetres of thin axon to convert space into time.

Parallel fibre terminals release glutamate that spills over onto neighbouring molecular layer interneurons and Bergmann glia, a form of volume transmission.

Granule cell bursts trigger local increases in blood flow through nitric oxide, and their glutamate release drives astrocyte calcium waves that in turn regulate capillary diameter.

Granule cell activity instructs oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the underlying white matter, and granule cells are the origin of two of the four molecular subgroups of medulloblastoma, the commonest malignant brain tumour of childhood.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Mossy fibre excitation, 4 to 5 channels per cell, each 0 to 500 hertz in bursts, from pontine, spinocerebellar, vestibular and reticular sources.

◦ Golgi cell phasic inhibition, 2 to 3 sources per dendrite, 0 to 50 hertz.

◦ Golgi cell tonic inhibition, a scalar equivalent to ambient GABA of 0.1 to 0.2 micromolar.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ One glutamatergic axon, spikes at 0 to 300 hertz, delivered to Purkinje cells, Golgi cells, molecular layer interneurons, Lugaro cells and candelabrum cells.

◦ Delivery is delayed by 0 to about 10 milliseconds depending on distance along the parallel fibre.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, refractory countdown, per-synapse short-term depression factor.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting potential about minus 70 millivolts, threshold about minus 50 millivolts, drive per active mossy fibre about 11 millivolts, tonic inhibition 0 to 6 millivolts, refractory period about 1 millisecond.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 5 to 10 milliseconds, synaptic AMPA current about 1 millisecond, NMDA current about 50 milliseconds, tonic inhibition effectively constant, parallel fibre conduction delay 0 to 10 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of granule cells produces cerebellar hypoplasia and severe ataxia, seen in congenital disorders of glycosylation and in some forms of ataxia with cerebellar atrophy.

◦ Uncontrolled proliferation of granule cell precursors in the external germinal zone produces sonic hedgehog subgroup medulloblastoma.

◦ Alcohol and benzodiazepine-like drugs act strongly on the alpha-6 GABA type A receptor, which is one reason intoxication looks like cerebellar disease.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a granule cell fires, given which of its four mossy fibre inputs are active and how strong the standing tonic inhibition is.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called refractory countdown with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called active input count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called synaptic drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called mossy fibre states with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 1000 times.
    Set active input count to 0.
    For each state in mossy fibre states, perform the following operations.
        Set active input count to the sum of active input count and state.
    End the loop.
    Set synaptic drive to the difference of the product of active input count and 11 and the tonic inhibition level.
    Check if refractory countdown is greater than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set refractory countdown to the difference of refractory countdown and 1.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of the sum of the difference of -70 and membrane voltage and synaptic drive divided by 80.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -50.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set membrane voltage to -70.
        Set refractory countdown to 10.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C was chosen because there are 68.5 billion of these cells and the bytes per cell decide whether a whole cerebellum fits in memory. */
#include <stdio.h>
#define NDEND 4
#define DT 0.1f
#define TAU 8.0f
#define VREST -70.0f
#define VTH -50.0f
#define WSYN 11.0f
#define TONIC 4.5f
typedef struct { float v; unsigned char refr; } Granule;   /* 8 bytes per granule cell */
static int step(Granule *g, const unsigned char act[NDEND], float tonic)
{
    int i, n = 0;
    float drive;
    for (i = 0; i < NDEND; i++) n += act[i];
    drive = WSYN * (float)n - tonic;          /* mossy fibre drive minus the standing curtain */
    if (g->refr) { g->refr--; return 0; }
    g->v += DT * ((VREST - g->v) + drive) / TAU;
    if (g->v >= VTH) { g->v = VREST; g->refr = 10; return 1; }   /* reset plus 1 ms refractory */
    return 0;
}
int main(void)
{
    Granule g;
    unsigned char act[NDEND];
    float tonic[2];
    int t, pattern, i, spikes;
    tonic[0] = TONIC; tonic[1] = 0.0f;        /* Golgi cell inhibition on, then off */
    for (t = 0; t < 2; t++) {
        printf("tonic inhibition %.1f mV\n", tonic[t]);
        for (pattern = 0; pattern <= NDEND; pattern++) {
            g.v = VREST; g.refr = 0; spikes = 0;
            for (i = 0; i < NDEND; i++) act[i] = (unsigned char)(i < pattern);
            for (i = 0; i < 1000; i++) spikes += step(&g, act, tonic[t]);   /* 100 ms */
            printf("  %d of 4 mossy fibres active gives %d spikes in 100 ms\n", pattern, spikes);
        }
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the smallest neuron you will ever see, packed so densely that the granular layer looks under a microscope like coarse sand or caviar.

It has four claw-like dendrites and no more.

Its axon makes a perfect capital T, and no other neuron in the human body does that.

And it is the only cell of which you personally own tens of billions.

CHAPTER 115. GOLGI CELLS (COG)

One Golgi cell can quieten two thousand granule cells at once, which makes it the volume knob for four fifths of the neurons in your brain.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The Golgi cell is a large inhibitory interneuron of the granular layer, and it is the gatekeeper of the cerebellum's front door.

An interneuron is a neuron whose axon stays inside its own region rather than leaving to talk to distant places.

Its job is to control how many granule cells are allowed to respond to any given mossy fibre input, which keeps the granule cell code sparse and therefore useful.

Without it, a strong input would light up the whole granular layer, every pattern would look the same, and the Purkinje cell above would have nothing specific to learn.

It also imposes rhythm, because Golgi cells fire as pacemakers and are electrically coupled to each other, so the granular layer oscillates.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The soma is large and roughly polygonal, sitting in the upper part of the granular layer.

Two dendritic systems emerge, and this two-headed shape is its signature.

Apical dendrites rise up through the Purkinje cell layer into the molecular layer, where they are combed by parallel fibres, sampling the output of the granular layer.

Basal dendrites stay down in the granular layer and reach into glomeruli, sampling the input to the granular layer directly from mossy fibres.

The axon breaks up immediately into a dense, bushy plexus that spreads horizontally through the granular layer and terminates inside glomeruli.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 25 micrometres across, so it is two to three times the width of a granule cell but only about half the width of a human Purkinje cell.

Recorded membrane capacitance splits the population into small cells around 19.8 plus or minus 1.4 picofarads and large cells around 32.8 plus or minus 3.8 picofarads.

The axonal plexus is very wide for an interneuron, spreading 300 to 600 micrometres horizontally, which is how one cell reaches so many targets.

The apical dendrites reach the full thickness of the molecular layer, so the cell is several hundred micrometres tall.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The clearest split is chemical: some Golgi cells release only GABA while others release GABA and glycine together, and the mixed type is the more common in the granular layer.

Glycine is a second inhibitory transmitter, simpler than GABA, and its presence is what distinguishes cerebellar inhibition from inhibition almost everywhere else in the forebrain.

Golgi cells are also split by the marker metabotropic glutamate receptor type 2, which most Golgi cells carry and which their look-alike neighbours the Lugaro and globular cells do not.

A further marker split uses neurogranin, present in Golgi cells and absent from Lugaro and globular cells, and this pair of markers is the standard way to tell these confusable cells apart.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Throughout the granular layer of the cerebellar cortex, in every lobule I to X, in the vermis, paravermis, hemispheres and flocculonodular lobe.

Most somata sit in the outer third of the granular layer, close to the interface with the Purkinje cell layer.

The cell straddles two interfaces at once: its apical dendrites live in the molecular layer while its soma and axon live in the granular layer, so it physically bridges the input stage and the output stage of the cortex.

Its axon terminals live inside cerebellar glomeruli, the shared synaptic balls where mossy fibres meet granule cell dendrites.

NUMBER:

On the order of 10 million in the human cerebellum, which is a scaled estimate rather than a direct count, so confidence is moderate at best.

The scaling rests on the well-measured rodent ratio of roughly one Golgi cell for every 430 granule cells and on the roughly 1:1 relationship between Golgi cells and Purkinje cells in rodent tissue.

Ten million is about 0.014 percent of the 69.03 billion neurons in the cerebellum, and about 0.012 percent of all brain neurons.

The honest bound is somewhere between 5 and 20 million, and no unbiased human stereological count of Golgi cells has been published.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Golgi cells are spontaneous pacemakers, firing without any input at all, typically at 1 to 10 hertz at rest and rising to 20 to 50 hertz when driven.

They possess a hyperpolarisation-activated current, called the h current, which pulls the membrane back up after every dip and makes the rhythm regular.

A remarkable property is that hyperpolarising a Golgi cell, either by injecting current or by activating metabotropic glutamate receptor type 2, produces a long-lasting increase in its spontaneous rate, so inhibition paradoxically makes the cell faster in the long run.

Strong granule cell input can also silence a Golgi cell completely for hundreds of milliseconds, a pause that opens a window of granule cell freedom.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs on the basal dendrites come directly from mossy fibres, giving fast feedforward information about what is arriving.

Inputs on the apical dendrites come from parallel fibres, and inputs on the basal dendrites also come from granule cell ascending axons, giving feedback information about what the granular layer just did.

Inhibitory inputs come from Lugaro cells and globular cells, from other Golgi cells, and from molecular layer interneurons, although only a minority of the inhibition a Golgi cell receives comes from local GABAergic cells.

Outputs go exclusively to granule cell dendrites inside glomeruli, and to a lesser extent to unipolar brush cells, with a single Golgi cell reaching about 40 glomeruli and roughly 2,000 granule cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is thin, unmyelinated, and branches immediately and profusely without ever leaving the granular layer.

Its terminals are the inhibitory component of every glomerulus, positioned so that transmitter released there bathes dozens of granule cell dendrites at once.

Because the glomerulus is not a tight seal, transmitter escapes and produces the tonic inhibition that sets the granule cell firing threshold, so this axon works by leak as well as by aim.

Conduction distances are short, under a millimetre, so delays are well under a millisecond.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA in all Golgi cells and glycine in addition in most of them, released together from the same vesicles.

Both are loaded by the vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter, and the mix determines whether the granule cell or the unipolar brush cell responds, because granule cells have few glycine receptors while unipolar brush cells have many.

Golgi cells are the only granular layer cells that reliably express metabotropic glutamate receptor type 2 and neurogranin.

They also carry nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, so cholinergic input from the brainstem can raise their rate directly.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable in any meaningful sense, and the reason is worth stating so it is not mistaken for an omission.

The Golgi cell axon never leaves the granular layer, its longest branch is well under a millimetre, and its function depends on slow, diffuse, spatially broad release rather than on fast point-to-point delivery.

Myelin would speed conduction the cell does not need and would physically block the transmitter spillover the cell depends on.

Golgi cell axons are therefore entirely unmyelinated, by design rather than by accident.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and steady, dominated by the cost of never stopping.

A cell that pacemakes at 5 to 30 hertz for a lifetime must run its sodium and potassium pumps continuously, and the h current adds a further standing ion flux that must be undone.

The very wide axonal plexus means a large membrane area to maintain relative to a small soma, so mitochondria are concentrated in the axonal branches.

Golgi cells are relatively resistant to the insults that kill Purkinje cells, which is why cerebellar disease often leaves the granular layer circuitry structurally intact.

PLASTICITY:

The mossy fibre to Golgi cell synapse and the granule cell ascending axon to Golgi cell synapse both show activity-dependent strengthening.

The best-known plasticity here is intrinsic rather than synaptic: a period of hyperpolarisation produces a long-lasting increase in the spontaneous firing rate, so the cell remembers having been inhibited by becoming more active.

Golgi cell inhibition onto granule cells also shows a form of disinhibition, because GABA type B receptors on the Golgi terminal itself reduce further GABA release when activity is high.

Gap junction coupling strength between Golgi cells is itself modifiable, changing how tightly the network oscillates.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The relevant glia are the velate astrocytes that wrap each glomerulus, and their behaviour here is genuinely unlike astrocytes elsewhere.

Instead of sealing the synapse and clearing transmitter as fast as possible, the glomerular sheath deliberately allows GABA to accumulate and escape, which is what creates tonic inhibition of granule cells.

The astrocytes also express GABA transporters whose activity level directly sets the ambient GABA concentration, so a glial cell here is effectively turning the granule cell threshold up and down.

Beyond the glomerulus there is nothing unusual about the oligodendrocytes or microglia around Golgi cells.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove Golgi cells and the granular layer loses its sparseness and its rhythm on the same day.

Every mossy fibre burst would recruit far more granule cells than it should, so different inputs would produce overlapping, blurry patterns instead of crisp distinct ones.

Concretely, the region would lose contrast, in exactly the sense a photograph loses contrast when it is overexposed.

The theta-band oscillation of the granular layer, which is thought to time the arrival of information, would also vanish.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Golgi cells are coupled to each other by gap junctions, which are direct pores between cells that let electrical current flow without any transmitter, and this coupling makes an isolated group of Golgi cells oscillate spontaneously.

They exert volume transmission, releasing GABA that spreads beyond the synapse to activate extrasynaptic receptors on many granule cells at once.

They receive non-synaptic signals from climbing fibres, responding to glutamate spilling out of climbing fibre terminals metres away in circuit terms and micrometres away in physical terms.

They show intrinsic plasticity, they autoregulate through presynaptic GABA type B receptors, and their apical dendrites in the molecular layer perform genuine dendritic integration of parallel fibre input separately from what the basal dendrites are doing.

The two dendritic domains are electrically distant enough that one cell effectively computes a feedforward signal and a feedback signal in parallel and compares them at the soma.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Mossy fibre excitation onto basal dendrites, 0 to 500 hertz in bursts, feedforward.

◦ Parallel fibre and ascending axon excitation from granule cells, 0 to 300 hertz, feedback.

◦ Inhibition from Lugaro cells, globular cells, molecular layer interneurons and other Golgi cells, 0 to 30 hertz.

◦ Gap junction current from neighbouring Golgi cells, proportional to voltage difference.

◦ Acetylcholine, serotonin and noradrenaline as slow scalar modulators.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Mixed GABA and glycine release into about 40 glomeruli, reaching about 2,000 granule cells and some unipolar brush cells.

◦ A phasic inhibitory conductance plus a tonic ambient GABA level of 0.1 to 0.2 micromolar.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, h current activation, spontaneous rate set point that drifts after hyperpolarisation, ambient GABA pool.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting potential about minus 60 millivolts, threshold about minus 45 millivolts, pacemaker drive equivalent to about 12 millivolts, gap junction coupling coefficient 0.02 to 0.1, divergence about 2,000 granule cells.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 20 to 30 milliseconds, h current activation 100 to 500 milliseconds, inhibitory synaptic decay 10 to 20 milliseconds, granule-driven pause 100 to 500 milliseconds, intrinsic rate plasticity minutes.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Selective ablation of Golgi cells in animals causes severe ataxia within days, dominated by an inability to keep granule cell activity sparse.

◦ Ethanol blocks the granule-cell-driven silencing of Golgi cells, over-inhibiting the granular layer, which contributes to the ataxia of intoxication.

◦ Loss of glycine co-release disrupts unipolar brush cell control and degrades vestibular processing.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run two gap-junction-coupled Golgi cells that pacemake, are driven by granule cells, and in turn suppress those granule cells.
Create a number variable called first voltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called second voltage with initial value -52.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called granule rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called coupling with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spikes this step with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 8000 times.
    Set granule rate to the difference of 40 and inhibition.
    Set coupling to the product of 0.05 and the difference of second voltage and first voltage.
    Set drive to the sum of 12 and the product of granule rate and 0.12.
    Set spikes this step to 0.
    Set first voltage to the sum of first voltage and the quotient of the sum of the sum of drive and coupling and the difference of -60 and first voltage divided by 50.
    Set second voltage to the sum of second voltage and the quotient of the difference of the sum of drive and the difference of -60 and second voltage and coupling divided by 50.
    Check if first voltage is greater than or equal to -45.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set first voltage to -62.
        Set spikes this step to the sum of spikes this step and 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if second voltage is greater than or equal to -45.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set second voltage to -62.
        Set spikes this step to the sum of spikes this step and 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set inhibition to the product of the sum of inhibition and the product of spikes this step and 6 and 0.97.
End the loop.
Display granule rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python was chosen because two coupled cells plus a feedback loop stay readable with no libraries at all.
DT = 0.5                 # milliseconds per step
TAU = 25.0               # membrane time constant, milliseconds
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -60.0, -45.0, -62.0     # millivolts
PACE = 12.0              # intrinsic pacemaker drive, millivolts
FEEDBACK = 0.12          # millivolts of drive per hertz of granule cell firing
INHIB_PER_SPIKE = 6.0    # hertz of granule layer suppression added by one Golgi spike
def run(gj, steps=8000, mossy_rate=40.0):
    v = [-60.0, -52.0]                          # start the two cells out of phase
    inhibition, gap_sum = 0.0, 0.0
    spikes = [0, 0]
    for _ in range(steps):
        granule_rate = max(0.0, mossy_rate - inhibition)
        gap = [gj * (v[1] - v[0]), gj * (v[0] - v[1])]   # computed before either cell moves
        gap_sum += abs(v[0] - v[1])             # how far apart the two cells are held
        for c in (0, 1):
            drive = PACE + FEEDBACK * granule_rate + gap[c]
            v[c] += DT * ((V_REST - v[c]) + drive) / TAU
            if v[c] >= V_TH:
                v[c] = V_RESET
                spikes[c] += 1
                inhibition += INHIB_PER_SPIKE   # feedback onto the granule layer
        inhibition *= 0.97                      # decays with about a 17 ms time constant
    seconds = steps * DT / 1000.0
    print("gap junction", gj,
          "rates in hertz", [round(s / seconds, 1) for s in spikes],
          "mean voltage gap in mV", round(gap_sum / steps, 2),
          "granule rate left in hertz", round(granule_rate, 1))
run(0.0)     # uncoupled
run(0.05)    # electrically coupled

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cerebellar neuron with one set of dendrites in the molecular layer and another set in the granular layer, reading the output and the input of the same circuit at the same time.

It is the only cell whose axon terminals fill the glomeruli.

Stain a slice for metabotropic glutamate receptor type 2 and neurogranin together and the Golgi cells light up while their look-alike neighbours stay dark.

And it is the cell that decides how many of your 68.5 billion granule cells get to speak.

CHAPTER 116. LUGARO CELLS (COG)

This cell sleeps until serotonin arrives, and then it wakes up and silences an entire strip of the cerebellar cortex at once.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The Lugaro cell is an inhibitory interneuron lying immediately beneath the Purkinje cell layer, described by Ernesto Lugaro in 1894 and then largely ignored for a century.

It is a chemical switch rather than a message carrier.

At rest it is essentially silent, firing about 0.06 hertz, which is roughly one spike every sixteen seconds.

When serotonin floods the cortex from the raphe nuclei in the brainstem, the same cell begins firing steadily at about 15 hertz, a jump of more than two hundred fold.

Because its long axon runs the length of a parasagittal strip and inhibits Golgi cells, basket cells and stellate cells, that switch changes the operating mode of a whole slab of cerebellum.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The soma is fusiform, meaning spindle-shaped, and it lies horizontally, flattened along the underside of the Purkinje cell layer.

Two thick dendrites emerge from opposite ends of the spindle and run horizontally in the parasagittal plane, in the same plane as the Purkinje cell fans, for several hundred micrometres.

Those dendrites are the sampling apparatus: they run directly through the field of Purkinje cell axon collaterals.

The axon is the striking part: it runs transversely for one to two millimetres, at right angles to the dendrites, and sends a dense plexus of beaded branches up into the molecular layer.

SIZE:

The soma is roughly 10 to 20 micrometres in its long axis and considerably narrower across, so it is comparable in bulk to a small Golgi cell.

Membrane capacitance is about 18.1 plus or minus 0.8 picofarads for typical Lugaro cells sitting in the middle of the granular layer, and about 13.7 plus or minus 3.1 picofarads for the small fusiform subtype just under the Purkinje layer.

The dendrites span 300 to 600 micrometres front to back.

The axon covers one to two millimetres side to side, so a single Lugaro cell influences a strip of cortex far larger than itself.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two forms are distinguished by position and by size.

The classical Lugaro cell sits in the upper granular layer with a large fusiform soma and higher capacitance, around 18 picofarads.

The small fusiform Lugaro cell sits pressed against the underside of the Purkinje cell layer, has a lower capacitance around 14 picofarads, and is the form most dramatically switched on by serotonin.

A third form, sometimes called the globular cell, was historically grouped with Lugaro cells and is now treated as a separate type, described in its own entry.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The upper granular layer of the cerebellar cortex, with many somata directly at the interface between the granular layer and the Purkinje cell layer.

That interface position is functionally the point: the cell sits exactly where Purkinje cell axons and their recurrent collaterals pass on their way down, so it is the first thing the cortex's own output meets.

Lugaro cells are found in all lobules I to X, in the vermis, paravermis and hemispheres, and in the flocculonodular lobe.

Their axons project into the molecular layer of the same and neighbouring folia, and their influence is organised in parasagittal strips aligned with the zebrin stripes.

NUMBER:

On the order of 1 million in the human cerebellum, estimated by scaling the rodent observation that Lugaro cells number roughly one for every fifteen Purkinje cells.

With 15 million human Purkinje cells that gives about 1 million, and confidence is low because no direct human count exists.

One million is about 0.0014 percent of the 69.03 billion cerebellar neurons and about 0.001 percent of all brain neurons.

A defensible bound is 0.5 to 3 million, and anyone building a simulation should treat the figure as an order of magnitude rather than a measurement.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The defining property is bistability driven by chemistry rather than by voltage.

Without serotonin the cell sits below threshold and fires at 0.06 plus or minus 0.06 hertz, which is functionally silence.

With serotonin applied, small fusiform Lugaro cells fire at 15.2 plus or minus 1.7 hertz, and the firing is remarkably regular, more like a metronome than a neuron responding to events.

Noradrenaline, which excites many other cerebellar interneurons, produces no spike discharge in small fusiform Lugaro cells, so the switch is specific to serotonin.

Once switched on, the cell tends to fire at its own rate rather than following its synaptic inputs, so it broadcasts a state, not a message.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The principal excitatory input is not a classical synapse at all: it is serotonin arriving by volume transmission from raphe fibres, acting on 5-hydroxytryptamine type 2 receptors.

Purkinje cell axon collaterals provide powerful inhibitory input, so the cortex's own output holds the Lugaro cell down.

Mossy fibres and parallel fibres provide weaker excitatory input, and other inhibitory interneurons contribute.

Outputs are the important part: Lugaro cell axonal varicosities form multiple symmetrical synapses onto the somata and proximal dendrites of basket cells and stellate cells, and onto Golgi cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is unmyelinated, thin, and unusually long for an interneuron, running one to two millimetres transversely through the granular layer before its branches ascend.

It runs in the same direction as the parallel fibres, which means one Lugaro cell shares a target field with an enormous number of granule cells and can veto them collectively.

Its terminals are beaded varicosities rather than discrete boutons, consistent with broad, low-precision, high-coverage release.

Conduction is slow, a fraction of a metre per second, which is acceptable because the signal being sent is a slow state change.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Lugaro cells release GABA, and they are positive for both glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 and glycine transporter 2, meaning they also handle glycine.

At the Lugaro cell to Purkinje cell synapse the effect is purely through GABA type A receptors, whereas the Lugaro cell to Golgi cell synapse has a glycinergic component as well, so the same axon speaks two languages depending on who is listening.

They are negative for metabotropic glutamate receptor type 2 and for neurogranin, which is precisely how they are told apart from Golgi cells.

Their key receptor is the serotonin type 2 receptor, which is what makes the whole cell a serotonin-gated switch.

MYELINATION:

None.

Lugaro cell axons are unmyelinated along their entire one to two millimetre course.

The cell does not need speed because it is signalling a slow neuromodulatory state, and an unmyelinated axon also allows the beaded varicosities to release transmitter along its whole length rather than only at the tip.

This is not an omission in the data; it is a consistent finding of every ultrastructural study of the cell.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low at baseline and moderate when switched on.

A cell that fires once every sixteen seconds costs almost nothing to maintain, which is why the Lugaro cell can afford to be a standing reserve.

When serotonin arrives, the cell must support 15 hertz firing plus transmitter release across a long, densely varicose axon, so demand rises sharply and then falls again when the serotonin clears.

This duty cycle makes the Lugaro cell one of the most energy-efficient designs in the cerebellum: it is expensive only when it is useful.

PLASTICITY:

Poorly characterised, and it is important to say so rather than to invent a mechanism.

What is established is that the serotonin response itself can be desensitised by prolonged exposure, so the switch has a form of adaptation.

The Purkinje cell collateral synapses onto Lugaro cells show short-term dynamics that alter the strength of the brake over hundreds of milliseconds.

No long-term potentiation or depression rule has been demonstrated at any Lugaro cell synapse, and a simulation should model plasticity here as absent unless new data appear.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes around Lugaro cells do something unusual and directly relevant: they express serotonin transporters and monoamine oxidase, so they set how long serotonin lingers in the tissue.

Because the Lugaro cell is driven by ambient serotonin rather than by a synapse, the glial clearance rate is effectively part of the cell's input pathway.

Bergmann glial fibres pass directly through the Lugaro cell's dendritic field and their end-feet contact its axonal plexus in the molecular layer.

Otherwise the oligodendrocytes and microglia here behave as they do elsewhere in the granular layer.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the Lugaro cell and the cerebellar cortex loses its ability to change gear.

Serotonin release from the brainstem, which rises with arousal, locomotion and behavioural state, would still bathe the tissue but would no longer be converted into a coordinated, strip-wide suppression of inhibitory interneurons.

Concretely, the region would lose its state control, the mechanism that says "we are now running, so process input this way" as opposed to "we are now still, so process it that way".

The cerebellum would compute correctly but would compute the same way whether you were asleep or sprinting.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The Lugaro cell is the cerebellum's clearest example of a neuron whose principal input is not a synapse: it reads a chemical concentration in the extracellular space, which is volume transmission in its purest form.

It performs a nonlinear thresholded conversion of a slow chemical variable into a regular spike rate, effectively acting as a chemical-to-frequency converter.

Its output is disinhibitory as well as inhibitory, because by silencing basket and stellate cells it releases Purkinje cells from inhibition, so one cell can both suppress and liberate depending on the path traced.

It is embedded in a closed loop with the Purkinje cell, receiving inhibition from Purkinje axon collaterals and indirectly modulating Purkinje output, which makes it a feedback controller rather than a feedforward element.

Its transverse axon crossing the parasagittal dendrites of Purkinje cells means it operates on the orthogonal axis to the parallel fibre system, giving the cortex a second, slower coordinate.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Ambient serotonin concentration, 0 to about 2 micromolar, acting on serotonin type 2 receptors, treated as a slow scalar rather than as spikes.

◦ Purkinje cell axon collateral inhibition, 20 to 100 hertz, powerful.

◦ Weak mossy fibre and parallel fibre excitation, 0 to 100 hertz.

◦ Noradrenaline, explicitly ineffective on the small fusiform subtype and modelled as a null input.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA onto basket cells and stellate cells, and GABA plus glycine onto Golgi cells, at 0 to 20 hertz.

◦ Spatial coverage of a strip 1 to 2 millimetres wide transversely by 300 to 600 micrometres sagittally.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, bound serotonin receptor fraction, receptor desensitisation level, output firing rate.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting potential about minus 65 millivolts, threshold about minus 45 millivolts, baseline rate 0.06 hertz, serotonin-driven rate 15.2 hertz, half-maximal serotonin concentration about 0.5 micromolar.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane about 30 milliseconds, serotonin rise and fall in tissue about 400 milliseconds, switch-on to steady rate about 1 to 2 seconds, receptor desensitisation tens of seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Drugs that raise brain serotonin, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, will chronically hold this switch on, and cerebellar side effects such as tremor and gait unsteadiness are consistent with that.

◦ Serotonin syndrome produces exactly the clinical picture of over-driven cerebellar interneurons, with tremor, clonus and incoordination.

◦ Loss of Lugaro cells is not a recognised human disease on its own, which is itself worth recording as a known unknown.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert a slowly changing serotonin concentration into the switch between a silent Lugaro cell and a steadily firing one.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called serotonin level with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called target serotonin with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spikes this second with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called rate report with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 20000 times.
    Check if the current time in milliseconds is greater than or equal to 5000.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set target serotonin to 2.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set target serotonin to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set serotonin level to the sum of serotonin level and the quotient of the difference of target serotonin and serotonin level divided by 400.
    Set drive to the quotient of the product of 28 and serotonin level divided by the sum of 0.5 and serotonin level.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the quotient of the sum of drive and the difference of -65 and membrane voltage divided by 30.
    Check if membrane voltage is greater than or equal to -45.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to -68.
        Set spikes this second to the sum of spikes this second and 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if a whole second has just elapsed.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add spikes this second to the end of rate report.
        Set spikes this second to 0.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display rate report to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python was chosen because the whole point is a slow chemical switch and Python makes the two states obvious.
DT = 1.0                 # milliseconds per step
TAU_M = 30.0             # membrane time constant, milliseconds
V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET = -65.0, -45.0, -68.0     # millivolts
KD_5HT = 0.5             # micromolar serotonin giving half the maximum drive
MAX_DRIVE = 28.0         # millivolts of depolarisation at saturating serotonin
TAU_5HT = 400.0          # serotonin rises and falls slowly in tissue, milliseconds
def run(seconds=20.0):
    v, serotonin = V_REST, 0.0
    spikes_this_second, second, report = 0, 0, []
    for step in range(int(seconds * 1000 / DT)):
        t_ms = step * DT
        target = 2.0 if 5000 <= t_ms < 12000 else 0.0   # a raphe burst floods the cortex
        serotonin += DT * (target - serotonin) / TAU_5HT
        drive = MAX_DRIVE * serotonin / (KD_5HT + serotonin)   # simple binding curve
        v += DT * ((V_REST - v) + drive) / TAU_M
        if v >= V_TH:
            v = V_RESET
            spikes_this_second += 1
        if int(t_ms) // 1000 != second:
            report.append(spikes_this_second)
            spikes_this_second, second = 0, int(t_ms) // 1000
    report.append(spikes_this_second)
    print("Lugaro cell firing rate in hertz, one value per second:")
    print(report)
run()

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is a spindle lying on its side directly under the Purkinje cells, with dendrites running front to back and an axon running side to side, a perfect cross.

It is the only cerebellar neuron that is silent until you add serotonin and then fires like a metronome.

It stains positive for glycine transporter 2 and negative for metabotropic glutamate receptor type 2, the exact opposite of the Golgi cell it superficially resembles.

And it is the only cell in the cerebellum whose main input is a chemical in the water rather than a wire.

APPENDIX 1. THE THREE-STAGE PROVING SYSTEM OF PREVIOUSLY UNNAMED CONSTRUCTS (PUC)


A1.1 Why the Names Must Be Proved

Eleven times in this work, a construct has been marked with the tag (PUC), meaning Previously Unnamed Construct, and given a name.

That is a strong act, and it carries a burden.

To claim that a thing is real, is used, and yet has never been named is to make three assertions at once, and each of them can be wrong.

The thing might not be real.

Clustering algorithms produce clusters whether or not nature put a boundary there, and a great deal of what looks like a cell type is a cut through a continuum, drawn where the analyst set a parameter.

It might already have a name that the author overlooked.

This is the commonest and most embarrassing failure, and it is the reason the second stage below carries the heaviest burden of the three.

Or the proposed name might be a poor one that the field is right to reject.

A responsible naming, therefore, is not a christening but a proof.

This appendix supplies that proof system, and the appendices that follow it apply the system to each Previously Unnamed Construct named in this volume.

No construct earns its name by assertion.

Each must survive the three stages.

The naming is never a claim of discovery.

Every construct named in this work was already real, already relied upon, already published in parts.

What was missing was the word, and a science cannot reason efficiently about a thing it cannot name.

The proving system is the discipline that ensures a proposed word deserves to exist.


A1.2 The Three Stages

Every construct is evaluated against three stages, in order.

A construct that fails any stage does not earn its name.

STAGE 1: CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The construct must be demonstrably real and currently relied upon in the neuroscience literature.

It must be physically or functionally distinct from every adjacent named construct, not merely a paraphrase of something already named.

And it must be functionally necessary, playing a specific causal role whose existence is documented, rather than being a convenience of description.

In short: the thing must exist, must be distinct, and must matter.

Applied to a cell type rather than to a brain region, this stage is sharpened into three specific tests.

• The convergence test, for reality.

Do independent methods agree that this population exists?

A cluster that appears only in gene-expression data, and that no anatomist, physiologist or connectivity study has ever separated from its neighbours, fails.

A population that appears as a distinct cluster in sequencing, a distinct shape under a microscope, a distinct firing pattern under an electrode, and a distinct projection target in a tracing study has passed the strongest test the field can apply.

• The boundary test, for distinctness.

Which named cell type is this one most likely to be confused with, and what specifically separates them?

The answer must be stated, not assumed.

• The ablation test, for necessity.

If this population is silenced, deleted, or lost to disease, what specifically fails?

Evidence that a cell is merely active during a behaviour is not enough.

Something must break.

STAGE 2: IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

The construct must lack an accepted, widely used proper name in the existing literature.

The burden here is high, and it is placed on the person claiming the gap rather than on the reader.

Informal descriptive phrases, pedagogical metaphors, and passing usages in single papers do not count as proper names.

An established proper name is one used consistently across the literature, appearing in standard textbooks, understood without further definition by the relevant community.

If any such name exists, even an imperfect or contested one, the construct does not qualify, and it is cited as a named concept instead.

For cell types one further clarification is needed, and it is the clarification that makes this exercise possible.

A label is not a name.

None of the following counts as an accepted proper name, however consistently it is used.

• A gene symbol, or a combination of gene symbols, such as Sst Chodl or Lamp5 Lhx6.

A gene symbol names a gene, designates the cell by a correlate, and changes when a better marker is found.

• An alphanumeric cluster identifier from any atlas or taxonomy, such as subcluster 0417 or MLI2.

• An anatomical coordinate, such as layer 6b or lamina II inner.

• A description of the method by which the cell was found, or of how it looks on a plot.

• A phrase that varies from paper to paper, so that two papers about the same cell cannot be retrieved by the same search.

An eponym, meaning a scientist's surname, does count as a proper name, and disqualifies a candidate.

A long-established functional term that appears in textbooks and is understood without definition, such as silent nociceptor or intrinsic primary afferent neuron, also counts and also disqualifies.

Each construct must state, by name, the strongest counter-candidate term and precisely why that term does not clear the bar.

STAGE 3: PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

The proposed name must be self-explanatory to an informed reader, must accurately describe the construct's identity and function, and must be more useful for teaching, research and clinical application than the current unnamed state.

Names that are opaque, misleading, excessively long, or redundant with existing terminology do not pass.

The name must earn its place.

Every name proposed in this work obeys six rules.

• Plain English, with no Latin, no Greek, no eponym, no gene symbol, no acronym and no alphanumeric string.

• The name tells the story of the cell's purpose, function and faculty, so that a first-year student meeting the name alone learns something true.

• Two to five words, ending in the word neuron or cell.

• Dignified enough to print in a journal and plain enough for a curious teenager.

• Not redundant with, and not confusable with, any existing neuron name, nor with the other names proposed alongside it.

• Compound modifiers hyphenated, so that the reader parses the name correctly on first reading.


A1.3 The Additional Considerations: Ten Properties of a Sound Construct

The three stages are the minimum.

To hold each construct to the maximum, each is also examined against ten properties, drawn from the qualities that distinguish a genuine construct from a mere label.

These are stated once here and then reported briefly for each construct.

REALITY: the construct denotes something that physically or functionally exists, not a modelling artefact.

NECESSITY: the construct is required to reason about the domain; remove it and something true becomes unsayable.

CONCEPTUAL PRECISION AND SPECIFICITY: the construct picks out one thing exactly, with sharp boundaries, not a fuzzy region.

IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS: there is a demonstrable hole in the field's vocabulary that this construct fills, and no accepted proper name already occupies it.

PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY: the name teaches; a student meeting it learns something true about the construct from the name alone.

DIRECTIONALITY: what the cell takes in, and where it sends its output, is definite and stated, not ambiguous.

HIERARCHICAL POSITION: the construct sits at a definite layer of the fifteen-layer framework, and its relation to the layers above and below it is specified.

Every construct named in this work sits at Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, and each entry states the Layer 8 microcircuit motif it participates in and the Layer 9 region or pathway it helps to build.

UNIVERSALITY WITHIN ITS CLASS: the construct is not a one-off; it is an instance of a recognisable class, and the class is populated.

THEORETICAL COMPLETENESS IN HIERARCHICAL MODELS: naming the construct closes a gap that a complete hierarchical model of the nervous system would otherwise leave open.

CLINICAL CONSEQUENCE: a person is different because of it, whether through its loss, its excess, or a drug in current use that acts upon it.

For brevity, where a property is fully satisfied and needs no elaboration, it is marked as satisfied; where it requires comment, the comment is given.

A construct for which a property genuinely does not apply is marked (NA), meaning Not Applicable, and is always accompanied by the reason for its non-applicability, so that a reader never mistakes a property that does not apply for one that was merely omitted.


A1.4 How These Eleven Were Selected

The eleven Previously Unnamed Constructs named in this work were not chosen.

They are what survived.

Two sweeps were run across the whole of neuroscience, the first across twenty territories and the second across eighteen more, and together they returned four hundred and sixty-three candidate cell types, which merged into two hundred and twenty-nine distinct constructs.

Forty-six of those were carried into the proving system.

Each of the forty-six was then attacked by two independent skeptics working separately, neither of whom saw the other's report.

The first was instructed to refute the claim of namelessness, to search the standard textbooks, the review literature, the Petilla terminology, the Cell Ontology and the major brain atlases, and to reject the construct if it found any qualifying proper name, or if it was merely uncertain.

The second was instructed to refute the claim of reality, distinctness and necessity, to look for clustering artefacts, arbitrary cuts through continua, single-laboratory findings that failed to replicate, and rebrandings of things already known, and to demand causal evidence rather than correlation.

A construct passed only if both skeptics tried and failed.

Eleven survived.

Thirty-five did not.

Twenty-one of the thirty-five failed because a proper name already existed and the proposer had not found it, which is the single most important practical lesson of the exercise: the hard part of claiming that something is unnamed is not the claiming, it is the looking.

The appendices that follow apply the three stages, and the ten additional considerations, to each Previously Unnamed Construct that appears in this volume.


APPENDIX 2. Harm-Converging Gatekeeper Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 65.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

This cell lives in the outer shell of the central nucleus of the amygdala, the almond-shaped structure in each temporal lobe that gives events their emotional weight.

Small and densely branched, it is 48 percent of the neurons in the lateral part of that shell.

Its messenger is gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main quietening signal, so every message it sends silences.

It silences the amygdala's own output neurons next door, and sends long axons, the output cables of a nerve cell, to the zona incerta, parabrachial nucleus and periaqueductal gray, which govern pain.

Its work is to take in news that something is wrong, whether injury, toxin, fullness or an opioid wearing off, and turn it all into one verdict: stop eating, get away, hurt more.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

The commonest labels, "PKC-delta-positive neurons" and "Prkcd neurons", are a protein and gene-symbol barcode welded to an anatomical coordinate.

The legacy label "CeL-Off cells" is an unstable descriptive phrase taken from how a firing rate looks in one fear-conditioning plot.

The atlases offer "supertype 368, CeA Prkcd-Ezr" and "MC-6 (Prkcd/Cartpt)", which are cluster identifiers.

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real, not an artefact of one laboratory or one clustering algorithm.

Antibody staining, ribonucleic acid (RNA) sequencing, paired recording, viral tracing and activity imaging converge on it in at least six laboratories, and matching populations appear in rat, macaque and human.

It is distinct, and it is most easily confused with its neighbour, the somatostatin-positive cell of the same shell.

Hunt and colleagues found 48 percent of these neurons carrying protein kinase C delta and 38 percent carrying somatostatin, with only 1.5 percent carrying both, and the two pull in opposite directions.

It is functionally necessary, and two experiments show what fails without it.

Cai and colleagues silenced it, and three unrelated "stop eating" signals lost their power to suppress appetite.

Singh and colleagues switched off its endings in the zona incerta and reversed nerve-injury hypersensitivity, while switching them on produced it in uninjured mice.

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

What is named is the neighbourhood, not the resident: the amygdala, its central nucleus, and its inhibitory messenger all have names.

What is not named is the cell itself, the one inhibitory type where pain, nausea, fullness, learned threat and drug withdrawal converge and become a single aversive state.

The strongest counter-candidate is "CeL-Off cell", and it fails on three grounds.

It is not co-extensive, since reviews say those cells only partly overlap this population.

It is paradigm-bound, vanishing from the feeding, pain and withdrawal literature on the same cell, so two papers about one cell are not found by one search.

It appears in no standard textbook, and it collides with the established ON-cell and OFF-cell terms of the rostral ventromedial medulla.

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

"Bad" teaches valence, the direction of feeling, and says this cell deals in what a body wants less of.

"News" teaches that these are incoming reports arriving in many forms rather than one.

"Gate" teaches control of passage, because a gate can be held shut or swung open, and this cell does both: a warning cue opens it and freezing follows, while a harmful signal shuts it on appetite.

"Neuron" says nerve cell.

The one insight a student gains from the name alone is that many different miseries share a single switch.

That insight unlocks chronic pain, appetite loss in illness, drug withdrawal and anorexia nervosa, which stop looking like separate problems.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

◦ Satisfied: convergent staining, sequencing, recording, tracing and imaging in many laboratories and four species.

• Necessity.

◦ Satisfied: silencing it abolishes appetite suppression by three unrelated satiety signals.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

◦ Satisfied: only 1.5 percent overlap with the somatostatin cell, though the marker also labels a caudal variant.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

◦ Satisfied: no textbook, eponym, ontology entry or encyclopaedia names this cell.

• Pedagogical clarity.

◦ Satisfied: the name alone teaches what the cell handles and that it controls passage.

• Directionality.

◦ It takes in harm signals from the parabrachial nucleus and sends inhibition to the neighbouring output neurons, the zona incerta and periaqueductal gray.

• Hierarchical position.

◦ Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework.

◦ At Layer 8 it joins a lateral-inhibition motif with the somatostatin cell, at Layer 9 it builds the central extended amygdala, and at Layer 10 it sets a defensive state seen at Layer 12 as freezing and pain.

• Universality within its class.

◦ Satisfied: half the lateral shell in mouse, reproduced in rat, matched by clusters in macaque and human.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

◦ Satisfied: no model explains how unrelated harms yield one shared response without a named gate.

• Clinical consequence.

◦ Knocking the marker down suppresses compulsive alcohol drinking and destroying these cells protects mice from self-starvation, but no human disease has yet been traced to it.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Haubensak and colleagues, Genetic dissection of an amygdala microcircuit that gates conditioned fear, Nature, 2010.

• Cai and colleagues, Central amygdala PKC-delta neurons mediate the influence of multiple anorexigenic signals, Nature Neuroscience, 2014.

• Hunt and colleagues, Intrinsic circuits in the lateral central amygdala, eNeuro, 2017.

• Singh and colleagues, An inhibitory circuit from central amygdala to zona incerta drives pain-related behaviors in mice, eLife, 2022.

• Toivainen and colleagues, Generation and characterization of a novel Prkcd-Cre rat model, Journal of Neuroscience, 2024.

• Wooldridge and colleagues, Central amygdalar PKC-delta neurons mediate fentanyl withdrawal, Neuropsychopharmacology, 2025.


APPENDIX 3. Both-Pathway Quieting Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 81.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

This cell lives in the striatum, the forebrain hub that turns wanting into doing, across the caudate, putamen and nucleus accumbens.

It is a small to medium cell whose output wire never leaves the striatum, its branches nearly bare of the knobs called spines.

Its messenger is gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's main quieting signal.

It listens to an alerting relay from the parafascicular thalamus, to acetylcholine and to dopamine, and answers by inhibiting the striatum's output cells, the spiny projection neurons, on both opposed routes.

In primates it is one of the two most numerous inhibitory cells of the striatum.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

In primates the labels are "TAC3 interneurons", "TAC3+ interneurons" and "the TAC3 class", after the gene symbol for tachykinin precursor 3, so each is a gene-symbol barcode.

In rodents the same lineage is "tyrosine hydroxylase interneurons", "TH interneurons" or "THINs" after an enzyme, again a gene-symbol barcode, with variants "Type I" through "Type IV", which are bare cluster identifiers.

The database entry, Cell Ontology CL:4042001 "TAC3-positive striatal interneuron", welds a gene-symbol barcode to an atlas cluster identifier.

None says what the cell does.

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real, and was found by methods sharing no assumptions.

Whole-cell recording and light-triggered activation in mouse slices established a reproducible inhibitory cell with four electrical variants (Ibanez-Sandoval and colleagues, 2010; Xenias and colleagues, 2015).

Single-nucleus ribonucleic acid (RNA) sequencing, which reads one cell's gene activity at a time, recovered a discrete population at 30 percent of marmoset and 34 percent of human striatal interneurons (Krienen and colleagues, 2020).

An independent study of twenty-eight human donors found the same class at 28.6 percent of interneurons (Garma and colleagues, 2024).

It is distinct from the fast-spiking parvalbumin interneuron, which it resembles in shape in the macaque: imaging shows they never overlap, and this cell spikes briefly and cannot sustain firing.

It is functionally necessary: destroying these cells in mice with a targeted toxin gene impairs prepulse inhibition, the damping of a startle by a quiet warning just before the bang, while habituation and walking survive (Assous and colleagues, 2017).

The same lesion leaves mice unable to change action after the reward is made worthless (Kaminer and colleagues, 2019); no causal test has yet been run in a primate.

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

Already named, and used without definition, are the striatum's other local cells: cholinergic, fast-spiking and low-threshold-spike interneurons.

Unnamed is the population supplying roughly a third of every inhibitory cell in the primate striatum.

The strongest counter-candidate, "tyrosine hydroxylase interneuron", fails twice: it is an enzyme name, and it misleads, because these cells lack the rest of the dopamine machinery and release GABA.

The older phrase "dopaminergic neuron intrinsic to the striatum" fails likewise, having been refuted rather than adopted.

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

"Even-Handed" teaches that the cell plays no favourites.

The striatum issues its orders along two opposed routes, one promoting a movement and one suppressing it; this cell inhibits both.

"Brake" teaches that it slows rather than drives, and is applied by an arriving signal.

"Neuron" marks it as one nerve cell, not a region and not a pathway.

The insight from the name alone is that the brain holds cells whose job is to slow a whole decision, not tip it one way.

That insight unlocks sensory gating, the ability of a warning to blunt a reaction, and the flexibility to drop an action whose reward has gone.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

Satisfied by slice electrophysiology, primate single-nucleus sequencing, tissue imaging and macaque patch recording.

• Necessity.

Satisfied in rodent only: targeted destruction impairs prepulse inhibition and abolishes action switching after devaluation.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

Satisfied: the class is defined by several genes together, not the shared TAC3 signal, and parts cleanly from parvalbumin cells.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

Satisfied: every label in use is a gene symbol, an atlas string or an ordinal.

• Pedagogical clarity.

Satisfied: the name gives the effect's direction and its impartiality.

• Directionality.

In comes glutamate from the parafascicular thalamus, with acetylcholine and dopamine; out goes GABA to spiny projection neurons of both routes.

• Hierarchical position.

Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework.

At Layer 8 it forms a feed-forward inhibition motif; at Layer 9, the striatum and its loop through the basal ganglia.

The Layer 10 consequence is impartial damping of action selection, the Layer 12 consequence sensory gating.

• Universality within its class.

Satisfied: the founding developmental class occurs in primates, pig, ferret and mouse, though far scarcer in mouse.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

Satisfied: any account listing only cholinergic, fast-spiking and low-threshold-spike cells omits a third of primate striatal inhibition.

• Clinical consequence.

Not yet known: no human disease has been tied to this cell, and no drug or genetic tool yet reaches it.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Krienen and colleagues, Innovations present in the primate interneuron repertoire, Nature, 2020.

• Corrigan and colleagues, Conservation and alteration of mammalian striatal interneurons, Nature, 2025.

• Garma and colleagues, Interneuron diversity in the human dorsal striatum, Nature Communications, 2024.

• Xenias and colleagues, Are striatal tyrosine hydroxylase interneurons dopaminergic?, Journal of Neuroscience, 2015.

• Ibanez-Sandoval and colleagues, Electrophysiological and morphological characteristics and synaptic connectivity of tyrosine hydroxylase-expressing neurons in adult mouse striatum, Journal of Neuroscience, 2010.

• Assous and colleagues, Differential processing of thalamic information via distinct striatal interneuron circuits, Nature Communications, 2017.

• Kaminer and colleagues, Loss of striatal tyrosine-hydroxylase interneurons impairs instrumental goal-directed behavior, European Journal of Neuroscience, 2019.


APPENDIX 4. Dashed-Hope Damping Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 82.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

This cell sits in a dense cluster in the midbrain, just behind the region making most of the brain's dopamine, the messenger of better-than-predicted news.

It is a projection neuron, one whose fibre reaches far beyond its neighbourhood, carrying gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brain's quietening signal, to the dopamine-making cells of the ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra.

It is studded with the receptors through which morphine acts.

It fires in bursts to shock, to cues warning of shock, and to rewards that fail to arrive, and falls silent when reward comes, mirroring the dopamine cells it commands.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

The labels in use, verbatim, are "RMTg neurons", "rostromedial tegmental nucleus neurons", "tVTA neurons", "FoxP1+ neurons" and "Pnoc neurons".

"Rostromedial tegmental" and "tail of the ventral tegmental area" are anatomical coordinates, a direction word bolted onto a region, or a position relative to a neighbour.

"FoxP1" and "Pnoc", short for prepronociceptin, are gene-symbol barcodes, while "LatC", applied in 2026 to the adjacent human cluster, is a cluster identifier.

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real, found twice over in 2009 by two laboratories working separately, under Jhou and under Barrot.

Methods sharing no assumptions converge: fibre tracing from the dopamine regions, staining for the enzyme that builds GABA, single-unit recording in rats and macaques, and staining of ten human midbrains in 2026.

It is most easily confused with the local GABA interneurons of the ventral tegmental area, which also inhibit dopamine cells but are midbrain-born and wire only to neighbours.

It is functionally necessary: destroying the cells left rats freezing 76 percent less to a danger-predicting tone and abolished avoidance of an elevated maze's exposed arms.

A second study showed the chemical half: the share of dopamine cells falling silent to footshock, siren and bright light collapsed to 19, 16 and 18 percent.

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

Named already are the ventral tegmental area, the lateral habenula, GABA, the genes FoxP1 and Pnoc, and the nucleus itself, which holds an atlas entry.

What is not named is the cell, since every phrase in use means neuron at address X, or neuron carrying gene Y.

The strongest counter-candidate, "rostromedial tegmental nucleus neuron", is a coordinate, grammatically identical to laterodorsal tegmental and pedunculopontine tegmental, and coordinates are excluded however consistent.

It is also not understood without definition: papers still explain on first mention that this nucleus is also called the tail of the ventral tegmental area.

It appears in no standard textbook, returns zero matches in the Cell Ontology and Uberon, and the field's "brake" shorthand stays in scare quotes.

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

"Worse" teaches that this cell cares how badly an event turned out, not merely that it happened.

"Than-Expected" teaches that the brain runs a standing prediction and that this cell reports the shortfall rather than reality itself.

"Restraint" teaches what the report is for, since the output is not an alarm but a holding back, applied to dopamine and thence to pursuit.

"Neuron" teaches that one cell type, not a region, does the whole computation.

The insight from the name alone is that disappointment is a measurement, not a mood, and that the brain has hardware turning it into restraint.

That insight unlocks punishment resistance, the failure to stop a rewarding action that has begun to hurt, which is the core of addiction.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

Satisfied by two independent 2009 discoveries and convergent tracing, recording and sequencing.

• Necessity.

Satisfied: destroying the cells removes most of the dopamine pause and most learned avoidance.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

Satisfied with one limit: only 30 to 40 percent of neurons there show the full pattern, chiefly those projecting to the dopamine cells.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

Satisfied: every label is an address or a gene symbol, and no eponym exists.

• Pedagogical clarity.

Satisfied: the name teaches prediction, shortfall and inhibition in plain words.

• Directionality.

It takes excitation from the lateral habenula, frontal cortex and parabrachial nucleus, and sends inhibition to dopamine cell bodies.

• Hierarchical position.

Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework.

◦ Layer 8 motif: the sign-inverting feed-forward inhibitory relay, which opioids exploit in reverse by silencing it.

◦ Layer 9 pathway: the lateral habenula to midbrain route, by which bad outcomes reach dopamine.

◦ Layer 10: it sets the sign of dopamine's teaching signal to the striatum; Layer 12: punishment learning.

• Universality within its class.

Satisfied across rat, mouse and macaque, the human cluster mapped in 2026.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

Satisfied: learning models need a source for the negative half of prediction error.

• Clinical consequence.

Silencing it makes rats endure more footshock for cocaine, and opioids act partly here, but no human disease is yet tied to it.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Jhou and colleagues, The rostromedial tegmental nucleus (RMTg), a GABAergic afferent to midbrain dopamine neurons, encodes aversive stimuli and inhibits motor responses, Neuron, 2009.

• Hong and colleagues, Negative reward signals from the lateral habenula to dopamine neurons are mediated by rostromedial tegmental nucleus in primates, Journal of Neuroscience, 2011.

• Smith and colleagues, Gene expression and neurochemical characterization of the rostromedial tegmental nucleus (RMTg) in rats and mice, Brain Structure and Function, 2019.

• Li and colleagues, Generality and opponency of rostromedial tegmental (RMTg) roles in valence processing, eLife, 2019.

• Filimontseva, Fu and Halliday, Location and mapping of the human rostromedial tegmental nucleus and associated midbrain inhibitory nuclei regulating dopamine neurons, Brain Structure and Function, 2026.


APPENDIX 5. Blood-Sampling Thirst Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 111.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

This neuron lives in the subfornical organ, a lentil-sized button of tissue on the roof of the third ventricle, a fluid-filled chamber in the brain.

Its vessels are deliberately leaky, so this cell is bathed in whole blood rather than shielded behind the blood-brain barrier, the tight vessel lining that keeps circulating chemicals out of brain tissue.

It is a small excitatory neuron, a nerve cell that urges its targets to fire, and it speaks with glutamate, the brain's main excitatory messenger.

It reads the blood directly: concentration, through a stretch-gated pore called transmembrane protein 63B (TMEM63B), and the hormone angiotensin, released when blood volume falls.

Its output excites the median preoptic nucleus, the hub commanding drinking.

When it fires, an animal that has just drunk its fill will cross a cage and drink again, so its firing is not a measurement of thirst but the thirst itself.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

The leading current review calls it "SFOVglut2 neurons" and "thirst-promoting glutamatergic neurons", with markers "Slc17a6, Etv1, Nos1, Agtr1a, Pdyn, and Nxph4", a gene-symbol barcode bolted to an anatomical coordinate.

Laboratories also write "SFO-nNOS neurons", "SFO-GLUT" and "SFO-ETV1", the same pattern, and profiling adds cluster identifiers like "Glut5-Rxfp3".

The rest are unstable descriptive phrases: "thirst neurons" is used for subfornical, preoptic and even fly cells, and "water neurons" is re-explained in the text each time it appears.

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real, and independent laboratories converge on it.

Switching on genetically marked cells with light evoked immediate, water-specific drinking in fully water-satiated mice (Oka and colleagues, 2015).

Profiling of 2,642 subfornical neurons resolved five excitatory and three inhibitory types (Pool and colleagues, 2020), and the relay to the preoptic area was mapped by ablation and silencing (Augustine and colleagues, 2018).

It is distinct from the cell most easily confused with it, the inhibitory thirst-suppressing neuron of the same organ.

The two differ in messenger and marker genes, and most plainly in behaviour: switching one on makes a sated mouse drink, switching the other on makes a parched mouse stop.

It is functionally necessary: mice lacking transmembrane protein 63B drank about half as much as normal when dehydrated, and restoring the gene inside this organ alone returned drinking to about three quarters of normal (Yang and colleagues, 2024, confirmed by Zou and colleagues, 2025).

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

What is named is generous: the organ, the hormone angiotensin, the sensation thirst, the channel, and the illness.

What is not named is the cell that does the work.

The strongest counter-candidate is "osmoreceptor", which is textbook-grade and needs no definition, and it fails three ways.

It is used predicatively: these cells function as osmoreceptors rather than being them; its classical anchor is the organum vasculosum and the supraoptic nucleus; and it names half the job, saying nothing of angiotensin or of the urge it produces.

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

"Blood" teaches that this cell reads the bloodstream itself, not a report relayed from other neurons.

"Sampling" teaches that the reading is direct and continuous, possible only because it sits outside the blood-brain barrier.

"Thirst" teaches that its output is not a number but a want the animal works to switch off.

"Neuron" teaches that an ordinary nerve cell does this, not a gland.

The insight from the name alone is that thirst is manufactured, by a few nerve cells permitted to touch the blood.

That unlocks adipsic hypernatremia, in which the blood turns dangerously salty while the person feels no thirst, because that same exposure lets antibodies reach these cells.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

Satisfied, by light activation, single-cell profiling and gene deletion across independent laboratories.

• Necessity.

Satisfied, by deleting the sensing channel in this organ and rescuing it there.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

Satisfied, though the name denotes a class of at least five excitatory types.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

Satisfied, no textbook or ontology entry supplies a proper name.

• Pedagogical clarity.

Satisfied, the name states input, privilege and output in three words.

• Directionality.

It takes in blood concentration, circulating angiotensin and fast reports from mouth and gut, and excites the median preoptic nucleus and wider lamina terminalis.

• Hierarchical position.

Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework.

Its Layer 8 motif is a first-order sensory drive node with recurrent inhibitory braking.

Its Layer 9 structure is the lamina terminalis thirst pathway.

The Layer 10 consequence is lifelong fluid balance, and the Layer 12 consequence is conscious motivation to seek water.

• Universality within its class.

Satisfied for mammals in principle, shown in mouse and rat, though the species match is unsettled.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

Satisfied, it is the entry point without which the fluid-balance hierarchy has no first term.

• Clinical consequence.

In autoimmune adipsic hypernatremia, antibodies against this organ leave children salt-loaded and without thirst.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Oka and colleagues, Thirst driving and suppressing signals encoded by distinct neural populations in the brain, Nature, 2015.

• Hiyama and colleagues, Adipsic hypernatremia without hypothalamic lesions accompanied by autoantibodies to subfornical organ, Brain Pathology, 2017.

• Augustine and colleagues, Hierarchical neural architecture underlying thirst regulation, Nature, 2018.

• Pool and colleagues, The cellular basis of distinct thirst modalities, Nature, 2020.

• Yang and colleagues, TMEM63B channel is the osmosensor required for thirst drive of interoceptive neurons, Cell Discovery, 2024.

• Grove and Knight, The neurobiology of thirst and salt appetite, Neuron, 2024.

• Zou and colleagues, TMEM63B functions as a mammalian hyperosmolar sensor for thirst, Neuron, 2025.


APPENDIX 6. Push-And-Pull Novelty Neuron, proved. (From CHAPTER 112.)

WHAT IT NAMES.

This small nerve cell sits in the lateral supramammillary nucleus, a thumbprint of tissue in the hypothalamus at the base of the brain.

It sends one long fibre, an axon, into the dentate gyrus, the entrance hall of the hippocampus, where memories of places are laid down.

Its defining property is that each ending releases two opposite messengers at once: glutamate, the brain's main go signal, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), its main stop signal.

It contacts granule cells, the output cells of the dentate gyrus, and the inhibitory cells that restrain them, but not the neighbouring hilar mossy cells.

It fires when the animal meets a place it has not seen before.

Alone it cannot fire a granule cell; it raises readiness, so a cortical message arriving at the same moment now succeeds.

WHAT THE LITERATURE CALLS IT NOW.

The labels in use, verbatim, are "SuM neurons", "SuML neurons", "SuM-DG neurons", "SuML-Vgat neurons", "VGluT2+/VGAT+ neurons" and "GABA-glutamate supramammillary neurons".

The first three are anatomical coordinates or wiring addresses, naming tissue that holds several unrelated cell types rather than the cell.

The next two are gene-symbol barcodes, and the last is an unstable phrase used for unrelated cells elsewhere.

STAGE 1, CONCEPTUAL PRECISION.

The cell is real, found by tracing fibres under a microscope rather than by clustering, so it is no statistical artefact.

Soussi and colleagues found both loading proteins in 96 percent of endings traced into the rat dentate gyrus, and Billwiller and colleagues in 378 of 380 mouse neurons.

Three further laboratories confirmed the double message by direct recording, and a molecular survey found it again.

It is most easily confused with its neighbour in the medial supramammillary nucleus, which reaches area CA2 and the lower dentate gyrus and speaks with one voice only.

Just 4 percent of that neighbour's endings carry the inhibitory marker.

It is functionally necessary: when Li and colleagues stripped the glutamate loader from these neurons, mice still learned a new place but could not retrieve it.

STAGE 2, IDENTIFICATION OF A GAP, AND PROOF OF NAMELESSNESS.

What is named is everything around the cell: the tissue, the target granule cell, and both messengers.

What is not named is the cell itself, the one thing on that list that does the work.

No textbook names it, the Cell Ontology holds no entry, and the atlas offers only region, gene and number.

The strongest counter-candidate is "SuML GABA-glutamate neuron", stable across three decades of anatomy.

It fails three times: the first half is a coordinate, the second a transmitter description used elsewhere, and no textbook carries it.

It also fails retrieval: six papers on this cell share no search string.

The gap is genuine.

STAGE 3, PEDAGOGICAL CLARITY.

"Two-Voiced" teaches what makes this cell extraordinary, that one nerve ending can say go and stop in the same breath.

"Novelty" teaches what makes it speak, the arrival of surroundings the animal has not met before.

"Neuron" teaches that this is one cell, not a region and not a pathway.

The insight from the name alone is that the brain runs a dedicated line from its housekeeping floor into its memory gate to say the world has changed, using push and brake together.

That unlocks why a new place is remembered better than a familiar one, and points at Alzheimer's disease, where this line runs abnormally in mice.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

• Reality.

Satisfied, by fibre tracing in two species, recording in four laboratories, and a molecular survey.

• Necessity.

Satisfied, because removing the glutamate loader abolishes memory retrieval while leaving learning intact.

• Conceptual precision and specificity.

Satisfied, because two-voicedness separates this cell from its single-voiced medial neighbour.

• Identification of a gap and proof of namelessness.

Satisfied, because every label in use is a coordinate, barcode or wiring address.

• Pedagogical clarity.

Satisfied, because the name teaches co-release and novelty reporting in three words.

• Directionality.

Satisfied.

It takes in arousal and state signals from the brainstem and nearby hypothalamus.

Its output goes to the upper dentate gyrus, onto granule cells and inhibitory cells, never hilar mossy cells.

• Hierarchical position.

Satisfied.

It sits at Layer 6, the Cellular Layer, of the fifteen-layer framework.

Its Layer 8 motif is long-range gain setting, one fibre exciting a principal cell and recruiting its inhibitory partners.

Its Layer 9 structure is the supramammillary-to-dentate pathway.

At Layer 10 it helps generate dentate theta and gamma rhythms during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, and at Layer 12 it makes new places memorable.

• Universality within its class.

Satisfied for rodents, though never shown in a monkey or a human.

• Theoretical completeness in hierarchical models.

Satisfied, because it fills the empty slot for a subcortical cell reporting world state to the memory gate.

• Clinical consequence.

Satisfied in animals only.

In Alzheimer's disease model mice these neurons fire abnormally, and driving them restores memory.

No human evidence exists, and no drug acts on this cell.

SOURCES FOR THIS CONSTRUCT.

• Soussi and colleagues, Heterogeneity of the supramammillary-hippocampal pathways: evidence for a unique GABAergic neurotransmitter phenotype and regional differences, European Journal of Neuroscience, 2010.

• Hashimotodani and colleagues, Supramammillary Nucleus Afferents to the Dentate Gyrus Co-release Glutamate and GABA and Potentiate Granule Cell Output, Cell Reports, 2018.

• Chen and colleagues, A hypothalamic novelty signal modulates hippocampal memory, Nature, 2020.

• Li and colleagues, Supramammillary nucleus synchronizes with dentate gyrus to regulate spatial memory retrieval through glutamate release, eLife, 2020.

• Billwiller and colleagues, GABA-glutamate supramammillary neurons control theta and gamma oscillations in the dentate gyrus during paradoxical (REM) sleep, Brain Structure and Function, 2020.

• Luo and colleagues, Segregated supramammillary-dentate gyrus circuits modulate cognitive and affective function in healthy and Alzheimer's disease model mice, Neuron, 2025.
