THE NEURONAL MANUSCRIPT

Every Type of Neuron in the Human Nervous System, Described, Explained, and Specified

VOLUME 5 OF 5

Chapters 240 to 302

D. R. Dison

Founder, Artificial Intelligence University (AIU)

ORCID: 0009-0001-9246-5758

Prepared 30 July 2026


ABOUT THIS VOLUME

This is volume 5 of five, and it continues the catalogue at Chapter 240.

The front matter and Part One, the general account of the neuron, are given in Volume 1 and are not repeated here.

The tags and flags used throughout are explained in Volume 1, and are summarised again in one line each below.

• (PUC) marks a Previously Unnamed Construct: a neuron type that is real, functionally necessary and relied upon in the literature, but which had no accepted proper name until this work gave it one.

• (COG) marks a type involved in cognition, and (NON-COG) marks a type that is not.


PART FIFTEEN: DORSAL ROOT GANGLION NEURONS - BODY SENSATION (CONTINUED FROM VOLUME 4)

CHAPTER 239. LOW-THRESHOLD MECHANORECEPTORS (LTMRS) (Gentle-Touch Sensing Neuron) (NON-COG)

Every pleasant thing your skin has ever told you arrived on one of these wires.

Low-threshold mechanoreceptor, abbreviated LTMR, is laboratory shorthand describing a measurement setting rather than a purpose, so it teaches a student nothing.

Gentle names the defining property, because these cells fire to skin indentations far below the force needed to cause harm, in the fraction of a millinewton range, unlike their high-threshold neighbours.

Touch names the faculty they build.

Sensing Neuron marks them as the inward-reporting side of the nervous system rather than the commanding side, so that together the name says this is the family that lets a light contact be felt at all.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A low threshold mechanoreceptor (LTMR) is a dorsal root ganglion (DRG) sensory neuron that fires to gentle deformation of the skin, far below any force that hurts.

Low threshold means it answers a push under one thousandth of a newton, roughly the weight of a grain of salt.

This entry is the parent family, and the four that follow are its fastest members, so their counts sit inside this one rather than adding to it.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Pseudounipolar, a round dendrite free cell body on a stalk that splits into a skin branch and a spinal branch.

The skin end is rarely a naked wire, ending instead in a corpuscle, on a Merkel cell, or as a palisade of bare membrane called a lanceolate ending within 100 nanometres of a hair follicle wall.

SIZE:

Fast myelinated members have cell bodies of median diameter 90 to 100 micrometres in the 2025 human atlas, while unmyelinated C tactile members fall between 42 and 80 micrometres.

Fibre diameter varies thirty fold, from 0.4 to 12 micrometres.

Human hair follicle LTMRs conduct in the fast A beta range, whereas the mouse equivalents conduct in the slower A delta range.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• A beta slowly adapting types 1 and 2, and rapidly adapting types 1 and 2, each detailed in the four entries that follow.

• A beta field and hair follicle endings, which cover hairy skin.

• A delta down hair endings, the most sensitive of all, also excited by moving cool air.

• C tactile afferents, unmyelinated and tuned to slow stroking near 3 centimetres per second, which is the physiology of a caress.

The 2025 atlas resolved four A beta clusters, A-beta-LTMR.ETV1, A-beta-LTMR.LGI, A-beta-LTMR.NSG2 and A-beta-LTMR.CCKAR, plus a C-LTMR.CDH9 cluster.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies fill dorsal root ganglia at every spinal level, and endings tile the body surface, both glabrous skin such as palm and sole and hairy skin everywhere else.

Central branches climb the dorsal columns to the gracile nucleus for the lower body and the cuneate nucleus for the upper body, dropping collaterals into laminae III to V, with C tactile fibres ending in inner lamina II.

The interface that matters is the dorsal root entry zone, where peripheral myelin gives way to central myelin.

NUMBER:

The best modern estimate is about 230,000 tactile afferent fibres in young adult skin, plausible range 200,000 to 270,000, falling 5 to 8 percent per decade.

About 19 percent serve the face and lips through the trigeminal ganglion, leaving roughly 185,000 with DRG cell bodies, of which about 60 percent are slowly adapting.

Adding hair follicle, field, deep tissue and joint mechanoreceptors gives a family of 250,000 to 400,000 cells, some 2.5 to 4 percent of the roughly 10 million DRG neurons and about 0.0003 percent of all neurons.

Confidence is high for the 230,000 figure and low for the wider bound, and single cell surveys assign LTMRs a larger share than these fibre counts allow, a discrepancy not yet resolved.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Fast myelinated members rest near minus 60 millivolts and fire spikes lasting half a millisecond to a millisecond with a very high safety factor.

C tactile members have broad spikes carried partly by tetrodotoxin resistant sodium channels and creep along at half a metre per second, so a stroke on the calf registers a full second late.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Central terminals excite dorsal column nucleus cells and laminae III to V neurons including a well known PKC gamma population.

They also excite inhibitory interneurons that damp incoming pain traffic, which is the basis of gate control and the reason rubbing a banged elbow helps.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A beta fibres are 6 to 12 micrometres conducting at 33 to 75 metres per second, A delta fibres 1 to 5 micrometres at 5 to 30, and C fibres 0.4 to 1.2 micrometres at 0.5 to 2.

Myelin is shed at a heminode just before the ending, and that heminode is where spikes are born.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate throughout, packaged by VGLUT1 in myelinated members and by VGLUT3 in C tactile afferents.

Healthy LTMRs carry no substance P, but after nerve injury some A beta cells switch it on, and that switch is one route by which touch begins to hurt.

MYELINATION:

A beta and A delta members are myelinated one Schwann cell per internode, with thinner sheaths than proprioceptors.

C tactile afferents are unmyelinated, several axons sharing one Schwann cell in a Remak bundle.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate but relentless, supporting axons up to a metre long.

The unbarriered capillaries of the ganglion let toxins and high blood glucose reach these cells freely, which is why diabetes and chemotherapy blunt touch early.

PLASTICITY:

Corpuscles and Merkel cells are rebuilt from stem cells for life, so the sensor is replaceable while the neuron is not.

After injury the cord becomes sensitised and light touch is read as pain, a PIEZO2 dependent state called mechanical allodynia, which is why sunburned skin hurts under a shirt.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glial cells jacket the cell body and buffer potassium exactly as for other DRG neurons.

The extraordinary difference is at the far end, where terminal Schwann cells, which elsewhere merely insulate, become the stacked lamellar cells that build Meissner and Pacinian corpuscles, so here the glia are the sense organ itself.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take these cells out and skin still burns, aches and feels hot and cold, but it stops being informative.

Patients lacking PIEZO2 show exactly this: no vibration sense, no touch discrimination, no felt joint position, yet pain and temperature intact, so they cannot button a shirt in the dark.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The sensor is PIEZO2, tuned by the accessory protein STOML3 and modulated by membrane cholesterol.

Much of the computation happens outside the membrane, because the capsule filters the stimulus mechanically before the neuron sees it, so each subtype is defined as much by its jelly and collagen as by its channels.

The T junction low pass filters traffic on the way in, and after injury these cells release factors that recruit microglia, turning a touch pathway into a pain pathway.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: indentation depth in micrometres, indentation velocity in micrometres per second, lateral skin strain as a fraction, vibration amplitude and frequency in micrometres and hertz.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to about 500 spikes per second, glutamate in the dorsal column nuclei and spinal laminae II to V, plus drive to gate control interneurons.

• STATE: adaptation level per subtype, refractory timer, spike phase accumulator, injury sensitisation flag.

• PARAMETERS: threshold 0.01 to 15 micrometres by subtype, gain 0.4 to 9 spikes per second per micrometre, conduction 0.5 to 75 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: transduction under 1 millisecond, adaptation 2 milliseconds to 10 seconds across the family, corpuscle renewal weeks, injury sensitisation hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE: diabetic and chemotherapy neuropathy strip the longest fibres first, giving numb feet with intact pain; PIEZO2 loss abolishes discriminative touch outright; after nerve injury the same input drives allodynia, where a bedsheet feels like a blade.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert one skin indentation trace into the firing rate of every low threshold mechanoreceptor class in a supplied list.
Create a number variable called adapted with initial value 0.0.
For each class in the class list, perform the following operations.
    Set adapted to 0.0.
    For each depth in the indentation trace, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the difference of depth and adapted.
        Set drive to the result.
        Calculate the quotient of 0.001 divided by the time constant of the class.
        Calculate the product of drive and the result.
        Calculate the sum of adapted and the result.
        Set adapted to the result.
        Calculate the difference of drive and the threshold of the class.
        Set rate to the result.
        Check if rate is less than 0.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set rate to 0.
        End the conditional block.
        Calculate the product of rate and the gain of the class.
        Set rate to the result.
        Display rate to the console.
    End the loop.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: one tiny model with four parameter sets shows the whole family is a
# single leaky filter running at four different speeds.
DT = 0.001  # simulation step in seconds

# name: (gain in spikes/s per micrometre, adaptation time constant in s,
#        threshold in micrometres)
TYPES = {"SA1": (1.10, 4.000, 8.0), "SA2": (0.45, 10.000, 15.0),
         "RA1": (2.20, 0.060, 5.0), "RA2": (9.00, 0.002, 0.5)}

def response(name, depth_series):
    gain, tau, thresh = TYPES[name]
    adapted, phase, spikes = 0.0, 0.0, 0   # slow state, phase, spike count
    for depth in depth_series:
        drive = depth - adapted
        adapted = adapted + (depth - adapted) * DT / tau
        phase = phase + gain * max(0.0, drive - thresh) * DT
        while phase >= 1.0:                # emit whole spikes only
            phase, spikes = phase - 1.0, spikes + 1
    return spikes

if __name__ == "__main__":
    step = [0.0] * 50 + [100.0] * 500      # 100 um step held for 500 ms
    for name in ("SA1", "SA2", "RA1", "RA2"):
        print("%s fired %d spikes to a 100 um step" % (name, response(name, step)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It answers a force too small to bend a hair, and never answers heat, cold or damage.

It is the only sensory family whose end organs are built out of glial cells, and the only one whose loss leaves pain intact while making the world untouchable.

CHAPTER 240. A-BETA SLOWLY ADAPTING TYPE 1 (SA1) (Fine-Edge Pressure Neuron) (NON-COG)

Run a fingertip across a line of braille, and the cell reading it is only half a neuron, because its business end is plugged into a tiny clear cell borrowed from your skin.

SA1 is an alphanumeric series label recording only how fast the response decays in a laboratory recording.

Fine-Edge names what the cell is actually for, because its narrow, sharply bounded receptive field makes it the afferent that resolves corners, edges, curvature and raised dot patterns, and it is the channel that carries braille and fine surface form.

Pressure names the physical quantity it holds onto, since its partner Merkel cells transduce the sustained component of an indentation rather than only its onset.

Neuron marks it as a first-order afferent, and the name therefore teaches both the stimulus it keeps reporting and the perceptual job that reporting serves.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An A beta slowly adapting type 1 afferent (SA1) is a fast myelinated dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neuron whose skin ending clamps onto Merkel cells, small transparent cells in the deepest layer of the epidermis.

Slowly adapting means it keeps firing while the skin stays pressed, instead of falling silent after the first moment.

Its speciality is spatial detail: edges, corners, points, curvature and printed dots, which is why braille is readable at all.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Pseudounipolar, with a round dendrite free cell body and a T shaped branch point.

The skin branch divides into up to about twenty twigs, each ending in a disc that indents one Merkel cell like a thumb pressed into dough.

In hairless skin the Merkel cells cluster at the tips of the epidermal ridges that make your fingerprint, and in hairy skin they cluster in a touch dome beside a guard hair.

SIZE:

Median cell body diameter is 90 to 100 micrometres in the 2025 human DRG atlas, and the fibre is 6 to 12 micrometres thick with myelin.

A Merkel cell is only 10 to 15 micrometres across, so a neuron a metre long ends on a target a hundred thousand times shorter than itself.

The receptive field, the skin patch that drives the cell, averages about 11 square millimetres on the fingertip, the smallest on the body.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Glabrous SA1 units, on Merkel cells at the bases of the epidermal ridges of fingertip, palm and sole.

• Hairy skin touch dome units, which give a brisker initial burst.

• Nail bed Merkel units, packed around the nail, helping encode fingertip force.

Assignment of these classes to the four A beta molecular clusters of the 2025 atlas is still provisional.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies occupy dorsal root ganglia at every spinal level, with face equivalents in the trigeminal ganglion.

Endings live in the basal layer of the epidermis, at the interface between epidermis and dermis, an unusual address, since most touch endings stop in the dermis below.

Central branches reach laminae III, IV and V and climb the dorsal columns unbroken to the gracile and cuneate nuclei, crossing the dorsal root entry zone where Schwann cell myelin is handed to oligodendrocyte myelin.

NUMBER:

Take the whole body figure of about 230,000 tactile afferents, remove the roughly 19 percent that are facial, and apply the one quarter share SA1 units hold in hand recordings.

That gives about 50,000 SA1 neurons, plausible range 30,000 to 70,000, which is 0.5 percent of the roughly 10 million DRG neurons and about 0.00006 percent of all neurons.

It sits inside the LTMR family total rather than adding to it, at moderate confidence, anchored on Johansson and Vallbo's 241 tactile units per square centimetre at the fingertip against 58 in the palm.

Independent estimates put SA1 density near 70 to 100 units per square centimetre at the fingertip.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 60 millivolts, with a narrow spike and no shoulder on its falling phase.

The signature is an irregular sustained discharge, and that raggedness is the classic test separating SA1 from SA2.

Rates run 20 to 60 spikes per second during a steady press and 100 to 200 during the ramp in, from a threshold near 8 to 30 micrometres, conducting at 35 to 75 metres per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Peripherally the Merkel cell is presynaptic to the neuron and releases serotonin onto it, so a synapse sits inside the receptor itself.

Centrally the terminal releases glutamate in laminae III to V and in the cuneate and gracile nuclei, where lateral inhibition sharpens the edge signal a second time.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Fast and thickly myelinated, branching heavily only at its two ends, with myelin shed at the last heminode before each disc.

Each of the twenty or so discs can start spikes independently, so one axon polls a small committee of sensors, which is why the receptive field has multiple hot spots.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate centrally, loaded by VGLUT1, and serotonin travelling the other way from Merkel cell to nerve terminal inside the receptor.

No substance P and no calcitonin gene related peptide, the two pain peptides, which is a defining negative marker.

Maintenance depends on neurotrophin 3 through the receptor TrkC and on the receptor RET.

MYELINATION:

Myelinated by Schwann cells peripherally and oligodendrocytes centrally, with a thinner sheath than a proprioceptor and nodes of Ranvier 0.5 to 1 millimetre apart.

The neuron instructs sheath thickness by displaying neuregulin-1 type III.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High and sustained, because unlike most touch cells this one fires continuously while contact lasts.

The unmyelinated terminal discs pump sodium constantly and are packed with mitochondria, and the ganglion's absent blood nerve barrier lets glucose and platinum drugs reach the soma unfiltered.

PLASTICITY:

The sensor is renewable although the neuron is not, because Merkel cells are replaced from epidermal stem cells over weeks to months.

Merkel numbers fall with age, contributing to the decline in tactile spatial acuity after the fifth decade.

Braille reading expands the cortical territory these cells feed, and expert readers show finer acuity in the reading finger.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glial cells jacket the cell body and buffer the potassium a continuously firing neuron releases.

The unusual partner is at the far end, where the Merkel cell is not glia but a skin cell of epidermal origin recruited as a transducer, depending on the transcription factor ATOH1 for its existence.

Keratinocytes surround the complex and transmit force to it, while terminal Schwann cells stop at the epidermal boundary and leave the last stretch bare.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete SA1 and the fingertip becomes a pressure gauge that cannot read.

You would still know something was touching you and roughly how hard, because RA1 and SA2 survive, but shape would be gone: no edges, no corners, no letters, no telling a key from a coin without looking.

Braille would be a blank page, and the cuneate nucleus would lose the high resolution map it exists to sharpen.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is a two cell sensor with a clear division of labour.

The Merkel cell carries PIEZO2 and depends on it absolutely, producing the sustained response, while the nerve terminal carries its own PIEZO2 and produces the fast dynamic part, so one afferent runs two transducers at two speeds.

Fingerprint ridges focus strain onto the Merkel clusters, so skin architecture does part of the computation, and Merkel cells release peptides that influence local immune cells and keratinocytes.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: indentation depth in micrometres, useful range 8 to 1500; local surface curvature in reciprocal millimetres; indentation velocity in micrometres per second; skin temperature in degrees Celsius, which shifts gain slightly.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate in laminae III to V and in the cuneate and gracile nuclei, as an irregular train of 0 to about 200 spikes per second.

• STATE: membrane voltage, Merkel cell calcium, slow adaptation variable, PIEZO2 inactivation level, interval jitter seed.

• PARAMETERS: threshold 8 to 30 micrometres, static gain about 1 spike per second per micrometre, edge gain about 6 times static gain, receptive field about 11 square millimetres, conduction 35 to 75 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: transduction under 1 millisecond, fast adaptation 5 to 15 milliseconds, slow adaptation 2 to 5 seconds, Merkel cell turnover weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: PIEZO2 loss of function abolishes fine form perception while pain remains; diabetic and chemotherapy neuropathy kill the longest SA1 axons first; leprosy strips these endings from the cooler skin of the fingers; ageing thins the Merkel population.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert a scanned surface profile into the edge enhanced, slowly adapting discharge of an SA1 afferent.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.0.
Create a number variable called previous_depth with initial value 0.0.
Create a number variable called older_depth with initial value 0.0.
For each centre_depth in surface_profile, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the sum of older_depth and centre_depth.
    Calculate the difference of the result and previous_depth.
    Calculate the difference of the result and previous_depth.
    Set curvature to the result.
    Check if curvature is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set curvature to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of previous_depth and 10.0.
    Calculate the difference of the result and adaptation.
    Set drive to the result.
    Check if drive is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of 0.02 and drive.
    Calculate the sum of adaptation and the result.
    Set adaptation to the result.
    Calculate the product of 6.0 and curvature.
    Calculate the sum of drive and the result.
    Display the result to the console.
    Set older_depth to previous_depth.
    Set previous_depth to centre_depth.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the SA1 computation is a short spatial filter plus a slow leak, and
# Python expresses both without any library at all.
THRESHOLD = 10.0    # micrometres of indentation before firing begins
STATIC_GAIN = 1.0   # spikes/s per micrometre of sustained indentation
EDGE_GAIN = 6.0     # spikes/s per micrometre of surface curvature
ADAPT_RATE = 0.02   # fraction of drive folded into adaptation per sample
MAX_RATE = 200.0    # ceiling set by the refractory period

def sa1_scan(profile):
    """profile: indentation depth in micrometres at successive scan points."""
    rates, adaptation = [], 0.0
    for i in range(1, len(profile) - 1):
        # Second spatial difference: positive values mark the edge of a dot.
        curvature = max(0.0, profile[i - 1] + profile[i + 1] - 2.0 * profile[i])
        pressed = max(0.0, profile[i] - THRESHOLD)
        drive = max(0.0, pressed - adaptation)   # slowly adapting plateau
        adaptation += ADAPT_RATE * drive
        rates.append(min(MAX_RATE, STATIC_GAIN * drive + EDGE_GAIN * curvature))
    return rates

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # A flat plateau with a single raised braille dot in the middle.
    surface = [0.0] * 5 + [60.0] * 10 + [140.0] * 3 + [60.0] * 10 + [0.0] * 5
    out = sa1_scan(surface)
    print("rate on the flat plateau:", round(out[8], 1), "spikes/s")
    print("rate at the dot edge:   ", round(max(out), 1), "spikes/s")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only touch afferent whose transducer is a separate cell of skin origin that synapses onto it with serotonin.

A large myelinated fibre that fires irregularly and without pause under a steady press, answers a raised dot far more strongly than a flat plateau of the same depth, and ends on ATOH1 dependent Merkel cells inside the epidermis, is an SA1 and nothing else.

CHAPTER 241. A-BETA SLOWLY ADAPTING TYPE 2 (SA2) (Skin-Stretch Posture Neuron) (NON-COG)

This is the cell that knows your hand is open when your hand is touching nothing, because it reads the stretch of your own skin the way a sail reads wind.

SA2 is a series number that says nothing except that it adapts slowly and was catalogued second.

Skin-Stretch names the stimulus precisely, because these endings are excited by pulling the skin along the long axis of the receptor rather than by pressing into it, and they cluster at the finger and wrist joints and along the palm folds while being scarce in the fingertips.

Posture names the faculty, since human microneurography shows these afferents track voluntary limb and hand movement well enough to signal joint angle, giving the skin itself a share in position sense.

Neuron marks it as an afferent recording a genuine second sense of self carried by a touch fibre.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An A beta slowly adapting type 2 afferent (SA2) is a fast myelinated dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neuron that answers skin being pulled sideways rather than pressed inwards.

Slowly adapting means it holds its discharge for the whole stimulus, and type 2 marks it out from SA1 by a regular rather than a ragged rhythm.

It measures tension in the skin sheet, turning the hand into a strain gauge that reports finger posture and the direction of grip force.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Pseudounipolar, a round dendrite free cell body with a T shaped branch point.

The ending is traditionally a Ruffini corpuscle, a spindle shaped capsule about 1.4 millimetres long in the deep dermis, in which the fibre braids among collagen, so pulling the collagen taut squeezes the fibre like a Chinese finger trap.

Honesty is required, because careful searches find remarkably few Ruffini corpuscles in the human index finger pad even though SA2 recordings there are routine, so the human end organ is unsettled.

SIZE:

Median cell body diameter is 90 to 100 micrometres and the fibre is 6 to 12 micrometres thick with myelin.

The receptive field is large and poorly bounded, about five times the area of an SA1 field on the same skin, often 50 square millimetres or more with no sharp border at all.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Cutaneous units in glabrous skin, densest around the nail, encoding fingertip force direction.

• Cutaneous units in hairy skin, spread far more evenly than SA1 units.

• Joint capsule and ligament Ruffini endings, reporting joint angle near the ends of the range rather than in the middle.

• Periodontal ligament endings around tooth roots, reporting bite force and direction, with cell bodies in the trigeminal ganglion.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in dorsal root ganglia at all spinal levels.

Endings sit in the deep dermis and subcutaneous layer, at the interface between dermis and the fibrous tissue beneath, where skin tension is greatest, concentrating in the nail bed, the finger folds, joint capsules and ligaments.

Central branches enter through the dorsal root entry zone and terminate in laminae III to V and in the gracile and cuneate nuclei.

NUMBER:

Take the whole body figure of about 230,000 tactile afferents, remove the roughly 19 percent that are facial, and apply the near one fifth share SA2 units hold in hand recordings.

That gives about 35,000 SA2 neurons, plausible range 20,000 to 55,000, which is 0.35 percent of the roughly 10 million DRG neurons and about 0.00004 percent of all neurons.

It falls inside the LTMR family total rather than adding to it, at low to moderate confidence, because SA2 units are systematically under sampled by microelectrode recording.

Johansson and Vallbo found that unlike SA1 and RA1 units they spread evenly from palm to fingertip, so the body total scales with skin area rather than with dexterity.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 60 millivolts with a narrow action potential.

The signature is a regular, metronomic discharge, and most units carry an ongoing resting rate of 5 to 20 spikes per second even when nothing touches the skin, because resting skin is never fully slack.

They are about six times less sensitive to indentation than SA1 units but two to four times more sensitive to lateral stretch, conducting at 35 to 75 metres per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Central terminals release glutamate in laminae III to V and in the dorsal column nuclei.

Because SA2 signals resemble joint angle information, their output converges in the cuneate nucleus and cortex with true proprioceptor traffic, and the brain fuses the two into one estimate of posture.

Presynaptic GABA-A receptors let the cord suppress this steady background during movement, which is why you are not constantly aware of your own skin tension.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Fast and myelinated, with the last heminode just outside the capsule serving as the spike initiation site.

Branching in the skin is sparse, and the huge vague field comes from collagen carrying strain over long distances rather than from axonal spread.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, packaged by VGLUT1, with no substance P and no calcitonin gene related peptide.

PIEZO2 is required for the stretch response, and PIEZO2 loss of function patients lose exactly the skin stretch cues these cells provide.

MYELINATION:

Myelinated in the A beta range by Schwann cells peripherally and oligodendrocytes centrally, with internodes near one millimetre.

Myelin stops at the capsule wall, leaving the braided fibre inside naked so collagen presses directly on mechanosensitive membrane.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Continuously moderate rather than peaky, which matters, because an SA2 unit is one of the few sensory neurons that never fully stops.

Holding a background discharge for a lifetime is a real energy cost, met by dense mitochondria at the terminal and the nodes.

PLASTICITY:

Sensitivity depends on the mechanical state of the surrounding collagen, and collagen stiffens with age and sun damage, so gain drifts across a lifetime.

Habitually stretched skin, as on the palms of manual workers, remodels its dermis and changes the signal sent.

After nerve injury the ongoing discharge can become unremitting, contributing to a sense of a tight band when nothing is swollen.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glial cells wrap the cell body as for every DRG neuron, with nothing unusual there.

The special support is structural rather than glial, because fibroblasts, the collagen making cells of the dermis, build and continuously remodel the strands that are this receptor's working parts.

The capsule cells are perineurial, the flattened barrier cells that normally sheathe a nerve bundle, so the receptor is a pocket of nerve sheath turned inside out.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove SA2 and the hand loses the sense of its own shape.

You would still feel contact, texture and vibration, but not which way a held object was pulling, nor the direction of the force you were applying to it.

Skin stretch cues alone let people judge finger position, and single unit microstimulation published in 2022 showed that driving one SA2 unit produces a conscious sensation, so its loss removes a real feeling.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The computation is largely mechanical and happens outside the neuron.

Collagen strands act as a directional filter, so each unit is tuned to one direction of pull, firing hardest along its best axis and least across it, roughly following a cosine.

Collagen is viscoelastic, creeping under load like slowly stretching toffee, so a held stretch produces a discharge that sags over tens of seconds, and because the cell has a resting rate it can also signal by falling silent.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: lateral skin strain, dimensionless, useful range 0 to 0.30; strain direction in degrees, 0 to 360; perpendicular indentation in micrometres, weakly effective; joint angle in degrees for capsular units.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate in laminae III to V and in the gracile and cuneate nuclei, as a regular train of 0 to about 100 spikes per second with a non zero floor.

• STATE: membrane voltage, viscoelastic creep variable, adaptation level, current resting rate.

• PARAMETERS: resting rate 5 to 20 spikes per second, strain gain about 200 spikes per second per unit strain, one preferred direction per cell, indentation sensitivity about one sixth of SA1.

• TIME CONSTANTS: transduction under 1 millisecond, fast adaptation 20 to 50 milliseconds, viscoelastic creep 10 to 60 seconds, collagen remodelling weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: PIEZO2 loss of function removes the stretch signal and degrades felt hand posture; nerve injury turns the ongoing discharge into phantom tightness; ageing and diabetic stiffening of dermal collagen distort the gain so force direction is misjudged, one cause of dropped objects in later life.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert skin strain and its direction into the regular, direction tuned discharge of an SA2 afferent.
Create a number variable called creep_state with initial value 0.0.
Create a number variable called preferred_direction with initial value 45.0.
For each sample in strain_recording, perform the following operations.
    Access the item at position 1 in sample.
    Set strain_size to the result.
    Access the item at position 2 in sample.
    Set strain_direction to the result.
    Calculate the difference of strain_direction and preferred_direction.
    Set direction_factor to the cosine of the result.
    Check if direction_factor is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set direction_factor to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of strain_size and direction_factor.
    Calculate the difference of the result and creep_state.
    Set drive to the result.
    Check if drive is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of 0.004 and drive.
    Calculate the sum of creep_state and the result.
    Set creep_state to the result.
    Calculate the product of 200.0 and drive.
    Calculate the sum of 12.0 and the result.
    Set firing_rate to the result.
    Display firing_rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the SA2 model needs a cosine, a leak and a floor, and the math module
# supplies the first while the rest is plain arithmetic.
import math

RESTING_RATE = 12.0      # spikes/s with no stimulus at all
STRAIN_GAIN = 200.0      # spikes/s per unit of effective strain
PREFERRED_DEG = 45.0     # this cell's best direction of pull
CREEP_RATE = 0.004       # collagen creep folded in per millisecond sample
MAX_RATE = 100.0         # ceiling for a regular slowly adapting unit

def sa2(strain_series):
    """strain_series: list of (strain magnitude, pull direction in degrees)."""
    rates, creep = [], 0.0
    for magnitude, direction in strain_series:
        # Directional tuning: half wave rectified cosine about the best axis.
        tuning = max(0.0, math.cos(math.radians(direction - PREFERRED_DEG)))
        drive = max(0.0, magnitude * tuning - creep)   # viscoelastic sag
        creep += CREEP_RATE * drive
        rates.append(min(MAX_RATE, RESTING_RATE + STRAIN_GAIN * drive))
    return rates

if __name__ == "__main__":
    aligned = [(0.10, 45.0)] * 2000        # 2 s pull along the best axis
    across = [(0.10, 135.0)] * 2000        # same pull, wrong axis
    print("aligned, first sample:", round(sa2(aligned)[0], 1), "spikes/s")
    print("aligned, after 2 s:  ", round(sa2(aligned)[-1], 1), "spikes/s")
    print("orthogonal pull:     ", round(sa2(across)[0], 1), "spikes/s")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cutaneous afferent already talking before you touch it, and the only one reporting the direction of a pull rather than the fact of a press.

A large myelinated unit with a regular resting rhythm, an enormous fuzzy edged field, far less sensitivity to indentation than its SA1 neighbour but more to stretch, and a discharge that sags over half a minute, can be nothing else.

CHAPTER 242. A-BETA RAPIDLY ADAPTING TYPE 1 (RA1) (Slip-Catching Flutter Neuron) (NON-COG)

Every time a glass begins to slip from your fingers, this cell catches it about seventy milliseconds before you know anything has happened.

RA1 is a barcode for a fast-decaying response, not a description of purpose.

Slip-Catching names the job that matters most in daily life, because a single one of these afferents gathers signal from thirty to eighty Meissner corpuscles and fires the instant a held object begins to move against the skin, triggering the reflexive tightening of grip.

Flutter names its frequency home, since it responds best to low-frequency skin motion in roughly the twenty to forty hertz band that people perceive as flutter.

Neuron marks it as an afferent that exists to notice movement across the skin rather than steady contact.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An A beta rapidly adapting type 1 afferent (RA1), also called a fast adapting type 1 or FA1 unit, is a fast myelinated dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neuron ending inside a Meissner corpuscle.

Rapidly adapting means it fires a burst when a stimulus begins and another when it ends, and is silent in between, so it reports change rather than state.

Its subject is motion across the skin, and that is why gripping works, since gripping is not about squeezing hard but about catching the first microscopic slip.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Pseudounipolar, with a round dendrite free cell body and a T shaped branch point.

Each twig enters a Meissner corpuscle, an egg shaped body roughly 40 by 100 micrometres sitting in a dermal papilla, one of the upward bumps of dermis under a fingerprint ridge.

Inside, the naked fibre zigzags between a stack of flattened lamellar cells like a ribbon threaded through a pile of pancakes, and collagen anchors the corpuscle to the epidermis above.

SIZE:

Median cell body diameter is 90 to 100 micrometres and axon diameter 6 to 12 micrometres with myelin.

The fingertip receptive field averages about 25 square millimetres, larger than an SA1 field but still sharply bounded.

Reported Meissner densities vary widely with method, from about 3 per square millimetre in one histological count and about 12 by living confocal microscopy of the little finger, up to about 50 at the very tip of the index finger.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Glabrous units of fingertip, palm and sole, with the highest density and smallest fields.

• Lip, tongue and nipple units, where Meissner like corpuscles are abundant, the facial ones having trigeminal cell bodies.

• Hair follicle rapidly adapting units, filling the same niche in hairy skin using lanceolate endings, palisades of bare membrane running alongside the hair shaft.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies occupy dorsal root ganglia at every spinal level, with the face served by the trigeminal ganglion.

Endings occupy the dermal papillae of glabrous skin, at the interface between dermis and epidermis, only about 0.5 millimetres below the surface, closer to the outside world than any other encapsulated receptor.

Central branches terminate in laminae III to V and ascend the dorsal columns unbroken to the gracile nucleus for the foot and the cuneate nucleus for the hand, crossing the dorsal root entry zone.

NUMBER:

Meissner corpuscles exist only in glabrous skin, which bounds the count tightly.

The glabrous skin of one young adult hand holds about 17,000 tactile afferents, of which RA1 units are the largest single class, and each foot sole holds about 4,000 in total.

Adding lips, soles and genital skin and excluding the roughly 19 percent of body tactile afferents that are facial gives about 45,000 RA1 neurons, plausible range 25,000 to 70,000.

That is 0.45 percent of the roughly 10 million DRG neurons and about 0.00005 percent of all neurons, at moderate confidence, with density reported near 141 units per square centimetre at the distal fingertip.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 60 millivolts, with a narrow spike and a very high safety factor, so almost every impulse that starts arrives.

A sustained press gives one or two spikes at onset, silence during the hold, and one or two at release.

To vibration these cells entrain, firing one spike per cycle over roughly 5 to 50 hertz with best sensitivity at 20 to 40 hertz, the range felt as flutter, from a threshold of a few micrometres, conducting at 35 to 75 metres per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The peripheral arrangement is many to many: one corpuscle receives several afferents and one afferent supplies several corpuscles, which is why RA1 fields exceed SA1 fields despite the smaller receptor.

Centrally, glutamate is released in laminae III to V and in the cuneate and gracile nuclei.

The signal drives a loop that raises grip force automatically 70 to 100 milliseconds after a slip begins, long before the event reaches awareness.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Fast, myelinated and branching profusely in the dermis, with myelin shed at a heminode just before each corpuscle.

Each corpuscle can start spikes independently and the axon sums them, so one cell reads a small array of motion detectors at once.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, packaged by VGLUT1, with no substance P and no calcitonin gene related peptide.

Many RA1 cells carry parvalbumin, the same protein used to label proprioceptors, so parvalbumin alone does not identify a proprioceptor.

Development and corpuscle formation depend on brain derived neurotrophic factor through the receptor TrkB, also written NTRK2, and on the receptor RET.

MYELINATION:

Myelinated in the A beta range with internodes near one millimetre, by Schwann cells peripherally and oligodendrocytes centrally.

The corpuscle's lamellar cells are themselves Schwann cell lineage, so the receptor is a Schwann cell that abandoned insulation for mechanics, and end organ formation depends on axon to glia signalling through molecules including Netrin-G1.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Bursty rather than continuous, and cheaper per second than an SA1 unit because the cell is silent whenever nothing moves.

Peak cost is high, since a scanning fingertip drives these cells at hundreds of spikes per second, and the corpuscle is a living structure the axon must continuously maintain.

PLASTICITY:

Meissner corpuscle density falls markedly with age, tracking the measurable decline in tactile spatial acuity across adult life.

Corpuscles are lost early in diabetic and other sensory neuropathies, and living confocal microscopy of Meissner corpuscles is now used clinically as a measure of nerve fibre loss.

Denervated corpuscles shrink within weeks and reinnervation rebuilds them, so the structure is under continuous neural control.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glial cells jacket the cell body in the standard way.

The distinctive support is peripheral, because the lamellar cells are modified Schwann cells that stopped making myelin and instead form a stack of mechanically coupled plates, so a glial cell has become the working part of the sense organ.

Collagen fibrils tether the corpuscle to the basal epidermis, so keratinocytes act as the first stage of its mechanics, and denervated skin makes these glia lose their identity.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove RA1 and the hand becomes clumsy in a very particular way.

Static touch survives, so a held object still feels solid and shaped, but the sense of motion across the skin would go, so you would not feel a surface starting to slide and would grip everything far too hard or drop it.

Fine flutter would vanish, fabric drawn between finger and thumb would feel flat, and the reflex that keeps a full cup steady while you walk would not fire.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The corpuscle is a mechanical differentiator, passing on the rate of change of pressure and discarding steady pressure before any ion channel is involved.

PIEZO2 then inactivates within about 5 to 15 milliseconds, so the neuron adds a molecular stage of change detection on top of the mechanical one.

Fingerprint ridges spaced 0.4 to 0.5 millimetres apart turn a scanning movement into vibration in exactly this cell's preferred band, so the fingerprint is a tuned antenna, and shared corpuscles correlate nearby afferents in a way the brain exploits to localise contact.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: indentation velocity in micrometres per second, the effective drive; vibration amplitude in micrometres and frequency in hertz, useful range 2 to 100; contact onset and offset; slip velocity in millimetres per second.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate in laminae III to V and in the gracile and cuneate nuclei, 0 to about 250 spikes per second, phase locked to vibration where present.

• STATE: membrane voltage, PIEZO2 inactivation level, corpuscle filter state, phase accumulator.

• PARAMETERS: best frequency 20 to 40 hertz, threshold 2 to 10 micrometres at best frequency, receptive field about 25 square millimetres, conduction 35 to 75 metres per second, high pass corner near 3 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS: PIEZO2 activation under 1 millisecond, PIEZO2 inactivation 5 to 15 milliseconds, corpuscle relaxation 10 to 30 milliseconds, grip reflex latency 70 to 100 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: PIEZO2 loss of function abolishes the response and leaves patients unable to grade grip without vision; carpal tunnel compression blocks these fibres early, giving tingling and clumsiness; diabetic neuropathy destroys Meissner corpuscles before nerve conduction studies turn abnormal.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert a skin indentation trace into the onset, offset and flutter locked discharge of an RA1 afferent.
Create a number variable called previous_depth with initial value 0.0.
Create a number variable called inactivation with initial value 0.0.
For each current_depth in indentation_recording, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of current_depth and previous_depth.
    Set depth_change to the result.
    Set previous_depth to current_depth.
    Check if depth_change is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of depth_change and -1.
        Set depth_change to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the quotient of depth_change divided by 0.001.
    Set indentation_speed to the result.
    Calculate the difference of 1.0 and inactivation.
    Set available_channels to the result.
    Calculate the product of indentation_speed and available_channels.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.35.
    Set firing_rate to the result.
    Calculate the product of 0.90 and inactivation.
    Set inactivation to the result.
    Check if indentation_speed is greater than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of 0.10 and available_channels.
        Calculate the sum of inactivation and the result.
        Set inactivation to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Display firing_rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the RA1 model is a differentiator plus a channel inactivation term,
# and Python keeps both visible in a dozen readable lines.
DT = 0.001              # sample interval in seconds
VELOCITY_GAIN = 0.35    # spikes/s per micrometre per second of skin movement
INACT_RATE = 0.10       # PIEZO2 inactivation accumulated per active sample
RECOVERY_RATE = 0.10    # inactivation removed per quiet sample
MAX_RATE = 250.0        # refractory ceiling

def ra1(depths):
    """depths: skin indentation in micrometres, one value per millisecond."""
    rates, previous, inactivation = [], depths[0], 0.0
    for depth in depths:
        speed = abs(depth - previous) / DT   # the corpuscle differentiates
        previous = depth
        available = 1.0 - inactivation       # fraction of PIEZO2 still usable
        rates.append(min(MAX_RATE, VELOCITY_GAIN * speed * available))
        inactivation *= 1.0 - RECOVERY_RATE  # channels recover every step
        if speed > 0.0:
            inactivation += INACT_RATE * available
    return rates

if __name__ == "__main__":
    hold = [0.0] * 20 + [200.0] * 300 + [0.0] * 20   # step on, hold, step off
    out = ra1(hold)
    print("onset burst: ", round(out[20], 1), "spikes/s")
    print("during hold: ", round(out[200], 1), "spikes/s")
    print("offset burst:", round(out[320], 1), "spikes/s")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the touch afferent that answers twice and never in between: once when you arrive and once when you leave.

A large myelinated fibre with a sharply bounded field of about 25 square millimetres, entraining to a 30 hertz flutter, silent under a steady press, and ending in Schwann derived lamellae in a dermal papilla beneath a fingerprint ridge, is an RA1 and nothing else.

CHAPTER 243. A-BETA RAPIDLY ADAPTING TYPE 2 (RA2) (Whole-Hand Vibration Neuron) (NON-COG)

Deep under your palm sit a few hundred structures the size of a grain of rice, each wired to one nerve fibre, and together they detect a ripple ten nanometres high.

RA2 is a catalogue entry, and its partner structure the Pacinian corpuscle is an eponym-shaped anatomical term that also hides the function.

Whole-Hand names its extraordinary spatial reach, because a single Pacinian afferent can be driven by vibration entering anywhere on the hand and even by vibration conducted through bone from a distant part of the limb, so it reports the state of a whole structure rather than a point.

Vibration names its stimulus, and it is the most sensitive vibration detector in the body, with peak sensitivity near two hundred and fifty hertz and useful responses across roughly fifty to five hundred hertz.

Neuron marks it as the cell that lets a person feel the texture of a surface through the tip of a held tool.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An A beta rapidly adapting type 2 afferent (RA2), also called a fast adapting type 2 or Pacinian unit, is a fast myelinated dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neuron ending inside a Pacinian corpuscle.

A Pacinian corpuscle is the largest sensory receptor in the body, an onion of up to about sixty fluid separated lamellae, half a millimetre to four millimetres long, just visible to the naked eye.

Its subject is high frequency vibration, and it is the most sensitive mechanical detector in the human body, which is why you feel a phone buzzing through a pocket and the moment a chisel bites wood.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Pseudounipolar, with a round dendrite free cell body and a T shaped branch point.

The peripheral fibre runs to a single corpuscle, loses its myelin at the entrance, and continues as a straight unbranched rod up the central core, surrounded by concentric lamellae separated by fluid.

The assembly behaves like a shock absorber: squeeze it slowly and the fluid redistributes so the core feels nothing, but hit it fast and the fluid cannot move and the core deforms.

SIZE:

Median cell body diameter is 90 to 100 micrometres and axon diameter 6 to 12 micrometres with myelin.

The corpuscle is by far the largest receptor in the body at up to four millimetres, thousands of times the volume of a Meissner corpuscle.

The receptive field is enormous and has no useful border, often covering a whole finger, a whole hand, or much of a limb, because vibration travels through tissue.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There is essentially one functional type, which is remarkable in a family defined by diversity, and variation is by location rather than by kind.

• Cutaneous and subcutaneous corpuscles of the hand and foot, the classic RA2 units.

• Interosseous corpuscles along the membrane between the forearm and lower leg bones, picking up vibration through the skeleton.

• Periosteal corpuscles on the outer surface of bone, and corpuscles in the mesentery, pancreas, joint capsules and external genitalia.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in dorsal root ganglia at all spinal levels.

Corpuscles lie in the deep dermis, subcutaneous fat, interosseous membranes, periosteum, joint capsules, the mesentery that suspends the intestines, and the genitalia.

In the hand they cluster around the digital nerves rather than at the skin surface, so this is a deep receptor reporting on surface events.

Central branches terminate in laminae III to V and ascend the dorsal columns to the gracile and cuneate nuclei, crossing the dorsal root entry zone.

NUMBER:

A cadaver study found a mean of 300 Pacinian corpuscles per hand, range 192 to 424, with 44 to 60 percent in the fingers, 23 to 48 percent around the knuckles and 8 to 18 percent in the thenar and hypothenar pads.

Since one afferent serves one corpuscle, those are afferent counts too, and extending to feet, interosseous membranes, periosteum, mesentery and genitalia gives about 10,000 RA2 neurons, plausible range 5,000 to 25,000.

That is 0.1 percent of the roughly 10 million DRG neurons and about 0.00001 percent of all neurons, making this by far the rarest of the four A beta classes.

Confidence is low, because microelectrode recording attributes over a tenth of hand tactile units to Pacinian afferents, which would imply thousands in the hand alone, and the likely resolution is that skin dissection misses corpuscles lying deep along nerve trunks.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 60 millivolts with a narrow, fast spike.

A steady press produces exactly one spike at onset and one at release and nothing in between, the most extreme adaptation of any receptor in the body.

The cell entrains to vibration from roughly 20 to 1000 hertz with a best frequency near 250 hertz, where the threshold is about ten nanometres of skin movement, and it conducts at 35 to 75 metres per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Peripherally the arrangement is strictly one afferent to one corpuscle, found nowhere else in the touch system.

Centrally the terminal releases glutamate in laminae III to V and in the gracile and cuneate nuclei.

Because the fields are so large, spatial information is discarded and the population instead codes frequency and intensity, read out in cortex as texture and as events at a tool tip.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Fast, myelinated and utterly unbranched at its peripheral end, so one axon equals one receptor.

The first node of Ranvier lies just inside the corpuscle, so the receptor physically encloses the spike initiation site, and the T junction limits sustained output when a 700 hertz vibration would otherwise demand 700 spikes per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, packaged by VGLUT1, with no substance P and no calcitonin gene related peptide.

PIEZO2 is the transduction channel, and human PIEZO2 loss of function abolishes vibration sense.

MYELINATION:

Myelinated in the A beta range peripherally by Schwann cells and centrally by oligodendrocytes, with internodes near one millimetre.

Myelin is stripped at the corpuscle entrance and the inner core lamellae take over as the axon's covering, and those lamellae are Schwann cell derived, so once again a glial cell has become the sense organ.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low at rest and enormous in bursts, since a hand on a vibrating tool drives these cells at hundreds of spikes per second for as long as the tool runs.

Maintaining a receptor several millimetres long with tens of concentric layers is a substantial burden carried by one axon.

PLASTICITY:

The corpuscle population declines dramatically across life, one of the best documented losses in the somatosensory system.

Serial sections show roughly 80 to 180 corpuscles in the end segment of a fetal digit against fewer than 40 in an elderly one, with the fetal tree like arrangements rarely found in old age.

Occasionally the opposite happens, since repeated trauma can provoke Pacinian corpuscle hyperplasia, a painful overgrowth in the hand.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glial cells envelope the cell body in the usual way.

Peripherally the support system is the receptor, because the inner core lamellae are modified Schwann cells and the outer capsule is built of perineurial cells, the flattened barrier cells that normally sheathe a nerve bundle.

Between the lamellae sits an actively maintained fluid providing the viscous damping, so the glia are not holding the axon but filtering for it, and a denervated corpuscle collapses within weeks.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete RA2 and the body loses the ability to feel through objects.

Static touch, edges, slip and stretch all survive, so a held object still feels solid, but fine texture would flatten, because fine texture is coded by the vibrations a moving finger generates.

Tools would become dead sticks, with no feel of the pen tip on paper and no feel of the scalpel meeting tissue, which is precisely the deficit of hand arm vibration syndrome.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The most instructive experiment in sensory biology was performed on this cell: peel the lamellae away one by one and the naked ending stops being rapidly adapting and answers steady pressure like a slowly adapting unit.

That proves the adaptation is mechanical, performed by the capsule, and not a property of the neuron at all, so most of this cell's computation is done by a structure it merely lives inside.

Because vibration propagates through tissue over many centimetres, the population performs a distributed, whole hand frequency analysis, with corpuscles at different depths receiving differently filtered copies of one event.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: vibration amplitude in micrometres from 0.01 upward; vibration frequency in hertz, useful range 20 to 1000; contact transients; tissue borne vibration arriving from centimetres away.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate in laminae III to V and in the gracile and cuneate nuclei, phase locked, 0 to about 500 spikes per second, saturating at one spike per cycle.

• STATE: membrane voltage, capsule filter state of at least second order, refractory timer, phase accumulator.

• PARAMETERS: best frequency 200 to 300 hertz, threshold at best frequency about 0.01 micrometres, high pass corner about 30 to 60 hertz, receptive field effectively a whole hand, exactly one afferent per corpuscle.

• TIME CONSTANTS: capsule relaxation 1 to 5 milliseconds, transduction under 1 millisecond, refractory period 1 to 2 milliseconds which sets the entrainment ceiling, corpuscle loss over decades.

• FAILURE MODE: PIEZO2 loss of function removes vibration sense entirely; diabetic and chemotherapy induced neuropathy destroy these afferents early, which is why tuning fork testing at the toe is the standard screening test; chronic vibrating tool use produces hand arm vibration syndrome with numbness and blanching fingers.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert a vibration trace into the phase locked discharge of a Pacinian RA2 afferent.
Create a number variable called previous_input with initial value 0.0.
Create a number variable called filtered_value with initial value 0.0.
For each current_input in vibration_recording, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of current_input and previous_input.
    Calculate the sum of filtered_value and the result.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.97.
    Set filtered_value to the result.
    Set previous_input to current_input.
    Set rectified_value to filtered_value.
    Check if rectified_value is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of rectified_value and -1.
        Set rectified_value to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of rectified_value and 0.01.
    Set drive to the result.
    Check if drive is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of 900.0 and drive.
    Set firing_rate to the result.
    Check if firing_rate is greater than 500.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to 500.
    End the conditional block.
    Display firing_rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: a one pole high pass filter plus a threshold reproduces the Pacinian
# capsule and its channel, and the math module supplies the test tone.
import math

DT = 0.0001            # 100 microsecond steps, needed above 250 Hz
ALPHA = 0.97           # capsule high pass coefficient, sets the corner
THRESHOLD = 0.01       # micrometres of core deformation before firing
GAIN = 900.0           # spikes/s per micrometre of suprathreshold deformation
MAX_RATE = 500.0       # entrainment ceiling from the refractory period

def pacinian(trace):
    """trace: skin displacement in micrometres sampled every DT seconds."""
    rates, previous, filtered = [], trace[0], 0.0
    for value in trace:
        # Discrete one pole high pass: steady pressure is discarded.
        filtered = ALPHA * (filtered + value - previous)
        previous = value
        rates.append(min(MAX_RATE, GAIN * max(0.0, abs(filtered) - THRESHOLD)))
    return rates

def tone(frequency, amplitude, seconds):
    n = int(seconds / DT)
    return [amplitude * math.sin(2.0 * math.pi * frequency * i * DT)
            for i in range(n)]

if __name__ == "__main__":
    print("250 Hz, 0.05 um:", round(max(pacinian(tone(250, 0.05, 0.05))), 1))
    print("  5 Hz, 0.05 um:", round(max(pacinian(tone(5, 0.05, 0.5))), 1))
    print("steady 50 um press:", round(max(pacinian([50.0] * 500)), 1))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only receptor in the human body with a strict one to one relationship between sense organ and nerve fibre, and the only one whose adaptation can be removed by peeling the receptor.

A single unbranched axon running to a rice grain sized onion of sixty lamellae, firing one spike at the start and one at the end of a press, entraining to 250 hertz at ten nanometres, with a field covering an entire hand, can be nothing else in biology.

CHAPTER 244. A-DELTA LOW-THRESHOLD MECHANORECEPTORS, ALSO CALLED D-HAIR CELLS (Faint-Breeze Hair Neuron) (NON-COG)

Blow gently across your forearm and this cell answers first, the most touch sensitive neuron you own.

A-delta names only axon calibre and D-hair names only a hair subtype, so neither says what the cell achieves.

Faint-Breeze names its distinction, because these are the most sensitive mechanoreceptors in skin, responding to displacements smaller than any other class can register, which is why a moving air current or a settling insect is felt at all.

Hair names the machinery, since the endings wrap around and run lengthwise along hair follicles and are deflected by the lever action of the shaft, and their receptive fields are unusually large so a single cell watches a wide patch of skin.

Neuron marks it as an afferent teaching that hairs are not decoration but the amplifying antennae of a warning-grade touch channel.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is a sensory nerve cell that reports the faintest bending of a body hair, and it holds the lowest mechanical threshold ever measured in mammalian skin.

Low-threshold means gentle force rather than damage, A-delta names its middling speed, and it fires only while a hair moves, hardest when the stroke runs against the lie of the hair.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is pseudounipolar: one stalk leaves a round soma and forks like a T, one arm to skin and one to spinal cord, with no dendrites.

In skin it lays spear-shaped lanceolate fingers along a hair follicle as a half-collar, each finger clasped by terminal Schwann cells, and that lopsided collar creates direction selectivity.

SIZE:

The soma is 30 to 45 micrometres across, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre, the axon is 1 to 5 micrometres wide, and one cell holds about 31 hair follicles in mouse.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Subtypes divide by hair type, zigzag hairs at some 74 per cent and awl or auchene hairs at some 25 per cent in mouse, and by preferred stroke direction, while the two human A-delta clusters found by sequencing remain unnamed.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The soma sits in a dorsal root ganglion beside every vertebra from neck to sacrum, the border post where the peripheral nervous system meets the central nervous system.

Its endings occupy hairy skin only, its axon crosses the dorsal root entry zone where Schwann cell insulation hands over to oligodendrocyte insulation, and its central arbors fill inner lamina II and lamina III of the dorsal horn.

NUMBER:

A defensible estimate is 100,000 to 300,000 in a whole adult, mid-point near 150,000, or 1 to 3 per cent of the roughly 10 million human dorsal root ganglion neurons.

Confidence is low because the figure is scaled from rodents, and against about 86 billion neurons overall it is some two cells per million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is near minus 60 millivolts and the spike is narrow, lacking the shoulder of pain fibres.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Nothing synapses on the cell body; in the cord it excites protein kinase C gamma interneurons and vertical cells, and its terminals receive axoaxonic gamma-aminobutyric acid contacts, the machinery of pain gating.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Conduction runs at 5 to 30 metres per second, D-hair units near 5 to 15, along up to a metre of cable whose T-junction filters out the fastest bursts.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glutamate, the main excitatory messenger, through vesicular glutamate transporter 1, carries no calcitonin gene-related peptide or substance P, and bears TrkB, the receptor for brain-derived neurotrophic factor.

MYELINATION:

Myelin, the fatty insulation that speeds conduction, is thin here, a few wraps from Schwann cells outside the cord and oligodendrocytes inside, and it stops before the follicle so bare membrane can feel the hair.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Most energy goes on the sodium potassium pump along a metre of axon, firing is cheap because the cell rests when hairs are still, and fenestrated capillaries feed the ganglion straight from blood.

PLASTICITY:

In adults neurotrophin-4 acting on TrkB raises the Cav3.2 current, and each hair growth cycle forces the ending to be rebuilt.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The special partner is the terminal Schwann cell, whose grip on each lanceolate finger is part of the force sensor itself.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and hairy skin keeps pressure, texture and pain but loses its trip-wire: no mosquito landing, no spider walking, no felt direction of a draught.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Direction selectivity is solved by anatomy, in the half-collar, before any electrical processing happens.

Beyond that, the T-junction filters spike trains, Cav3.2 amplifies movement below the noise floor of most neurons, terminal Schwann cells share transduction, cooling shifts responsiveness so temperature becomes an input to a touch cell, presynaptic inhibition lets the cord mute the cell, and local protein synthesis maintains the axon a metre from its nucleus.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: hair tip speed per follicle in micrometres per millisecond, signed plus one against the grain and minus one with it, from 20 to 40 follicles; presynaptic inhibition from 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: spikes releasing glutamate onto protein kinase C gamma interneurons and vertical cells of inner lamina II and lamina III.

• STATE: membrane voltage; Piezo2 open fraction; Kv1.2 inactivation; Cav3.2 availability; adaptation accumulator; time since last spike.

• PARAMETERS: threshold below 0.1 millinewtons; conduction 5 to 15 metres per second; about 31 follicles per field; direction gain ratio near 4 to 1.

• TIME CONSTANTS: transduction under 1 millisecond; adaptation 10 to 30 milliseconds; refractory 2 milliseconds; foot to cord delay 10 to 100 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: endings retract in small fibre neuropathy and light touch dulls; after nerve injury these terminals help drive allodynia, pain from a gentle stroke.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn hair movement in one receptive field into the direction selective, rapidly adapting burst of an A-delta low-threshold mechanoreceptor.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called last_spike with initial value -1000.
Create a list variable called spike_times with initial value empty list.
For each frame in time_steps, perform the following operations.
    Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
    For each follicle in frame, perform the following operations.
        Create a number variable called gain with initial value 0.2.
        If the direction of follicle is equal to 1, then perform the following actions.
            Set gain to 1.0.
        End the conditional block.
        Set drive to the sum of drive and the product of the speed of follicle and gain.
    End the loop.
    Create a boolean variable called rested with initial value false.
    Set rested to the result of checking if the difference of clock and last_spike is greater than or equal to 2.
    If both the difference of drive and adaptation is greater than 1.0 and rested is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add clock to the end of spike_times.
        Set last_spike to clock.
        Set adaptation to the sum of adaptation and 0.6.
    End the conditional block.
    Set adaptation to the difference of adaptation and the product of adaptation and 0.067.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 1.
End the loop.
Return spike_times to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: plain arithmetic and lists let a non-programmer follow the logic.
def d_hair_spikes(frames, dt=1.0):
    """frames: one list per millisecond of (speed, direction) per follicle."""
    AGAINST, WITH_GRAIN = 1.0, 0.2   # against vs with the lie of the hair
    THRESH, TAU, REFRACT, STEP = 1.0, 15.0, 2.0, 0.6
    adapt, last, clock, out = 0.0, -1e9, 0.0, []
    for frame in frames:
        drive = 0.0
        for speed, direction in frame:          # pool the receptive field
            drive += speed * (AGAINST if direction == 1 else WITH_GRAIN)
        if drive - adapt > THRESH and clock - last >= REFRACT:
            out.append(clock)
            last = clock
            adapt += STEP                       # each spike deepens adaptation
        adapt -= adapt * dt / TAU               # adaptation leaks away
        clock += dt
    return out

if __name__ == "__main__":
    stroke = [[(2.0, 1), (1.5, 1), (0.5, 1)]] * 20
    still = [[(0.0, 1), (0.0, 1), (0.0, 1)]] * 20
    back = [[(2.0, -1), (1.5, -1), (0.5, -1)]] * 20
    print("against grain:", d_hair_spikes(stroke + still))
    print("with grain:   ", d_hair_spikes(back + still))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A cell carrying TrkB and Cav3.2, wrapping a half-collar of lanceolate fingers around a fine hair, thinly myelinated yet more sensitive than any thick fibre, and firing only while that hair moves, is a D-hair cell and nothing else.

CHAPTER 245. C LOW-THRESHOLD MECHANORECEPTORS (C-LTMRS) (Caress-Speed Comfort Neuron) (NON-COG)

This is the neuron that makes a slow stroke down your arm feel good, and it is so slow that the pleasure arrives after the touch.

C-LTMR is an acronym built from fibre class and laboratory threshold, and it conceals one of the most human findings in sensory science.

Caress-Speed names the cell's tuning exactly, because it fires hardest to stroking at about one to ten centimetres per second delivered at skin temperature, and both faster and slower strokes reduce its firing, an inverted U-shaped curve that happens to match the speed of a human hand stroking another person.

Comfort names the faculty, since the firing rate of these unmyelinated afferents in hairy skin correlates directly with how pleasant people rate the touch.

Neuron marks it as a slow unmyelinated fibre, useless for discriminating shape, that exists chiefly to make being touched feel good.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A C low-threshold mechanoreceptor, called a C-tactile afferent when recorded in awake people, is an unmyelinated cell tuned to gentle skin movement.

Single-fibre recordings show peak firing to stroking at 1 to 10 centimetres per second at a skin-warm 32 degrees Celsius, and at that temperature its firing rate tracks how pleasant the touch feels.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Like every ganglion cell it is pseudounipolar, a round soma on a forked stalk with no dendrites, ending in skin as a full collar of lanceolate fingers around a hair follicle.

Its bare axon lies grooved into a Schwann cell beside other bare axons, an arrangement called a Remak bundle, and ends centrally in a dense flame-shaped terminal at the core of a type II glomerulus.

SIZE:

The soma is small at 15 to 30 micrometres, the axon is 0.2 to 1.5 micrometres, thinner than a wavelength of red light, and the skin field is a spot of a few square millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

They are plentiful in hairy skin and sparse in hairless palm skin, found there at about one unit per eighty myelinated mechanoreceptors, roughly seven times lower density, and rodent work splits them further by TAFA4 and tyrosine hydroxylase content.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Somata occupy dorsal root ganglia from the second cervical to the sacral level, the interface where the peripheral nervous system meets the central nervous system.

Endings cover hairy skin of forearm, thigh, back and face, and central terminals sit in inner lamina II directly above the protein kinase C gamma interneurons, at the deep edge of the isolectin B4 band.

NUMBER:

A defensible range is 200,000 to 1,000,000 cells, mid-point near 500,000, about 5 per cent of the roughly 10 million human dorsal root ganglion neurons.

Confidence is low to moderate, since rodents give 10 to 15 per cent, human sequencing finds one small cluster, and no direct human count exists; that is some six neurons per million of the whole nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is near minus 55 millivolts and the spike is broad with a shoulder, the signature of C fibres, because its upstroke uses the slow sodium channel Nav1.8.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It has no synapses on its soma; centrally it excites islet and protein kinase C gamma interneurons of inner lamina II inside glomeruli where several afferent profiles touch one another, and it receives axoaxonic contacts using gamma-aminobutyric acid and glycine.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Conduction is 0.5 to 1.5 metres per second, so a caress on the foot takes about a second to reach the cord, and repeated firing slows the axon further, a clinical signature called activity-dependent slowing.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It uses glutamate packaged by the unusual vesicular glutamate transporter 3, adds tyrosine hydroxylase and the secreted protein TAFA4 in rodents, where TAFA4 damps inflammatory pain, and carries almost no calcitonin gene-related peptide.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable, and the reason matters: this fibre is unmyelinated by definition, so it has no sheath, no nodes and no jumping conduction, although Schwann cells still cradle it inside Remak bundles.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Conducting without myelin costs more per millimetre because the whole membrane must be repolarised, but firing rates are low, and Remak Schwann cells supply lactate whose loss makes the longest foot fibres die back first.

PLASTICITY:

After injury spinal circuits let this gentle-touch input cross into pain pathways, TAFA4 shifts the state of spinal microglia, and stroke-to-stroke fatigue resets over tens of seconds.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Its distinctive partner is the Remak Schwann cell, which nurses many bare axons at once instead of insulating one.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and touch still works as information, since you would feel a hand, locate it and judge texture.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell band-passes velocity, preferring middling stroke speeds and rejecting slower and faster ones, then multiplies that by thermal context so a skin-warm caress outscores a cold one.

It also releases the protein TAFA4 onto immune cells, sits in glomeruli where afferents contact each other, carries a memory of recent use as conduction slowing, and builds proteins locally in its far axon.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: stroke velocity in centimetres per second, useful range 0.1 to 100; contact force in millinewtons, threshold under 1; contact temperature 15 to 45 degrees Celsius; count of recent strokes.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate, via vesicular glutamate transporter 3, onto inner lamina II interneurons; TAFA4 protein onto local immune cells and microglia.

• STATE: membrane voltage; Piezo2 open fraction; Nav1.8 availability; fatigue accumulator; recent spike count driving conduction slowing.

• PARAMETERS: optimal velocity about 3 centimetres per second; optimal temperature 32 degrees Celsius; peak rate 30 to 60 impulses per second; conduction 0.5 to 1.5 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: transduction 1 to 5 milliseconds; spike 2 to 5 milliseconds; adaptation 0.5 to 2 seconds; fatigue recovery 10 to 60 seconds; foot to cord delay about 1 second.

• FAILURE MODE: in small fibre neuropathy these endings die back and pleasant touch dulls before pain does, and after nerve injury their input is rerouted into pain circuits, producing allodynia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the firing rate of a C low-threshold mechanoreceptor from stroke speed, contact temperature and recent use.
Create a number variable called rate with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called moving with initial value false.
Set moving to the result of checking if stroke_speed is greater than 0.
If moving is not true, then perform the following actions.
    Return 0 to the calling function.
End the conditional block.
Create a number variable called speed_score with initial value 0.
Set speed_score to the closeness of stroke_speed to 3 centimetres per second on a logarithmic scale, scaled from 0 to 1.
Create a number variable called warmth_score with initial value 0.
Set warmth_score to the closeness of contact_temperature to 32 degrees Celsius, scaled from 0 to 1.
Create a number variable called fatigue with initial value 1.
Repeat the following steps exactly recent_strokes times.
    Set fatigue to the product of fatigue and 0.85.
End the loop.
Set rate to the product of 50 and the product of speed_score and the product of warmth_score and fatigue.
Display rate to the console.
Return rate to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

import math
# Python: both tuning curves are single-line bell shapes with the math module.
def ct_rate(velocity_cm_s, temp_c, recent_strokes=0):
    """Impulses per second from one human C-tactile afferent."""
    PEAK_V, V_WIDTH = 3.0, 0.55      # cm/s optimum, width in log10 units
    PEAK_T, T_WIDTH = 32.0, 8.0      # deg C optimum and width
    PEAK_RATE, FATIGUE = 50.0, 0.85  # Hz at optimum, decay per repeat
    if velocity_cm_s <= 0:
        return 0.0                   # a still finger evokes almost nothing
    v = math.exp(-((math.log10(velocity_cm_s) - math.log10(PEAK_V)) ** 2)
                 / (2 * V_WIDTH ** 2))
    t = math.exp(-((temp_c - PEAK_T) ** 2) / (2 * T_WIDTH ** 2))
    return PEAK_RATE * v * t * (FATIGUE ** recent_strokes)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    for speed in (0.3, 1.0, 3.0, 10.0, 30.0):
        print(speed, "cm/s ->", round(ct_rate(speed, 32.0), 1), "Hz")
    for temp in (18.0, 32.0, 42.0):
        print(temp, "C    ->", round(ct_rate(3.0, temp), 1), "Hz")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other afferent fires best to a slow, skin-warm caress and worse to anything faster, colder or hotter.

CHAPTER 246. NOCICEPTORS (NON-COG)

Touch a hot kettle and your hand is already moving before you know why, because this cell has shouted.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A nociceptor is a sensory neuron with a deliberately high threshold that fires only to stimuli strong enough to threaten tissue, whether burning heat, crushing force, freezing cold or irritant chemicals.

It is the alarm layer of the body, and the word covers a family rather than one cell, so this entry is the umbrella whose members are specified separately.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is pseudounipolar, a round soma on a forked stalk with no dendrites, and its skin ending is a free nerve ending, meaning a bare branching tip with no capsule or accessory structure.

Those tips climb between skin cells as intraepidermal nerve fibres, the fibres counted in a skin biopsy when a doctor tests for small fibre neuropathy.

SIZE:

Somata are small to medium, about 15 to 45 micrometres across, with heat-sensing TRPV1-positive human neurons averaging 44 plus or minus 7 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The main divisions are peptidergic and non-peptidergic, C fibre and A-delta fibre, polymodal and single-modality, plus silent nociceptors that are mechanically insensitive until inflamed and make up roughly 15 to 25 per cent of human C nociceptors.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Somata fill the dorsal root ganglia at every level from the second cervical to the sacral, the border post between peripheral and central nervous systems.

Endings sit in epidermis, dermis, joint capsule, muscle, bone periosteum, tooth pulp and viscera, and central terminals arborise in lamina I, outer lamina II and lamina V of the dorsal horn.

Two interfaces matter: the dermo-epidermal junction, which its endings cross to sit among skin cells, and the dorsal root entry zone, where Schwann cell territory becomes oligodendrocyte territory.

NUMBER:

About 6 million nociceptors, roughly 60 per cent of the approximately 10 million human dorsal root ganglion neurons, with a defensible range of 5 to 7 million.

The peptidergic, non-peptidergic and A-delta entries that follow divide this same 6 million rather than adding to it, and against 86 billion neurons overall nociceptors are about seven cells in every hundred thousand.

Confidence is moderate, resting on fibre counts and molecular marker studies rather than a direct human tally.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is near minus 55 millivolts and the action potential is broad with a hump on its falling edge, because the upstroke uses the slow, tetrodotoxin-resistant sodium channels Nav1.8 and Nav1.9.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The soma carries no synapses; central terminals excite lamina I projection neurons bearing the neurokinin 1 receptor and lamina II interneurons, and they receive axoaxonic inhibition using gamma-aminobutyric acid.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated C nociceptors conduct at 0.5 to 2 metres per second and thinly myelinated A-delta nociceptors at 5 to 30, which is why a stubbed toe delivers a sharp first pain and then a slower burning second pain.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

All release glutamate, packaged by vesicular glutamate transporter 2, and many also release the peptides calcitonin gene-related peptide and substance P, along with adenosine triphosphate and brain-derived neurotrophic factor.

MYELINATION:

Mixed by definition, since C nociceptors are unmyelinated and travel in Remak bundles while A-delta nociceptors carry a thin sheath of a few wraps.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The dominant cost is running ion pumps along up to a metre of thin axon, and thin axons have a high surface to volume ratio, so per millimetre they are expensive.

PLASTICITY:

Central sensitisation then amplifies the message in the cord, and after axon damage the neuron switches on a repair transcription programme marked by the gene ATF3 and redistributes its sodium channels, which can leave it firing without any stimulus at all.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

In the skin the specialised partner is the nociceptive Schwann cell, a mesh-like glial cell whose own processes can initiate pain signalling, and keratinocytes act as accessory transducers by releasing adenosine triphosphate onto the bare ending.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove nociceptors and the skin becomes a numb map: pressure, stroking and warmth are all still felt, but nothing is ever urgent.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The axon reflex is the signature trick: activity travelling back down side branches makes the ending secrete peptides that widen blood vessels and leak plasma, producing the red flare around a scratch, so this neuron controls local blood flow and inflammation.

It also talks to immune cells and glia, changes its own gene expression within hours of injury, synthesises proteins in its distal axon, and can be silenced for months by high-dose capsaicin, which retracts the endings before they regrow.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: temperature in degrees Celsius; mechanical force in millinewtons; proton concentration as pH; inflammatory mediator concentration as a scalar 0 to 1; descending and segmental inhibition 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: spikes releasing glutamate onto lamina I and lamina II neurons; peripheral release of calcitonin gene-related peptide and substance P onto vessels and immune cells.

• STATE: membrane voltage; TRPV1 open fraction; Nav1.8 availability; sensitisation level; transcriptional injury state.

• PARAMETERS: heat threshold 42 to 45 degrees Celsius before sensitisation; mechanical threshold above 5 millinewtons; conduction 0.5 to 30 metres per second; maximum rate about 50 impulses per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: transduction 1 to 10 milliseconds; spike 2 to 5 milliseconds; peripheral sensitisation seconds to minutes; injury transcription hours to days; endings regrow over weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: loss-of-function in the gene SCN9A abolishes pain entirely, gain-of-function causes the burning attacks of inherited erythromelalgia, and die-back of these endings in diabetes or chemotherapy gives painful small fibre neuropathy.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide when a nociceptor fires and how inflammation lowers its threshold over time.
Create a number variable called base_threshold with initial value 43.
Create a number variable called sensitisation with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spike_counts with initial value empty list.
For each sample in stimulus_trace, perform the following operations.
    Create a number variable called threshold with initial value 0.
    Set threshold to the difference of base_threshold and sensitisation.
    Create a number variable called spikes with initial value 0.
    If the temperature of sample is greater than threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Set spikes to the product of 2 and the difference of the temperature of sample and threshold.
    End the conditional block.
    If the inflammation of sample is greater than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set sensitisation to the sum of sensitisation and the product of 0.5 and the inflammation of sample.
    End the conditional block.
    If sensitisation is greater than 10, then perform the following actions.
        Set sensitisation to 10.
    End the conditional block.
    Set sensitisation to the product of sensitisation and 0.99.
    Add spikes to the end of spike_counts.
End the loop.
Return spike_counts to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the sensitisation loop is the whole story, and it reads as plain text.
def nociceptor_trace(samples, base_threshold=43.0):
    """samples: list of (skin temperature in C, inflammation from 0 to 1)."""
    MAX_SENS, GAIN, DECAY, RATE = 10.0, 0.5, 0.99, 2.0
    sensitisation, out = 0.0, []
    for temp_c, inflammation in samples:
        threshold = base_threshold - sensitisation   # inflamed skin hurts sooner
        spikes = RATE * (temp_c - threshold) if temp_c > threshold else 0.0
        sensitisation = min(MAX_SENS, sensitisation + GAIN * inflammation)
        sensitisation *= DECAY                       # sensitisation fades slowly
        out.append(round(spikes, 2))
    return out

if __name__ == "__main__":
    warm_only = [(40.0, 0.0)] * 5                    # warm, not painful
    inflamed = [(40.0, 1.0)] * 10                    # same warmth, inflamed skin
    print("healthy skin:", nociceptor_trace(warm_only))
    print("inflamed skin:", nociceptor_trace(inflamed))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only afferent family that stays silent through everything harmless and then fires to heat above about 43 degrees Celsius, to crushing force, or to a drop of capsaicin.

CHAPTER 247. PEPTIDERGIC NOCICEPTORS (Swelling-Driven Pain Neuron) (NON-COG)

Scratch your arm and watch a red streak bloom beside the scratch: that flare is this cell spraying chemicals out of its own skin ending.

Peptidergic is a chemical barcode naming the cargo, calcitonin gene related peptide and substance P, without saying what that cargo does.

Swelling-Driven names the cell's unique second job, because these endings do not only carry the pain signal inward but also dump their peptides outward at the injury site, and calcitonin gene related peptide released from perivascular endings widens local blood vessels to produce the visible red flare of the Lewis triple response.

Pain names the primary faculty, since these are polymodal detectors driven by damaging heat, damaging pressure and irritant chemicals, and are the capsaicin-sensitive population.

Neuron marks it as the afferent whose two-way traffic makes an injured patch of skin turn red and tender on its own.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A peptidergic nociceptor is a pain-sensing neuron that stores peptides, meaning short chains of amino acids, and releases them at both ends of itself.

Peptide is Greek for digested, and the two that matter here are calcitonin gene-related peptide and substance P, which widen blood vessels, leak plasma into tissue and excite the spinal cord, so this cell does not merely report damage, it inflames the tissue it reports on.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is pseudounipolar with free nerve endings, and its distinguishing feature is cargo: large dense-core vesicles, spherical packets with a dark core seen under the electron microscope, which carry peptides rather than the clear vesicles that carry glutamate.

Its endings reach the upper epidermis, wrap blood vessels and hair follicles, and supply deep tissue such as joint, muscle and bone.

SIZE:

Somata are small to medium at about 20 to 45 micrometres, dense-core vesicles are roughly 80 to 120 nanometres across, and terminal branches are well under a micrometre.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Human ganglion sequencing separates several peptidergic clusters, including a heat-sensing TRPV1-rich set, a TRPA1-rich chemical-sensing set, an enkephalin-expressing set and an itch-related pruritogen receptor set, and in women that itch-related set carries markedly more calcitonin gene-related peptide messenger RNA than in men.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Somata sit in the dorsal root ganglia at every level, again at the peripheral to central interface, with their facial counterparts in the trigeminal ganglion.

Endings occupy skin, cornea, joint, periosteum, tooth pulp and viscera, and their central terminals concentrate in lamina I and outer lamina II of the dorsal horn, with some reaching lamina V.

NUMBER:

About 3 to 3.5 million cells, roughly 55 per cent of the 6 million nociceptors and about a third of all 10 million dorsal root ganglion neurons, drawn from the nociceptor pool rather than added to it.

Confidence is moderate: calcitonin gene-related peptide messenger RNA is reported in 50 to 70 per cent of human ganglion neurons, a wide bracket, and in humans about a third of neurons carry both peptidergic and non-peptidergic markers, so the boundary is genuinely blurred.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 55 millivolts, a broad shouldered spike carried by Nav1.8 and Nav1.9, and threshold set by Nav1.7.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Centrally it drives lamina I projection neurons carrying the neurokinin 1 receptor, the receptor for substance P, which is the main ascending pain route to brainstem and thalamus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Most are unmyelinated C fibres conducting at 0.5 to 2 metres per second, with a thinly myelinated A-delta minority; peptides are made in the soma and carried the whole way out by motor proteins, so a terminal cannot restock quickly.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for fast signalling through vesicular glutamate transporter 2, plus calcitonin gene-related peptide and substance P, and the receptor that defines the class is TrkA, the receptor for nerve growth factor.

MYELINATION:

Mostly none, since the majority are C fibres in Remak bundles, with the A-delta minority carrying a few wraps of Schwann cell myelin.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Peptide manufacture is costly, because peptides cannot be recycled at the terminal the way glutamate is, so the soma must transcribe, package and ship every molecule.

PLASTICITY:

Chronic inflammation makes these fibres sprout into damaged tissue, and repeated migraine attacks depend on calcitonin gene-related peptide release from the trigeminal counterparts of these cells.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

In tissue the crucial partners are mast cells and macrophages, which supply nerve growth factor and are in turn degranulated by substance P, a two-way loop absent from most of the nervous system.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and skin still hurts when cut, but it stops turning red, stops swelling and stops becoming tender around an injury.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is the clearest example in the body of a neuron acting as a secretory gland, releasing peptides from peripheral endings to control blood vessel diameter, plasma leak and immune cell behaviour.

It performs volume transmission in the dorsal horn, where peptides diffuse beyond the synapse to reach receptors on distant cells, it changes its own gene expression under nerve growth factor control, and its axon reflex spreads the alarm sideways into skin that was never touched.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: temperature above 42 degrees Celsius; force above about 5 millinewtons; pH below 6; nerve growth factor and bradykinin concentrations; opioid and gamma-aminobutyric acid inhibition 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto lamina I neurokinin 1 receptor projection neurons; substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide into spinal tissue and into skin, gut and joint.

• STATE: membrane voltage; TRPV1 sensitisation; internal calcium; readily releasable peptide pool; transcriptional state under nerve growth factor.

• PARAMETERS: heat threshold 42 to 45 degrees Celsius; peptide release requires bursts above about 5 impulses per second; conduction 0.5 to 2 metres per second; peptide pool refill limited by axonal transport.

• TIME CONSTANTS: spike 2 to 5 milliseconds; TRPV1 sensitisation seconds to minutes; flare develops over 20 to 60 seconds; peptide resupply hours; transcriptional change hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE: losing the TrkA gene NTRK1 causes hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type four, in which children feel no pain and cannot sweat; overactivity of the same peptides drives migraine, and blocking calcitonin gene-related peptide prevents attacks.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to model a peptidergic nociceptor that fires to heat and, when firing hard enough, empties peptide into the tissue around it.
Create a number variable called heat_threshold with initial value 43.
Create a number variable called peptide_pool with initial value 100.
Create a number variable called flare with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called report with initial value empty list.
For each sample in stimulus_trace, perform the following operations.
    Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
    If sample is greater than heat_threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to the product of 3 and the difference of sample and heat_threshold.
    End the conditional block.
    Create a number variable called release with initial value 0.
    If both firing_rate is greater than 5 and peptide_pool is greater than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set release to the quotient of firing_rate divided by 10.
        Set peptide_pool to the difference of peptide_pool and release.
        Set flare to the sum of flare and release.
        Set heat_threshold to the difference of heat_threshold and 0.05.
    End the conditional block.
    Set flare to the product of flare and 0.98.
    Add firing_rate to the end of report.
End the loop.
Display flare to the console.
Return report to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: one loop shows firing, peptide depletion, flare and self-sensitisation.
def peptidergic_nociceptor(temps, threshold=43.0, pool=100.0):
    """temps: skin temperature in C, one value per second."""
    BURST, DRAIN, SENS, FADE = 5.0, 10.0, 0.05, 0.98
    flare, rates = 0.0, []
    for temp_c in temps:
        rate = 3.0 * (temp_c - threshold) if temp_c > threshold else 0.0
        if rate > BURST and pool > 0:          # only bursts empty dense-core vesicles
            released = rate / DRAIN
            pool -= released
            flare += released                  # the visible red flare in skin
            threshold -= SENS                  # the ending sensitises itself
        flare *= FADE
        rates.append(round(rate, 2))
    return rates, round(flare, 2), round(pool, 2)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    rates, flare, pool = peptidergic_nociceptor([46.0] * 20)
    print("firing rates:", rates[:5], "...")
    print("flare:", flare, " peptide left:", pool)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only sensory neuron whose activity turns the skin red, because no other cell squirts calcitonin gene-related peptide out of its own sensory ending.

CHAPTER 248. NON-PEPTIDERGIC NOCICEPTORS (Bare-Skin Injury Neuron) (NON-COG)

These pain fibres carry no chemical weapons for the tissue; they simply deliver the bad news and get out of the way.

Non-peptidergic defines the cell by a chemical it lacks, which is the least informative naming strategy available.

Bare-Skin names its exclusive territory, because roughly seventy-five percent of this population carries the Mrgprd marker and those cells innervate skin and nothing else, ending in the most superficial living layer of the epidermis, the stratum granulosum, above where their peptide-carrying cousins terminate.

Injury names the faculty, since removing these cells leaves animals selectively blunted to damaging mechanical stimulation while other pain responses survive.

Neuron marks it as the afferent teaching that the outer surface of the body has its own dedicated damage line, separate from the one that inflames tissue.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A non-peptidergic nociceptor is a pain-sensing neuron that lacks the peptide cargo of its peptidergic cousin and therefore does not inflame the tissue it monitors.

It is polymodal, answering pinch, noxious heat and irritant chemicals, and in mice the same cells signal the itch caused by beta-alanine, a food supplement amino acid.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is pseudounipolar with bare free nerve endings that climb higher into the epidermis than most, reaching the granular layer just beneath the dead surface cells.

It carries clear synaptic vesicles rather than dense-core peptide vesicles, and its central terminals form the core of glomeruli in the inner half of lamina II.

SIZE:

Somata are small at roughly 15 to 30 micrometres across, among the smallest neurons in the body, with terminal branches well under a micrometre wide.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

They divide by receptor: a large MrgprD-expressing mechanical and itch class, a TRPA1-rich chemical-sensing class, and smaller classes tuned to cold or to specific irritants, with about 80 per cent of small neurons responding to TRPA1 agonists binding the marker lectin.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Somata occupy the dorsal root ganglia at every spinal level, the interface between peripheral and central nervous systems.

Endings are concentrated in skin rather than deep tissue, and central terminals occupy the inner part of lamina II, just above the low-threshold mechanoreceptor zone and just below the peptidergic band in lamina I and outer lamina II.

NUMBER:

About 1.8 to 2 million cells, roughly 30 per cent of the 6 million nociceptors and about 20 per cent of the 10 million dorsal root ganglion neurons, taken from the nociceptor pool rather than added to it.

Confidence is low to moderate, because the defining markers behave differently in people: the adenosine triphosphate-gated channel P2X3 is found in virtually all human ganglion neurons, and roughly a third of human neurons carry peptidergic and non-peptidergic markers together.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 55 millivolts, a broad shouldered spike carried by tetrodotoxin-resistant Nav1.8, and a strong adenosine triphosphate-gated inward current through P2X3 that makes damaged, leaking tissue an effective stimulus.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

No synapses on the soma; centrally it excites inner lamina II interneurons, including vertical cells that relay onward to lamina I, and it receives axoaxonic inhibition using gamma-aminobutyric acid.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated C fibres conducting at 0.5 to 2 metres per second, branching profusely so that one neuron tiles a patch of skin with hundreds of tips.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate through vesicular glutamate transporter 2 and nothing else of consequence, which is precisely the point of the name.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable in the sense of a sheath, because these are unmyelinated C fibres; they travel bundled inside Remak Schwann cells, which support them metabolically without insulating them.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Running pumps along a metre of very thin, heavily branched axon is the whole expense, and the branching means an unusually large membrane area per cell.

PLASTICITY:

After nerve injury they contribute strongly to mechanical allodynia, and their spinal terminals change which interneurons they can drive.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Remak Schwann cells supply the axons, and specialised nociceptive Schwann cells contribute at the ending.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Kill this population selectively in animals and pinching hurts less while burning still hurts, and inflamed tissue remains inflamed because no peptides were being released here anyway.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

It reads the chemistry of broken cells directly, since adenosine triphosphate spilling from damaged tissue is its natural agonist, making it a damage detector as much as a force detector.

It also occupies the inner lamina II glomeruli where afferent terminals contact one another, undergoes a developmental identity switch controlled by the transcription factor Runx1, and maintains hundreds of branch points by local protein synthesis.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: mechanical force above about 5 millinewtons; temperature above 43 degrees Celsius; extracellular adenosine triphosphate in micromolar amounts; irritant chemicals acting on TRPA1; segmental inhibition 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto inner lamina II interneurons and, through them, lamina I projection neurons.

• STATE: membrane voltage; P2X3 desensitisation; Nav1.8 availability; branch-level local excitation.

• PARAMETERS: mechanical threshold 5 to 20 millinewtons; heat threshold about 43 degrees Celsius; conduction 0.5 to 2 metres per second; maximum rate about 20 impulses per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: P2X3 activation 10 to 50 milliseconds with desensitisation over seconds; spike 2 to 5 milliseconds; developmental identity switch over the first postnatal weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: these endings are lost early in diabetic and chemotherapy-induced small fibre neuropathy, and their overactivity after nerve injury contributes to allodynia and to chronic itch.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to combine force, heat and spilled adenosine triphosphate into the firing of a non-peptidergic nociceptor, including desensitisation of its chemical receptor.
Create a number variable called desensitisation with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called rates with initial value empty list.
For each sample in stimulus_trace, perform the following operations.
    Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
    If the force of sample is greater than 5, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to the sum of drive and the quotient of the difference of the force of sample and 5 divided by 5.
    End the conditional block.
    If the temperature of sample is greater than 43, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to the sum of drive and the difference of the temperature of sample and 43.
    End the conditional block.
    Create a number variable called chemical with initial value 0.
    Set chemical to the product of the atp of sample and the difference of 1 and desensitisation.
    Set drive to the sum of drive and chemical.
    Set desensitisation to the sum of desensitisation and the product of 0.2 and chemical.
    If desensitisation is greater than 0.9, then perform the following actions.
        Set desensitisation to 0.9.
    End the conditional block.
    Set desensitisation to the product of desensitisation and 0.95.
    Add drive to the end of rates.
End the loop.
Return rates to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: three input channels summed in one loop, with P2X3 desensitisation.
def non_peptidergic(samples):
    """samples: list of (force in mN, temperature in C, ATP level 0 to 1)."""
    F_THRESH, T_THRESH, DESENS_GAIN, RECOVERY = 5.0, 43.0, 0.2, 0.95
    desens, rates = 0.0, []
    for force, temp_c, atp in samples:
        drive = 0.0
        if force > F_THRESH:
            drive += (force - F_THRESH) / 5.0        # graded mechanical pain
        if temp_c > T_THRESH:
            drive += temp_c - T_THRESH               # noxious heat adds on top
        chemical = atp * (1.0 - desens)              # ATP from broken cells
        drive += chemical
        desens = min(0.9, desens + DESENS_GAIN * chemical)
        desens *= RECOVERY                           # the receptor recovers
        rates.append(round(drive, 2))
    return rates

if __name__ == "__main__":
    pinch = [(20.0, 32.0, 0.0)] * 3                  # pure pinch
    wound = [(20.0, 32.0, 1.0)] * 5                  # pinch on damaged skin
    print("pinch:", non_peptidergic(pinch))
    print("wound:", non_peptidergic(wound))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the pain fibre that binds the plant lectin isolectin B4, carries MrgprD and P2X3, answers to glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor rather than nerve growth factor, and holds no peptides at all.

CHAPTER 249. A-DELTA NOCICEPTORS (First-Pain Pricking Neuron) (NON-COG)

The bright sting that makes you snatch your hand back travels on these wires, and it beats the slow burn to your brain by about a second.

The existing label is an alphanumeric fibre-class barcode, since the letter A and the Greek letter delta describe axon calibre rather than what the cell does for a person.

First-Pain names the moment the cell owns, because a single sharp injury produces a double sensation and this cell delivers the opening half of it.

Pricking names the quality of that half, the bright well-localised sting that makes a hand withdraw before anything is felt as burning.

Neuron marks it as a thinly myelinated afferent conducting at roughly five to forty metres per second, about fifteen on average, so its message arrives at the spinal cord roughly a second earlier than the unmyelinated traffic behind it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An A-delta nociceptor is a thinly insulated pain fibre that carries first pain, the sharp, well-located prick that arrives before the dull ache.

It exists because speed matters: a fast warning can move a limb out of danger while a slow one only teaches a lesson.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is pseudounipolar with free nerve endings, but unlike C fibres its axon carries a thin myelin sheath that stops short of the terminal, leaving a bare sensing tip.

Its central terminals concentrate in lamina I and lamina V of the dorsal horn, the two layers that hold the main ascending pain projection neurons.

SIZE:

The soma is medium at about 30 to 50 micrometres, the axon 1 to 5 micrometres wide including myelin, and one cell covers a skin field of a few square millimetres to a couple of square centimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Type one has a very high heat threshold above about 53 degrees Celsius with a low mechanical threshold, and sensitises sharply after a burn.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Somata sit in the dorsal root ganglia at all levels, at the peripheral to central interface, with axons crossing the dorsal root entry zone where Schwann cell myelin gives way to oligodendrocyte myelin.

Endings are found in skin, joint capsule, muscle, periosteum and cornea, with type two units concentrated in hairy skin, and central terminals in lamina I and lamina V.

NUMBER:

About 1 million cells, roughly 10 per cent of the 10 million dorsal root ganglion neurons and about 15 to 20 per cent of the 6 million nociceptors, drawn from that same nociceptor pool.

Confidence is moderate, based on fibre counts in peripheral nerve and microneurography sampling rather than on a direct human census, giving roughly one cell per hundred thousand neurons in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage near minus 60 millivolts, a spike narrower than a C fibre spike but still carrying a Nav1.8 component, and threshold set by Nav1.7.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

No synapses on the soma; centrally it excites lamina I projection neurons bearing the neurokinin 1 receptor and lamina V wide-dynamic-range neurons, and it drives spinal motor circuits directly enough to produce the withdrawal reflex before the brain is informed.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Conduction is 5 to 30 metres per second, roughly ten to thirty times faster than a C fibre, so from the foot the sharp warning arrives in about 40 milliseconds while the burn takes a full second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate through vesicular glutamate transporter 2 is the main transmitter, with some units also carrying calcitonin gene-related peptide and substance P.

MYELINATION:

Thin, only a few wraps of Schwann cell membrane, giving nodes of Ranvier spaced a few hundred micrometres apart where the impulse jumps.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Myelin makes conduction cheap per millimetre by confining current to the nodes, but it must be built and maintained by Schwann cells, and the sodium pumps at each node are heavy consumers during a burst.

PLASTICITY:

After nerve injury, demyelination and sodium channel clustering can make these axons fire spontaneously, generating shooting, electric pain.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glia surround the soma, and at the tip the bare ending sits within the mesh of nociceptive Schwann cells and among keratinocytes.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove A-delta nociceptors and injury still hurts, but the hurt loses its edge and its address, arriving as a slow spreading ache with no sharp beginning.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its speed lets the spinal cord run a protective reflex before conscious pain exists, so the same spike drives behaviour and perception on two different timescales.

Type one units display a striking use-dependent sensitisation after burn injury, its thin myelin makes it selectively vulnerable to pressure and to demyelinating disease, and its terminals in lamina I sit on the projection neurons that carry pain to the brainstem and thalamus.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: temperature in degrees Celsius, with type one responding above 53 and type two above 46; mechanical force in millinewtons, low threshold in type one and very high in type two; inflammatory mediators 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto lamina I neurokinin 1 receptor neurons and lamina V wide-dynamic-range neurons, plus reflex drive to spinal motor circuits.

• STATE: membrane voltage; nodal sodium channel availability; heat sensitisation offset; burn-induced threshold shift.

• PARAMETERS: conduction 5 to 30 metres per second; maximum firing about 100 impulses per second; type one heat threshold above 53 degrees Celsius; type two heat threshold about 46 degrees Celsius.

• TIME CONSTANTS: transduction 1 to 5 milliseconds; spike about 1 millisecond; foot to cord delay 30 to 60 milliseconds; burn sensitisation minutes to hours.

• FAILURE MODE: pressure and demyelinating neuropathy silence these fibres first, removing sharp pain and slowing withdrawal, while after nerve injury the same fibres fire spontaneously and produce shooting electric pain.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to model the two kinds of A-delta nociceptor and the first pain they deliver ahead of the C fibre signal.
Create a number variable called heat_threshold with initial value 53.
Create a number variable called force_threshold with initial value 5.
Create a number variable called burn_shift with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called rates with initial value empty list.
If unit_type is equal to two, then perform the following actions.
    Set heat_threshold to 46.
    Set force_threshold to 200.
End the conditional block.
For each sample in stimulus_trace, perform the following operations.
    Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
    Create a number variable called effective_heat with initial value 0.
    Set effective_heat to the difference of heat_threshold and burn_shift.
    If the temperature of sample is greater than effective_heat, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to the sum of drive and the product of 8 and the difference of the temperature of sample and effective_heat.
        Set burn_shift to the sum of burn_shift and 0.3.
    End the conditional block.
    If the force of sample is greater than force_threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to the sum of drive and the quotient of the difference of the force of sample and force_threshold divided by 2.
    End the conditional block.
    If drive is greater than 100, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to 100.
    End the conditional block.
    Add drive to the end of rates.
End the loop.
Return rates to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: one function covers both A-delta types by swapping two thresholds.
def a_delta_nociceptor(samples, unit_type=1):
    """samples: list of (temperature in C, force in mN). Returns spikes/s."""
    heat_thr = 53.0 if unit_type == 1 else 46.0      # type I is heat-resistant
    force_thr = 5.0 if unit_type == 1 else 200.0     # type II ignores pressure
    MAX_RATE, BURN_STEP = 100.0, 0.3
    burn_shift, rates = 0.0, []
    for temp_c, force in samples:
        effective = heat_thr - burn_shift            # a burn lowers the bar
        drive = 0.0
        if temp_c > effective:
            drive += 8.0 * (temp_c - effective)
            burn_shift += BURN_STEP                  # sensitisation after burn
        if force > force_thr:
            drive += (force - force_thr) / 2.0
        rates.append(round(min(drive, MAX_RATE), 1))
    return rates

if __name__ == "__main__":
    burn = [(55.0, 0.0)] * 5
    pinch = [(32.0, 50.0)] * 3
    print("type I burn: ", a_delta_nociceptor(burn, 1))
    print("type II burn:", a_delta_nociceptor(burn, 2))
    print("type I pinch:", a_delta_nociceptor(pinch, 1))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only pain fibre fast enough to beat its own C fibre partner to the spinal cord, and the only one silenced first when you sit on your leg.

CHAPTER 250. C-FIBRE POLYMODAL NOCICEPTORS (Second-Pain Burning Neuron) (NON-COG)

Touch a hot pan and a sharp jab comes first, but the deep burning that floods in a second later belongs to this cell, the slowest alarm wire in the body.

C-fibre is a conduction-class letter and polymodal is technical shorthand for responding to more than one kind of stimulus, so the old label teaches classification rather than experience.

Second-Pain names the cell's slot in the sequence, the delayed wave that follows the sharp opening sting of the same injury.

Burning names its quality, the dull spreading heat that is poorly localised because these endings are unmyelinated and conduct at roughly one metre per second, less than two in all.

Neuron marks it as the larger population, since C-fibres make up around seventy percent of all fibres carrying noxious input, and the name keeps the pairing with the first-pain cell visible, which is the whole point.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is a sensory neuron of the dorsal root ganglion (DRG), the bead of nerve cell bodies in the bony gap beside each vertebra.

Polymodal means many modes, and it answers crushing pressure, burning heat and irritant chemicals alike, carrying the slow ache that outlasts an injury.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is pseudounipolar, meaning one stalk leaves the round cell body and splits like a letter T, one branch to skin and one into the spinal cord.

Its ending is a free nerve ending, a bare spray of axon climbing between the cells of the epidermis, the outermost skin layer.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 30 micrometres across, about a third the width of a hair.

The axon is 0.2 to 1.5 micrometres wide, conducts at 0.5 to 2 metres per second, and can be a metre long, so a toe signal needs about a second to arrive.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• The peptidergic subtype carries calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), substance P and the receptor TrkA.

• The non-peptidergic subtype binds isolectin B4, carries the Mrgprd receptor and depends on the receptor Ret.

• Functionally they grade from CMH units answering force and heat to CMHC units that add cold.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies fill dorsal root ganglia at all 31 spinal levels on both sides, and endings reach epidermis, dermis, fascia, periosteum, joint capsule and tooth pulp.

Central terminals stop in laminae I and II outer of the dorsal horn, so the cell spans two interfaces: the epidermal border with the outside world, and the dorsal root entry zone where Schwann cell territory meets central nervous tissue.

NUMBER:

About 900,000 cells, roughly 9 per cent of the 10 million neurons in human dorsal root ganglia and about 0.001 per cent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

The fraction comes from rat lumbar recordings, where these units were 9.8 per cent of all neurons and 19.4 per cent of nociceptors.

Confidence is moderate for the fraction and low for the human total, since nobody has counted them directly.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is near minus 55 millivolts and the spike is unusually wide at 2 to 5 milliseconds with a shoulder on its falling phase, because it runs on Nav1.8, a sodium channel that ignores the pufferfish poison tetrodotoxin.

An afterhyperpolarisation of 50 to 150 milliseconds holds firing to 0.5 to 20 spikes per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It excites lamina I projection neurons carrying the neurokinin 1 receptor, which relay to parabrachial nucleus and thalamus, plus local lamina II interneurons.

Its terminals carry mu-opioid, GABA-B and cannabinoid CB1 receptors, so morphine silences this cell before it speaks.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The bare axon rides in a Remak bundle, up to about 20 axons in the grooves of one Schwann cell, and repeated firing progressively slows it, a fingerprint used to identify it in living volunteers.

Spikes can also run backwards into neighbouring branches, the axon reflex that spreads the red flare around a scratch.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, loaded by VGLUT2, is the fast transmitter centrally, while CGRP and substance P are released both centrally and into skin, where they widen arterioles and make mast cells dump histamine.

MYELINATION:

None, which defines a C fibre and explains its slowness, although its Schwann cells still feed it lactate.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

One small cell body must supply a metre of axon and a whole terminal tree, which is why these fibres die back from the toes first in diabetes, the stocking and glove pattern of small fibre neuropathy.

PLASTICITY:

Within minutes, prostaglandin E2 and bradykinin switch on protein kinases A and C, which alter the heat sensor TRPV1 and drop its trigger from about 43 degrees Celsius to below body temperature, so warm bathwater hurts.

Over days, nerve growth factor carried back to the nucleus raises TRPV1 and Nav1.8 production.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Each cell body is sealed in a complete satellite glial jacket only 20 nanometres away, an arrangement found nowhere else in the nervous system.

Those glia buffer potassium through Kir4.1 channels, and after injury they lose Kir4.1 and let neighbouring cell bodies excite one another.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and skin keeps touch, cold and the first sharp prick but loses the burning ache and the red flare, so wounds redden less, heal slower, and lose the alarm that pulls blood and immune cells into damaged tissue.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its most striking act is at the far tip, where the axon reflex dumps CGRP and substance P into tissue with no message sent to the brain at all.

It also makes proteins inside its own axon, ships signalling endosomes to the nucleus over days, tunes blood flow, and steers immune cells, since animals lacking these neurons fight infection differently.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: terminal temperature in degrees Celsius, force in millinewtons, and protons, bradykinin, prostaglandin E2 and nerve growth factor within about 1 square millimetre.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to 20 hertz onto lamina I and II outer neurons, plus peripheral CGRP and substance P onto arterioles and mast cells.

• STATE: generator potential, TRPV1 sensitisation, afterhyperpolarisation timer, conduction slowing index.

• PARAMETERS: heat threshold 43 degrees Celsius, falling to 32 when inflamed, mechanical threshold about 90 millinewtons, conduction 0.5 to 2 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 milliseconds, afterhyperpolarisation 50 to 150 milliseconds, sensitisation minutes, transcription 1 to 3 days.

• FAILURE MODE: loss-of-function mutations in SCN9A, the gene for Nav1.7, cause congenital insensitivity to pain, while gain-of-function mutations cause inherited erythromelalgia with burning red hands and feet.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn heat and inflammation into the slow burning discharge of a C-fibre polymodal nociceptor.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value 43.
Create a number variable called membrane with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spikeCount with initial value 0.
For each sample in skinSamples, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of 43 and the inflammation of sample.
    Set threshold to the result.
    Calculate the difference of the temperature of sample and threshold.
    Calculate the sum of membrane and the result.
    Set membrane to the result.
    Check if membrane is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if membrane is greater than 12.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of spikeCount and 1.
        Set spikeCount to the result.
        Set membrane to 0.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spikeCount to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this model needs no libraries and reads almost like the English above.

# Polymodal nociceptor: heat, force and inflammation feed one generator potential.
def polymodal_nociceptor(samples, dt=0.001):
    """samples: (temperature_C, force_mN, inflammation 0..1). Returns spike times."""
    v, refractory, spikes = 0.0, 0.0, []
    for i, (temp, force, infl) in enumerate(samples):
        threshold = 43.0 - 8.0 * infl        # inflammation lowers the TRPV1 threshold
        drive = 2.0 * infl                   # chemical arm
        if temp > threshold:
            drive += (temp - threshold) * 1.2
        if force > 90.0:
            drive += (force - 90.0) / 60.0   # mechanical arm, 90 mN threshold
        v = v * 0.85 + drive                 # leak plus generator current
        if refractory > 0.0:
            refractory -= dt
        elif v > 12.0:
            spikes.append(round(i * dt, 4))
            v, refractory = 0.0, 0.05        # 50 ms afterhyperpolarisation
    return spikes

trace = [(32.0, 0.0, 0.0)] * 2000 + [(48.0, 0.0, 0.3)] * 2000   # 2 s calm, 2 s burn
out = polymodal_nociceptor(trace)
print(len(out), "spikes, first at", out[0], "s")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else combines a bare ending in the epidermis, a spike wide enough to have a shoulder, a speed slower than walking, and the power to redden skin from its own tip.

CHAPTER 251. A-BETA NOCICEPTORS AND MODERATE PRESSURE RECEPTORS (Ultrafast Bruise-Signalling Neuron) (NON-COG)

For a century the textbooks said thick fast fibres carry touch and thin slow fibres carry pain, and this cell quietly breaks the rule by carrying pain at motorway speed.

The old label is two fibre-class codes joined by an and, which no one can say aloud and which hides the surprise it contains, that some of the thickest, fastest axons in the nerve, usually thought of as touch lines, carry pain.

Ultrafast records the solid measured fact, a conduction velocity of roughly thirty-three to seventy-five metres per second, faster than any other pain-carrying afferent in the body.

Bruise-Signalling names the stimulus and the purpose together, a firm damaging indentation rather than a light stroke, which is exactly what the old phrase moderate pressure receptor was groping at, and electrical stimulation of single such fibres in humans evokes a painful percept and drives fast protective withdrawal.

Neuron marks it as an afferent of which about half of rat lumbar cells with superficial receptive fields fall into that moderate-threshold group.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, from the bead of cell bodies beside each vertebra, with thick fast axons that nonetheless report damage rather than gentle touch.

The A-beta nociceptor needs tissue-threatening pressure, while the moderate pressure receptor has a far lower trigger yet still fires steadily throughout a squeeze rather than only at first contact.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is pseudounipolar, one stalk splitting into a peripheral and a central branch, with a large pale cell body.

Its ending is free and unencapsulated, which is what separates it from the corpuscle-wrapped touch fibres of the same size.

SIZE:

The cell body is 40 to 70 micrometres across, two to three times a C-fibre cell body.

The axon is 6 to 12 micrometres wide and conducts at 30 to 100 metres per second, with human hairy-skin recordings putting fast high-threshold units near 48.5 metres per second.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Moderate pressure receptors have superficial fields and thresholds in the tens of millinewtons, and about half of superficial A-beta nociceptors belong to this group.

• Classic high-threshold A-beta nociceptors need roughly 90 millinewtons or more and sit deeper, in dermis, fascia and joint.

• A minority carries calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and substance P at low levels, with low TrkA, the nerve growth factor receptor.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies lie in dorsal root ganglia at all spinal levels, with endings in hairy and glabrous skin, joint capsule, periosteum and deep fascia.

Centrally the thick axon dives ventrally and arborises in laminae I, III, IV and V, so it straddles the interface between the deep touch layers and the superficial pain layers.

NUMBER:

About 600,000 cells, roughly 6 per cent of the 10 million neurons in human dorsal root ganglia and about 0.0007 per cent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

Rat lumbar recordings put moderate pressure receptors at 1.6 per cent of ganglion neurons and A-beta nociceptors overall at a looser 5 to 9 per cent.

Confidence is low to moderate, because electrodes favour either very large or very small cells.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Its spike is 0.8 to 2 milliseconds, narrower than a C fibre's but wider than a same-sized touch fibre's, often with a small shoulder.

Firing is slowly adapting, starting in the tens to low hundreds of spikes per second and settling to a level set by the force still applied.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It excites lamina I projection neurons directly and, through its deep arbor, wide dynamic range neurons in lamina V that pool touch and pain.

Its terminals receive presynaptic inhibition from GABAergic interneurons, the brake believed to fail in mechanical allodynia, where light touch hurts.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thick and myelinated, with nodes of Ranvier about 1 millimetre apart, so the spike jumps node to node and a foot pinprick registers within about 20 milliseconds.

Unlike C fibres it shows little activity-dependent slowing, another way experimenters tell them apart.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, loaded by VGLUT1 in this large myelinated population, with a minority co-releasing CGRP and substance P at levels too low to redden skin.

MYELINATION:

Heavily myelinated, with many tens of membrane wraps per internode, which makes it fast but also the first casualty of demyelination, and a bared stretch can fire spontaneously.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Insulation confines sodium entry to the nodes and slashes the pumping bill, but Schwann cells must feed the axon lactate through monocarboxylate transporters, so it depends metabolically on its own sheath.

PLASTICITY:

After nerve injury these fibres can start making substance P and brain-derived neurotrophic factor, a switch that makes a touch-speed fibre behave chemically like a pain fibre.

That switch, plus lost spinal inhibition, is a leading explanation for why brushing the skin hurts after shingles.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Its satellite glial jacket is thinner and made of fewer cells than the dense sheath around a small dark C-fibre neuron, and along the axon one Schwann cell makes exactly one internode, unlike the shared Remak cradles of C fibres.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and pain loses its speed and its map: skin would keep slow burning pain and light touch but lose the instant, precisely placed mechanical pain that snatches your hand back.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its terminal sums force across a patch of tissue, and a central arbor spanning laminae I to V lets one cell drive discriminative and emotional pain circuits at once.

It even instructs its own insulation, since neuregulin 1 type III on its surface tells the Schwann cell how thick to build the myelin.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: indentation force in millinewtons at the ending, plus a local inflammatory sensitisation index from 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: a slowly adapting train of 0 to about 200 hertz onto lamina I, III, IV and V neurons, with a collateral toward the gracile and cuneate nuclei.

• STATE: accumulated impulse, slow adaptation variable, refractory timer, injury-switch flag.

• PARAMETERS: threshold about 20 millinewtons for a moderate pressure receptor and about 90 for a high-threshold unit, conduction 30 to 100 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 4 milliseconds, adaptation 600 milliseconds, refractory 5 milliseconds, phenotypic switch 3 to 14 days.

• FAILURE MODE: after injury or demyelination it fires ectopically into pain circuits, producing mechanical allodynia in which a light brush is agony.

◦ In large fibre neuropathies it is lost early, leaving only slow burning pain with no sense of where the damage is.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert sustained pressure into the slowly adapting fast discharge of an A-beta nociceptor or moderate pressure receptor.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called impulse with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spikeCount with initial value 0.
For each force in forceSamples, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of force and 20.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.3.
    Set drive to the result.
    Check if drive is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of drive and 0.6.
    Calculate the difference of the result and adaptation.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.000833.
    Calculate the sum of adaptation and the result.
    Set adaptation to the result.
    Calculate the difference of drive and adaptation.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.0005.
    Calculate the sum of impulse and the result.
    Set impulse to the result.
    Check if impulse is greater than or equal to 1.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set impulse to 0.
        Calculate the sum of spikeCount and 1.
        Set spikeCount to the result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because the fastest fibre in the pain system belongs in a tight allocation-free loop a whole-body simulator can run millions of times per second.

/* A-beta nociceptor and moderate pressure receptor: slowly adapting force coding. */
#include <stdio.h>
#define DT 0.0005    /* 0.5 ms step */

typedef struct { double impulse, adapt, refrac; } AbetaNociceptor;

/* mpr = 1 gives a moderate pressure receptor near 20 mN, 0 a high threshold unit near 90 mN. */
static int abeta_step(AbetaNociceptor *n, double force_mN, int mpr)
{
    double threshold = mpr ? 20.0 : 90.0, drive = 0.0, net;
    int fired = 0;
    if (force_mN > threshold)
        drive = (force_mN - threshold) * (mpr ? 0.30 : 0.18);
    n->adapt += (0.6 * drive - n->adapt) * (DT / 0.60);   /* 600 ms adaptation */
    net = drive - n->adapt;
    if (net < 0.0) net = 0.0;
    n->impulse += net * DT;   /* a threshold of 1.0 makes net a rate in hertz */
    if (n->refrac > 0.0) n->refrac -= DT;
    else if (n->impulse >= 1.0) { n->impulse -= 1.0; n->refrac = 0.005; fired = 1; }
    return fired;
}

int main(void)
{
    AbetaNociceptor n = {0.0, 0.0, 0.0};
    int i, spikes = 0;
    for (i = 0; i < 4000; i++)   /* 2 s of a steady 150 mN squeeze */
        spikes += abeta_step(&n, 150.0, 1);
    printf("moderate pressure receptor fired %d times in 2 s\n", spikes);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the contradiction of the ganglion, a fat fast myelinated axon of the kind that should report a feather, ending in a bare terminal that only speaks when something is being crushed.

CHAPTER 252. SILENT OR SLEEPING NOCICEPTORS (Inflammation-Woken Ache Neuron) (NON-COG)

Press healthy skin with three quarters of a newton, hard enough to leave a dent, and this fibre says nothing; inflame the same patch for a day and it wakes up screaming.

Silent or sleeping is an evocative half-name spoiled by the alternation and by describing only what the cell fails to do in health.

Inflammation-Woken names the condition under which it starts working, since these endings ignore even crushing mechanical force in normal tissue and acquire mechanical sensitivity only once tissue is inflamed, a switch that depends on inflammation raising the level of the membrane protein TMEM100 in them.

Ache names what their recruitment feels like, the deep sustained soreness of an inflamed joint or organ rather than a sharp sting.

Neuron marks it as a large hidden reserve, roughly thirty percent of all C-fibre afferents in viscera and joints and about fifteen to twenty percent in human skin, so un-silencing them adds a substantial new stream of input to the spinal cord.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is a dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neuron, from the bead of nerve cell bodies beside each vertebra, that is born mechanically deaf and fires at no squeeze, poke or stretch in healthy tissue.

It is the reserve alarm, switched on by injury so that damaged tissue becomes far more sensitive than healthy tissue.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is pseudounipolar, and its free ending has an unusually wide branching tree covering several centimetres of skin, which is why these fibres, not ordinary ones, spread the red flare that fans out well beyond a sting.

SIZE:

The cell body is 20 to 35 micrometres across, and the bare axon of 0.2 to 1.5 micrometres conducts at 0.5 to 1 metre per second, the slow end even for a C fibre.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Cutaneous mechano-insensitive units feel no force, though many respond to heat and are then called CH units.

• A rarer group answers nothing natural at all and betrays itself only when capsaicin, the chilli chemical, is injected.

• Visceral and deep silent nociceptors carry CHRNA3, the alpha 3 subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, and are roughly half of all peptide-carrying afferents supplying organs and deep tissue.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in dorsal root ganglia at all levels, most densely at thoracolumbar and lumbosacral levels, with endings in skin, joint capsule and synovium, bone, bladder wall and gut wall.

Central branches run in Lissauer's tract, the interface strip between the dorsal root entry zone and the dorsal horn, then terminate across several segments in laminae I and II outer.

NUMBER:

About 700,000 cells, roughly 7 per cent of the 10 million neurons in human dorsal root ganglia and about 0.0008 per cent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

Human skin recordings make mechanically insensitive units 15 to 20 per cent of C fibres, rising to about 30 per cent of C afferents in joints and viscera.

Confidence is moderate for skin and lower for deep tissue.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Its electrical threshold is high, its spike wide at 3 to 5 milliseconds, and it shows the most extreme activity-dependent slowing of any fibre, shedding more than 30 per cent of its speed during 2 hertz stimulation.

Once awake it fires slowly and irregularly, 0.1 to 5 spikes per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It excites lamina I projection neurons and lamina II interneurons, but because one fibre branches across several segments it recruits a far wider spinal territory than a normal nociceptor.

That spread is the accepted explanation for secondary hyperalgesia, where undamaged skin around an injury becomes painful to touch.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated and carried in Remak bundles, the grooved cradles of non-myelinating Schwann cells, with an unusually powerful axon reflex that dumps peptides across a large area of skin.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the fast transmitter centrally, and nearly all these cells are peptidergic, releasing calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and substance P, which is why waking them reddens skin over a broad zone.

MYELINATION:

None, and that bareness is part of why it is so slow and so prone to slowing further when it works.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Almost nothing at rest, because a cell that never fires spends almost nothing pumping ions back, but demand climbs steeply once inflammation wakes it and it must build new sensor proteins.

PLASTICITY:

Plasticity is not a modifier here; it is the entire point of the cell.

Nerve growth factor from inflamed tissue raises production of TMEM100, a small membrane protein that is both required and sufficient to unsilence the fibre over hours, reversing over days once inflammation clears.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Its satellite glia look ordinary until inflammation arrives, when local glia and immune cells become the main source of the nerve growth factor that wakes it, so uniquely among sensory neurons this cell depends on its neighbours for its functional identity rather than merely for support.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and acute pain is untouched, but inflamed tissue stops being tender, so a sprained ankle would hurt when injured yet feel normal to press the next day and the protective limp that lets tissue heal would never appear.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its defining computation is a slow biochemical switch, a gene expression change that turns a deaf ending into a hair trigger over hours.

It spreads CGRP by volume transmission across centimetres, controls local blood flow, and signals to immune cells that feed nerve growth factor back to it, closing a loop between nervous and immune systems.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: force in millinewtons, tissue temperature in degrees Celsius, and nerve growth factor, bradykinin and proton levels at the ending.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to 5 hertz onto lamina I and II outer neurons across three or more spinal segments, plus wide-area peptide release into skin.

• STATE: TMEM100 level from 0 to 1, current mechanical threshold, conduction slowing index.

• PARAMETERS: resting threshold above 750 millinewtons, awakened threshold near 30 to 60 millinewtons, conduction 0.5 to 1 metre per second, field up to several square centimetres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: unsilencing rises with a time constant near 6 hours and decays over about 24 hours.

• FAILURE MODE: chronic inflammation keeps these fibres permanently awake, a major driver of pain in arthritis, interstitial cystitis and inflammatory bowel disease.

◦ Silencing them is an attractive drug target precisely because protective acute pain would survive.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to model how inflammation unsilences a sleeping nociceptor by lowering its mechanical threshold over hours.
Create a number variable called unsilencingProtein with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called mechanicalThreshold with initial value 750.
Create a number variable called firingRate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called elapsedHours with initial value 0.
While elapsedHours is less than 24, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the difference of 1 and unsilencingProtein.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.0167.
    Calculate the sum of unsilencingProtein and the result.
    Set unsilencingProtein to the result.
    Calculate the product of unsilencingProtein and 700.
    Calculate the difference of 750 and the result.
    Set mechanicalThreshold to the result.
    Calculate the difference of appliedForce and mechanicalThreshold.
    Set firingRate to the result.
    Check if firingRate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firingRate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Display firingRate to the console.
    Calculate the sum of elapsedHours and 0.1.
    Set elapsedHours to the result.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the interesting behaviour is a slow state change over a whole day, which reads best as plain sequential code.

# Silent nociceptor: nerve growth factor raises TMEM100, which drops the threshold.
RISE_H, FALL_H = 6.0, 24.0       # hours: un-silencing is fast, re-silencing is slow

def silent_nociceptor(force_mN, hours=48.0, dt=0.1, inflamed_until=24.0):
    """Returns a log of (hours, mechanical threshold in mN, firing rate in Hz)."""
    tmem100 = 0.0                # un-silencing protein level, 0 to 1
    log = []
    for i in range(int(hours / dt)):
        t = i * dt
        if t < inflamed_until:
            tmem100 += (1.0 - tmem100) * dt / RISE_H     # nerve growth factor present
        else:
            tmem100 -= tmem100 * dt / FALL_H             # inflammation has cleared
        threshold = 750.0 - 700.0 * tmem100  # 750 mN asleep, about 50 mN fully awake
        rate = max(0.0, (force_mN - threshold) / 25.0)
        log.append((round(t, 1), round(threshold, 1), round(rate, 2)))
    return log

for row in silent_nociceptor(200.0)[::120]:      # a steady 200 mN press, sampled 12-hourly
    print("t=%.1f h  threshold=%.1f mN  rate=%.2f Hz" % row)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only sensory neuron identified by what it does not do, findable only by proving it exists with capsaicin or an electric shock after every natural stimulus has failed.

CHAPTER 253. THERMORECEPTORS (NON-COG)

Right now, with nothing touching your skin, hundreds of thousands of these fibres are quietly ticking, and a room feeling cool is nothing more than that ticking speeding up.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, from the bead of cell bodies beside each vertebra, reporting temperatures that are not yet damaging.

Cool fibres speed up as skin cools and warm fibres do the opposite, and because both fire steadily at normal skin temperature they can report change in either direction.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Each is pseudounipolar with a free unencapsulated ending, and cool endings sit remarkably shallow, within about 0.2 millimetres of the surface, serving a spot about 1 millimetre across, which is why you can map cold spots on your forearm with a chilled pin.

SIZE:

Cool cell bodies are 20 to 40 micrometres across and warm ones 15 to 30.

Cool fibres are mostly thinly myelinated A-delta axons of 1 to 5 micrometres at 5 to 30 metres per second, while warm fibres are unmyelinated C fibres at 0.5 to 2, which is why warmth feels more sluggish than cold.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Cool thermoreceptors carry TRPM8, the menthol receptor and principal cold detector, which opens as temperature falls below about 28 degrees Celsius.

• Warm thermoreceptors depend on TRPM2 and TRPV1 together, and deleting either blunts warmth without abolishing it, so no single warm sensor has been found.

• A separate population carrying TRPA1 contributes mainly in the noxious cold range below about 15 degrees Celsius.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies lie in dorsal root ganglia at all spinal levels, with face and cornea served by the trigeminal ganglion, and endings in the epidermis of hairy and glabrous skin and in the sclera of the eye.

Central terminals reach lamina I, the interface layer where the signal splits between a conscious route to thalamus and insula and an unconscious route through the parabrachial nucleus to the preoptic hypothalamus that runs body temperature.

NUMBER:

About 450,000 cells, roughly 4.5 per cent of the 10 million neurons in human dorsal root ganglia and about 0.0005 per cent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

Cool fibres outnumber warm ones in skin recordings by something like five or ten to one, so perhaps 380,000 cool and 70,000 warm.

Confidence is low, because warm fibres are hard to find with an electrode and are probably undercounted.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Cool fibres tick regularly at 2 to 10 spikes per second at a neutral skin temperature of 33 to 34 degrees Celsius, with static firing peaking near 27 to 29 degrees and the regular tick breaking into rhythmic bursts below about 30.

Cooling also causes a large transient overshoot, so a 9 degree step briefly drives firing far above its settled level.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Both types excite thermospecific lamina I neurons, which answer temperature but not pinch, and warm and cool channels inhibit each other through spinal interneurons, which is why interlaced warm and cool bars feel painfully hot in the thermal grill illusion.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Cool A-delta axons carry thin myelin with nodes about 0.2 to 0.5 millimetres apart, while warm C axons are bare and ride in Remak bundles, so warmth arrives at the brain roughly a second after cold from the same patch of skin.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate at the spinal terminal for both types, and cool fibres are largely non-peptidergic, so unlike nociceptors they do not flood skin with calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), one reason cold alone does not redden it.

MYELINATION:

Cool fibres carry only a few wraps of Schwann cell membrane, intermediate between the bare C fibre and the thick touch fibre, while warm fibres carry none, and that mismatch is the direct cause of the difference in how quickly you feel cold and warmth.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Unusually high for a small neuron, because these cells never stop firing and must run their ion pumps continuously even when nothing at all is happening.

PLASTICITY:

TRPM8 is tuned by protein kinase C, so inflammation blunts cold sensitivity, and by the membrane lipid PIP2, so its set point drifts with membrane chemistry.

Chronic cold exposure and repeated menthol shift the population set point, part of how people acclimatise to a cold climate.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing about the satellite glia around these cell bodies is known to be special, and the honest answer is that they behave like satellite glia elsewhere in the ganglion.

The genuinely unusual partner is the keratinocyte, because a cool ending sits so shallow that surrounding skin cells act both as thermal buffer and as a source of adenosine triphosphate that modulates firing.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and skin goes thermally blind while still feeling touch and burn, so you would notice a scalding kettle only once it hurt, would not feel a draught, and would lose the reflex shivering and sweating that holds core temperature within a degree of 37 all day.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Information rides in the pattern as well as the rate, since below 30 degrees Celsius the discharge organises into bursts and the spikes per burst encode temperature independently of overall rate.

Because it never falls silent, the brain reads a ratio between warm and cool populations rather than a threshold crossing, and the same output drives sweating and shivering through the hypothalamus without ever reaching consciousness.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: skin temperature in degrees Celsius at the ending, plus its rate of change in degrees per second.

• OUTPUTS: an ongoing 0 to about 40 hertz train onto thermospecific lamina I neurons, feeding the insula for sensation and the preoptic hypothalamus for thermoregulation.

• STATE: an adapting reference temperature, a burst phase variable, and the current static rate.

• PARAMETERS: cool peak near 27 degrees Celsius, background 2 to 10 hertz at 34, silence above about 40, warm range 30 to 45 with a peak near 42.

• TIME CONSTANTS: the adapting reference follows skin with a time constant near 1.5 seconds, bursts recur every 0.2 to 1 second, acclimatisation takes days.

• FAILURE MODE: the chemotherapy drug oxaliplatin makes cold agonising within hours by altering sodium channels in these fibres, so patients cannot hold a cold glass.

◦ In small fibre neuropathy they die back and thermal thresholds widen, the basis of quantitative sensory testing.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to produce the ongoing and dynamic discharge of a cool thermoreceptor from a stream of skin temperatures.
Create a number variable called referenceTemperature with initial value 34.
Create a number variable called staticRate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dynamicRate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called rateTrace with initial value empty list.
For each temperature in temperatureSamples, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of temperature and 27.
    Calculate the product of the result and the result.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.045.
    Calculate the difference of 8 and the result.
    Set staticRate to the result.
    Check if staticRate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set staticRate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of referenceTemperature and temperature.
    Calculate the product of the result and 6.
    Set dynamicRate to the result.
    Check if dynamicRate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set dynamicRate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of staticRate and dynamicRate.
    Add the result to the end of rateTrace.
    Calculate the difference of temperature and referenceTemperature.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.033.
    Calculate the sum of referenceTemperature and the result.
    Set referenceTemperature to the result.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because the dynamic overshoot is a filtering problem a short array pipeline shows plainly, and it runs in any browser console with no installation.

// Cool thermoreceptor: a bell-shaped static rate plus a transient response to cooling.
function coolFibre(tempTrace, dt = 0.05) {
  const staticRate = t => Math.max(0, 8 - 0.045 * Math.pow(t - 27, 2));  // peak near 27 C
  let reference = tempTrace[0];        // slowly adapting reference temperature
  const out = [];
  for (const t of tempTrace) {
    const dynamic = Math.max(0, (reference - t) * 6);   // fires on the fall, not the level
    out.push(Number((staticRate(t) + dynamic).toFixed(2)));
    reference += (t - reference) * dt / 1.5;            // 1.5 s adaptation
  }
  return out;
}

const trace = Array(40).fill(34).concat(Array(60).fill(25));  // 2 s at 34 C, then 25 C
const rates = coolFibre(trace);
console.log("neutral skin   :", rates[30], "Hz");
console.log("peak on cooling:", Math.max(...rates).toFixed(2), "Hz");
console.log("3 s after step :", rates[99], "Hz");

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the sensory cell that never shuts up, firing steadily into a nervous system nobody is stimulating, so that silence itself becomes a signal.

CHAPTER 254. PRURICEPTORS (Itch-Sensing Scratch-Urge Neuron) (NON-COG)

Itch is the only sensation with a built-in reflex answer, and the fibre that creates the urge to scratch is the same fibre that scratching switches off.

Pruriceptor is built from the Latin prurire, to itch, so it teaches nothing to a reader who does not already know Latin, unlike the plain word itch.

Itch-Sensing names the input, the chemical signals such as histamine and chloroquine that these endings detect at the skin.

Scratch-Urge names the output and the reason the cell exists, because stimulating the skin terminals of this population in mice produces scratching and not pain behaviour, which is the evidence behind treating them as a dedicated line for itch.

Neuron marks it as a genuine minority only partly separable from pain lines, since between fifteen and forty percent of ganglion cells respond to histamine but only the few that respond with sustained discharge appear to signal itch.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is a dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neuron, from the bead of cell bodies beside each vertebra, tuned to chemicals signalling something crawling, stinging or wrong on the skin.

Its firing produces itch rather than pain, and itch produces scratching rather than withdrawal, a completely different behaviour from a nearly identical looking cell.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is pseudounipolar, with a free ending rising high into the epidermis, the outermost skin layer, close to the keratinocytes and immune cells that make itch chemicals.

Histamine-sensitive units have extraordinarily wide trees, with receptive fields measured in human volunteers up to about 85 millimetres across, which is why one bite makes a whole forearm itch.

SIZE:

The cell body is 15 to 30 micrometres across, among the smallest in the ganglion, and the bare axon conducts at about 0.5 to 1 metre per second, which is why itch builds slowly instead of arriving in an instant.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• The histamine line, called NP2, carries the histamine H1 receptor with MrgprA3 in mouse or MRGPRX1 in human, the receptor for the antimalarial drug chloroquine that makes people itch.

• The cytokine line, NP3, carries the interleukin 31 receptor, leukotriene and serotonin receptors and the peptide natriuretic peptide B, and drives the deep chronic itch of eczema.

• A third line, NP1, carries Mrgprd and answers beta-alanine, while the human receptor MRGPRX4 detects bile acids and explains the relentless itch of liver disease.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in dorsal root ganglia at all spinal levels, with face and scalp served by the trigeminal ganglion, and endings concentrate at the dermal-epidermal junction, the interface where mast cells and nerve endings sit within micrometres of one another.

Central terminals reach laminae I and II outer, onto a dedicated relay of neurons carrying the gastrin-releasing peptide receptor.

NUMBER:

About 250,000 cells, roughly 2.5 per cent of the 10 million neurons in human dorsal root ganglia and about 0.0003 per cent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

Mouse single-cell studies put the NP2 and NP3 groups near 10 per cent of ganglion neurons, but many of those also serve pain, so only the itch-dedicated share is counted here to avoid double counting with the nociceptor entries.

Confidence is low, and the honest bound is between 150,000 and 700,000.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Firing rates are strikingly low, 0.1 to 5 spikes per second even at maximum itch, so the brain reads sustained low chatter rather than a burst.

Histamine-sensitive units are mechanically insensitive, which is why itch and touch feel so different.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Central terminals release glutamate with natriuretic peptide B onto lamina I interneurons, which then release gastrin-releasing peptide onto the relay cells carrying itch upward.

Inhibitory interneurons defined by the transcription factor Bhlhb5 sit across that pathway and are what scratching recruits, which is why a scratch buys about half a minute of relief.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated, riding in Remak bundles, the grooved cradles of non-myelinating Schwann cells, and slowing markedly with use, while wide terminal trees let one axon gather chemical news from a large territory.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the fast transmitter and natriuretic peptide B the itch-selective co-transmitter that opens the labelled itch line in the cord.

Many also carry somatostatin, which disinhibits spinal itch circuits, and the peptidergic subset releases calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) into skin.

MYELINATION:

None, and that bareness is part of why itch is slow, spreading and poorly localised compared with a pinprick.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low, because these cells fire slowly, but sustained for weeks in chronic itch while terminals continuously renew receptors in an inflamed environment.

PLASTICITY:

In eczema, interleukin 31 from immune cells makes these fibres sprout, so itchy skin becomes physically more densely innervated over weeks.

Sensitised MrgprA3 neurons recruit the mechanical sensor Piezo2, turning light touch into itch, the everyday phenomenon called alloknesis in which a shirt collar suddenly itches.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The distinctive partners here are not glia but mast cells and keratinocytes, sitting within micrometres of the ending and supplying histamine, tryptase, interleukin 31 and leukotrienes on demand.

Satellite glia around the cell body behave conventionally, though in chronic itch they release interleukin 6 and help sustain firing after the skin trigger has gone.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and skin still feels pain, touch and temperature, but a mosquito bite would give a brief sting and then nothing, and the region would lose its chemical surveillance layer for parasites, plant irritants and allergens too small and too slow to hurt.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

It runs a labelled line, meaning its identity rather than its firing pattern sets the sensation, a design principle a simulator must encode explicitly.

It holds a two-way chemical conversation with immune cells, and it is subject to a behavioural feedback loop unlike any other sensory neuron, since the animal's own scratching recruits spinal inhibition that shuts the pathway down for tens of seconds.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: local histamine, interleukin 31, chloroquine-like ligands, bile acids, leukotriene C4 and serotonin, each as a 0 to 1 occupancy, plus a scratch boolean from the motor system.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to 5 hertz onto lamina I itch interneurons, with natriuretic peptide B released alongside glutamate.

• STATE: histamine pathway level, cytokine pathway level, scratch-driven inhibition, terminal sprouting density.

• PARAMETERS: peak firing about 15 hertz, conduction 0.5 to 1 metre per second, field up to 85 millimetres across, scratch inhibition depth about 85 per cent.

• TIME CONSTANTS: histamine response about 20 seconds, cytokine response about 2 minutes, scratch relief about 8 seconds, sprouting weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: in atopic dermatitis and prurigo nodularis these fibres fire for months, and the itch-scratch cycle damages skin, releasing more cytokines and driving more itch.

◦ Two drugs prove the mechanism: nemolizumab, blocking the interleukin 31 receptor, approved in 2024, and difelikefalin, a peripheral kappa opioid agonist approved in 2021 for the itch of dialysis.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to combine a fast histamine itch line and a slow cytokine itch line and then gate the result by scratching.
Create a number variable called histamineDrive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called cytokineDrive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called scratchBrake with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called itchRate with initial value 0.
For each sample in skinChemistrySamples, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of the histamine of sample and histamineDrive.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.005.
    Calculate the sum of histamineDrive and the result.
    Set histamineDrive to the result.
    Calculate the difference of the cytokine of sample and cytokineDrive.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.00083.
    Calculate the sum of cytokineDrive and the result.
    Set cytokineDrive to the result.
    Calculate the difference of the scratching of sample and scratchBrake.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.0125.
    Calculate the sum of scratchBrake and the result.
    Set scratchBrake to the result.
    Calculate the product of histamineDrive and 9.
    Set itchRate to the result.
    Calculate the product of cytokineDrive and 6.
    Calculate the sum of itchRate and the result.
    Set itchRate to the result.
    Calculate the product of scratchBrake and 0.85.
    Calculate the difference of 1 and the result.
    Calculate the product of itchRate and the result.
    Set itchRate to the result.
    Display itchRate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because itch is a race between two chemical lines and one behavioural brake, and small pure functions make that race easy to read and test.

# Pruriceptor: a fast histamine line, a slow cytokine line, and a scratch brake.
HIST_TAU, CYTO_TAU, SCRATCH_TAU = 20.0, 120.0, 8.0    # seconds

def pruriceptor(histamine, il31, scratching, dt=0.1, seconds=600):
    """Each argument is a function of time in seconds. Returns a trace in hertz."""
    h = c = brake = 0.0
    out = []
    for i in range(int(seconds / dt)):
        t = i * dt
        h += (histamine(t) - h) * dt / HIST_TAU       # H1 receptor onto TRPV1
        c += (il31(t) - c) * dt / CYTO_TAU            # IL-31 receptor onto TRPA1
        brake += ((1.0 if scratching(t) else 0.0) - brake) * dt / SCRATCH_TAU
        out.append(max(0.0, (9.0 * h + 6.0 * c) * (1.0 - 0.85 * brake)))
    return out

bite = lambda t: 1.0 if 30 <= t < 90 else 0.0     # a mosquito bite, 60 s
eczema = lambda t: 1.0 if t >= 30 else 0.0        # a flare that does not stop
scratch = lambda t: 300 <= t < 340                # 40 s of scratching
trace = pruriceptor(bite, eczema, scratch)
print("peak histamine itch %.2f Hz" % max(trace[:2000]))
print("while scratching    %.2f Hz" % trace[3200])
print("after scratching    %.2f Hz" % trace[4500])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only sensory neuron whose output triggers a behaviour that silences it, and the only one that can be deaf to a hard poke while screaming at a molecule.

CHAPTER 255. VISCERAL AFFERENTS (Inner-Organ Stretch-Reporting Neuron) (NON-COG)

A heart attack is often felt in the left arm, because the nerve reporting from your heart shares a spinal address with the nerve reporting from your skin, and the brain guesses wrong.

Visceral afferent is an address plus a direction-of-travel term, saying where the wire starts and which way the signal runs but nothing about what is being reported.

Inner-Organ replaces the Latin viscera with the plain English a reader already owns.

Stretch-Reporting names the stimulus these endings actually care about, since most afferents supplying hollow organs are mechanosensitive and it is over-distension of a muscular wall, not cutting or burning, that hurts.

Neuron marks it as a thin minority of the ganglion, about seven percent of cell bodies for the gut and under ten percent in the mouse lower lumbar ganglion, which quietly explains why such pain feels vague and hard to point at.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, from the bead of cell bodies beside each vertebra, whose endings lie inside internal organs and report stretch, chemical irritation and damage as fullness, urgency, nausea, cramp and deep aching pain.

They are separate from the vagal afferents of the nodose ganglion, which carry unconscious housekeeping data to the brainstem; these spinal ones carry the discomfort.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Each is pseudounipolar, with free endings in several shapes: flat branching arrays in the mucosa, long fibres running with muscle bundles, and knotty endings on the serosal surface and in the mesentery, the fatty sheet suspending the gut.

The central branch is remarkable for how far it travels, dividing in Lissauer's tract and running up and down across many spinal segments before terminating.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 20 to 45 micrometres across, slightly larger on average than skin C-fibre cell bodies.

Roughly 80 to 90 per cent of the axons are unmyelinated C fibres at 0.5 to 2 metres per second, the rest thinly myelinated A-delta at 5 to 20.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Mucosal afferents have the lowest threshold of all, answering a 10 milligram stroke, and report the texture and chemistry of the contents.

• Muscular and muscular-mucosal afferents answer low-intensity stretch and encode how full an organ is.

• Serosal and mesenteric afferents are high-threshold nociceptors answering only strong distension or traction, and a further mechanically insensitive group stays silent until inflammation wakes it.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies occupy two clusters, thoracolumbar ganglia from about T5 to L2 whose axons run in splanchnic nerves and sacral ganglia at S2 to S4 whose axons run in the pelvic nerve, with endings in oesophagus, stomach, intestine, bladder, ureter, uterus, heart, great vessels and mesentery.

Central branches enter at the dorsal root entry zone, travel in Lissauer's tract and terminate in laminae I, II outer, V and X around the central canal, converging in laminae I and V onto the very neurons that receive skin input, which is the anatomical basis of referred pain.

NUMBER:

About 200,000 cells, roughly 2 per cent of the 10 million neurons in human dorsal root ganglia and about 0.0002 per cent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

Even in the ganglion supplying the colon most heavily, colorectal afferents are fewer than 10 per cent of the neurons present, and the share falls sharply in neighbouring ganglia.

Confidence is low to moderate, which is startling given that these cells report on the organs keeping you alive.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Spikes are wide at 2 to 5 milliseconds, carried by tetrodotoxin-resistant channels including Nav1.8 and Nav1.9.

Muscular afferents fire slowly in proportion to organ volume, while serosal units stay silent until distension becomes uncomfortable and then climb steeply to 20 or 40 spikes per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They excite lamina I projection neurons and lamina V wide dynamic range neurons, and because one afferent branches across up to six segments, a single organ event floods a long stretch of cord.

Their terminals are strongly inhibited by mu-opioid receptors, which is why opioids relieve visceral pain so well and constipate the gut at the same time.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Mostly unmyelinated and grouped in Remak bundles, with a long indirect peripheral course through prevertebral ganglia such as the coeliac and inferior mesenteric ganglia, where sympathetic neurons can modulate these axons before they reach the cord.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the fast transmitter, with calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and substance P as co-transmitters in most of these cells.

Peripherally they carry TRPV1 in high proportion, 69 per cent of bladder-projecting ganglion neurons in the rat, along with the P2X3 receptor that detects adenosine triphosphate released by the stretched lining.

MYELINATION:

Predominantly absent, and the thin or missing sheath is one reason visceral sensation is slow, dull and hard to place.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and continuous, because low-threshold visceral afferents report organ filling all day, unlike skin nociceptors that spend most of their lives silent.

PLASTICITY:

Sensitisation here is dramatic and well measured: an inflammatory mixture applied to a stretch-sensitive colonic ending drops its threshold from about 91 millinewtons to about 31, so ordinary filling now hurts.

After gastroenteritis that change can persist for months, the leading explanation for post-infectious irritable bowel syndrome.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

At the far end the specialised partners are not glia at all but enteric glia and the enterochromaffin cells of the gut lining, which release serotonin directly onto the ending, making the gut wall itself part of the sensor.

Around the cell body the satellite jacket is conventional, though in colitis these glia proliferate and couple more strongly, sustaining pain after the gut has healed.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and you would not know your bladder was full, would not feel hunger, fullness, nausea or the cramp that signals obstruction, and a heart attack would be silent, which is exactly what happens to some people with long-standing diabetes.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its most consequential property is architectural rather than electrical, because massive divergence in the cord plus convergence with skin inputs means the brain cannot localise the source, producing referred pain in a predictable map.

It senses chemistry through a second cell, since serotonin from enterochromaffin cells and adenosine triphosphate from stretched lining cells are its real stimuli, and it drives gut motility reflexes through prevertebral ganglia in a loop that never reaches the brain.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: wall tension in millinewtons, luminal pH and osmolarity, and local serotonin, adenosine triphosphate and inflammatory mediator levels, with an inflammation index from 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to about 40 hertz onto laminae I, II outer, V and X neurons across up to six spinal segments, plus peptide release driving local reflexes.

• STATE: current threshold, sensitisation level, adaptation variable, peptide stores.

• PARAMETERS: mucosal threshold near 0.1 millinewtons, muscular in the low tens, serosal about 91 millinewtons falling to about 31 when inflamed, saturating rate near 40 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS: mechanical adaptation seconds, acute sensitisation minutes, post-infectious sensitisation months.

• FAILURE MODE: in irritable bowel syndrome and bladder pain syndrome these afferents fire at normal organ volumes, so ordinary filling is agony with no damage present.

◦ The drug linaclotide acts on guanylate cyclase C in the gut lining to raise cyclic guanosine monophosphate, which quietens these endings directly.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert hollow organ wall tension into the saturating discharge of a visceral afferent whose threshold falls with inflammation.
Create a number variable called restingThreshold with initial value 91.
Create a number variable called workingThreshold with initial value 91.
Create a number variable called excess with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called saturationTerm with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firingRate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called rateTrace with initial value empty list.
For each sample in organSamples, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of restingThreshold and 31.
    Calculate the product of the result and the inflammation of sample.
    Calculate the difference of restingThreshold and the result.
    Set workingThreshold to the result.
    Calculate the difference of the tension of sample and workingThreshold.
    Set excess to the result.
    Check if excess is less than or equal to 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firingRate to 0.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of excess and 60.
        Set saturationTerm to the result.
        Calculate the quotient of excess divided by saturationTerm.
        Calculate the product of the result and 40.
        Set firingRate to the result.
    End the conditional block.
    Add firingRate to the end of rateTrace.
End the loop.
Display firingRate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because a gut simulation runs thousands of afferents against a moving wall model on every time step, and a plain struct with no allocation keeps that affordable.

/* Visceral afferent: high threshold stretch coding that sensitises with inflammation. */
#include <stdio.h>

typedef struct {
    double threshold_mN;   /* resting mechanical threshold at the ending */
    double sens;           /* 0 = healthy, 1 = fully sensitised */
    double rate_Hz;        /* most recent output */
} ColonAfferent;

/* Inflammation drops a serosal threshold from about 91 mN to about 31 mN. */
static double visceral_rate(ColonAfferent *a, double tension_mN)
{
    double thr = a->threshold_mN - (a->threshold_mN - 31.0) * a->sens;
    double x = tension_mN - thr;
    /* saturating curve: climbs steeply, then plateaus near 40 Hz */
    a->rate_Hz = (x <= 0.0) ? 0.0 : 40.0 * x / (x + 60.0);
    return a->rate_Hz;
}

int main(void)
{
    ColonAfferent healthy = {91.0, 0.0, 0.0}, inflamed = {91.0, 1.0, 0.0};
    double p;
    printf("tension_mN   healthy_Hz   inflamed_Hz\n");
    for (p = 20.0; p <= 200.0; p += 45.0)
        printf("%9.0f %12.2f %12.2f\n", p,
               visceral_rate(&healthy, p), visceral_rate(&inflamed, p));
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the sensory neuron that cannot tell you where it is, because its central branch spreads across half a dozen spinal segments and lands on the same cells that serve a patch of skin.


PART SIXTEEN: AUTONOMIC GANGLION NEURONS

CHAPTER 256. SYMPATHETIC POSTGANGLIONIC NEURONS (NON-COG)

String a necklace of nerve knots down each side of the spine, hang a few more around the great arteries of the belly, and you have the relay station that turns a spinal whisper into a whole body command.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The sympathetic postganglionic neuron is the second and final cell in the two cell chain that carries sympathetic commands to the body.

It receives acetylcholine from a preganglionic axon and passes the message on to a target organ, almost always by releasing noradrenaline, the chemical cousin of adrenaline.

This entry describes the archetype, the principal ganglion cell.

The three entries that follow describe its specialised working versions, and those are drawn from this same population rather than added to it.

Its job is amplification and distribution: a few hundred thousand preganglionic cells hand off to several million of these, and each of these then spreads its output over centimetres of blood vessel, gland or muscle.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A multipolar cell, meaning several dendrites radiate from the cell body in different directions, with a single axon leaving from one pole.

Unlike neurons in the brain, its dendrites are short, thick and few, typically four to twelve main branches forming a loose ball around the cell body rather than a sprawling tree.

The whole cell is wrapped in a jacket of satellite glial cells, and the incoming axon pushes through a gap in that jacket to make a small cluster of contacts directly on the cell body or the first stretch of a dendrite.

The axon is the striking part: thin, unmyelinated and enormously long relative to the cell, ending not in a single terminal but in a string of thousands of swellings called varicosities, threaded through the target tissue like beads on a wire.

SIZE:

In the human superior cervical ganglion the cell bodies average about 25 micrometres across, with a mean cross sectional area of 509 to 528 square micrometres.

Eighty five per cent fall in a small class of 15 to 30 micrometres and most of the rest in a medium class of 30 to 40 micrometres.

The axon is 0.2 to 1.5 micrometres wide and may run 30 centimetres or more.

A single axon supplying a leg artery can carry ten thousand or more varicosities spread over a terminal arbour tens of centimetres long.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Paravertebral principal neurons in the sympathetic chain, small, supplying skin, skeletal muscle vessels, sweat glands, hair muscles and the heart.

• Prevertebral principal neurons in the coeliac, superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric ganglia, larger, with long dendrites, and unique in receiving direct input from sensory neurons of the gut wall so that they can run reflexes without consulting the spinal cord at all.

• Small intensely fluorescent cells, tiny dopamine containing interneurons scattered between the principal cells, which modulate rather than relay.

• By chemical coat: noradrenaline plus neuropeptide Y, noradrenaline plus somatostatin, noradrenaline plus calcitonin gene related peptide, and the cholinergic class described in the next entry.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The paravertebral sympathetic chain, a string of 20 to 24 paired ganglia running from the base of the skull to the tailbone, where the two chains meet at the single ganglion impar.

Named members include the superior cervical ganglion behind the carotid artery, the middle cervical ganglion, the stellate ganglion where the inferior cervical and first thoracic ganglia fuse, and eleven or twelve thoracic, four lumbar and four or five sacral ganglia.

The prevertebral ganglia sit on the front of the abdominal aorta at the coeliac, superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric arteries, with the aorticorenal ganglion as an offshoot.

A third home is the terminal or short ganglion embedded in the wall of a pelvic organ.

Two interfaces are explicit.

The chain ganglia sit at the junction between spinal nerve and blood vessel, joined to the spinal nerves by white rami carrying traffic in and grey rami carrying traffic back out.

The prevertebral ganglia sit at the interface between the central autonomic system and the enteric nervous system of the gut, and are the only place where the two hold a two way conversation.

NUMBER:

Several million in an adult human, with a defensible range of about 3 million to 6 million and a working central estimate near 4 million.

Confidence is moderate: individual ganglia have been counted in animals and sampled in humans, but nobody has counted every ganglion in one body.

That figure sits inside the roughly 20 million neuron budget for all autonomic ganglia, and it already includes the sudomotor, vasoconstrictor, pilomotor and cardiomotor cells detailed in the next two entries.

It is about four or five neurons in every hundred thousand in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage about minus 55 to minus 60 millivolts, with threshold about 15 millivolts above that.

Two personalities exist and can be told apart in a slice of living tissue.

Phasic cells fire one or two spikes at the start of a long current step and then fall silent, held back by a potassium current called the M current, while tonic cells fire steadily throughout.

The M current is the key to the whole ganglion: it is a slow potassium leak that keeps the cell hyperpolarised, and shutting it off is how the ganglion changes gear.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Each cell receives, on average, a handful of preganglionic axons.

Usually one is strong enough on its own to force a spike every time, the so called primary or dominant input, and the rest are weak secondaries that only matter when they add together.

Modelling of human recordings suggests an average of about two effective preganglionic inputs per cell.

Three postsynaptic events follow, on three timescales.

A fast excitatory potential lasting tens of milliseconds comes through nicotinic receptors.

A slow excitatory potential begins after about one second and lasts 30 to 60 seconds, produced by acetylcholine acting on M1 muscarinic receptors that close the M current channels built from the Kv7.2 and Kv7.3 proteins.

A late slow potential lasting minutes is produced by peptides such as substance P and luteinising hormone releasing hormone.

On the output side there are no classical synapses at all: transmitter is released from varicosities into a gap 50 to 100 nanometres wide in small vessels and up to 2 micrometres wide in large ones.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated C fibres, 0.2 to 1.5 micrometres in diameter, conducting slowly at about 0.5 to 2 metres per second.

They re enter the spinal nerves through the grey rami communicantes, which exist at every spinal level, and then travel with the nerve to skin and muscle, or they wrap around arteries and travel with them as a perivascular plexus.

An impulse launched at the neck can take half a second to reach a toe.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Noradrenaline is the headline, built from the amino acid tyrosine by a chain of enzymes and loaded into small dense cored vesicles.

It is never released alone.

Adenosine triphosphate, the cell's own energy molecule, is co stored in the same vesicles and acts on P2X1 purinergic receptors to produce the fast, sharp first phase of vessel narrowing, while noradrenaline on alpha1 adrenoceptors produces the slower, sustained phase.

Neuropeptide Y sits in separate large vesicles, is released only during intense or bursting activity, and acts both to strengthen the constriction at the muscle and to feed back on the nerve terminal and suppress further release of the other two.

The cholinergic sudomotor class is the great exception and gets its own entry.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none.

The postganglionic axon is bundled with dozens of others inside a single Schwann cell in what is called a Remak bundle, each axon lying in its own shallow groove without a spiral wrap.

This is why sympathetic responses are slow, why grey rami look grey, and why sympathetic outflow is a diffuse wash rather than a precise pulse.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high for the axon and modest for the cell body.

Manufacturing and pumping noradrenaline into thousands of varicosities, recovering roughly 80 per cent of it afterwards through the noradrenaline transporter, and running vesicle traffic along tens of centimetres of unmyelinated axon costs far more energy than the occasional spike.

Because the axon is unmyelinated, every square micrometre of membrane must repolarise itself, so sodium pump costs scale with an enormous surface area.

PLASTICITY:

These neurons never stop remodelling their terminals.

Blood vessel innervation density tracks vessel use across the lifespan, and terminals sprout in high blood pressure and retract in heart failure.

Nerve growth factor released by the target tissue is the currency: more target activity means more nerve growth factor, which means more sprouting.

The cell body can also change which transmitter it makes, which is one of the most remarkable facts in neuroscience and is described in the next entry.

After spinal cord injury, thoracic chain neurons rearrange their inputs even though the neurons themselves were never touched.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

There are no astrocytes and no oligodendrocytes out here.

Satellite glial cells form a complete envelope around each cell body, leaving only small windows for synapses, and they do something distinctive: in the tight extracellular space of a ganglion they mop up potassium and transmitter, and after injury they multiply and release inflammatory signals that make the neurons more excitable.

Schwann cells bundle the axons without myelinating them and also regulate how much noradrenaline survives in the junction.

Resident macrophages, not microglia, do the immune policing.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

The sympathetic chain without its principal neurons would be a bundle of passing fibres and nothing else, an empty relay.

Remove the cell and every artery in the body loses its background tone, blood pressure falls, and the person cannot stand without fainting.

The skin goes warm, pink and dry, the pupil stays small, the eyelid droops and the face flushes on one side only if the loss is one sided, the picture called Horner syndrome.

The whole notion of a body that can prepare for effort in advance disappears.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The ganglion is a gain controller, not a wire.

Muscarinic closure of the M current does not make the cell fire by itself; it makes previously useless weak inputs suddenly effective, multiplying the ganglion's throughput without adding a single new synapse.

Neuropeptide Y released from the same terminals acts back on the terminal to suppress further release, a self limiting brake.

Transmitter escapes the junction and acts at a distance on nearby smooth muscle, a form of volume transmission.

Nitric oxide from neighbouring nerves and from the vessel lining diffuses back and damps release.

The terminals are also immune organs: noradrenaline released into lymph nodes and spleen changes how lymphocytes behave.

And the cell reads its target chemically, switching which genes it expresses according to whatever tissue its axon happens to reach.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Nicotinic drive from 1 to 8 preganglionic axons, one usually strong enough to fire the cell alone, the others worth 3 to 8 millivolts each.

◦ Muscarinic slow drive from the same axons at firing rates above about 5 impulses per second.

◦ For prevertebral cells only, direct cholinergic input from intestinofugal neurons of the gut wall.

◦ Nerve growth factor from the target tissue, setting terminal density over days.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Noradrenaline and adenosine triphosphate from varicosities onto alpha1, alpha2 and P2X1 receptors of smooth muscle.

◦ Neuropeptide Y at high firing rates only.

◦ Noradrenaline into lymphoid tissue as an immune signal.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage.

◦ M current activation, on a scale from 0 to 1.

◦ Vesicle pool size and separate neuropeptide Y pool size.

◦ Terminal arbour density.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting voltage minus 58 millivolts and threshold minus 45 millivolts.

◦ Conduction velocity 0.5 to 2 metres per second.

◦ Varicosities per axon 10 thousand to 30 thousand.

◦ Noradrenaline reuptake fraction about 0.8.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Fast nicotinic potential 5 to 50 milliseconds.

◦ Slow muscarinic potential, onset 1 second and duration 30 to 60 seconds.

◦ Late slow peptide potential 1 to 5 minutes.

◦ Terminal remodelling days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy, in which antibodies against the alpha3 subunit of the ganglionic nicotinic receptor drag the receptor inside the cell and break transmission; such antibodies are found in about half of cases and cause fainting, dry mouth, dry eyes and a paralysed gut.

◦ Deposits of the protein alpha synuclein in these neurons in pure autonomic failure and Parkinson disease, causing a fall in blood pressure on standing.

◦ Surgical or chemical loss produces Horner syndrome, or, if both sides are lost, catastrophic postural hypotension.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to work out whether weak nicotinic inputs to a sympathetic postganglionic neuron reach threshold, given the state of the muscarinic slow excitatory potential.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value negative fifty eight.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value negative forty five.
Create a number variable called m current activation with initial value one.
Create a number variable called weak input count with initial value four.
Create a number variable called weak input size with initial value six.
Create a boolean variable called muscarinic input present with initial value true.
Create a number variable called summed input with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called m current hyperpolarisation with initial value zero.
Create a boolean variable called the neuron fired with initial value false.
Check if muscarinic input present is equal to true.
If the result of that check is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set m current activation to the product of m current activation and zero point one.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set m current activation to one.
End the conditional block.
Set m current hyperpolarisation to the product of m current activation and fifteen.
Set summed input to the product of weak input count and weak input size.
Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and summed input.
Set membrane voltage to the difference of membrane voltage and m current hyperpolarisation.
Check if membrane voltage is greater than threshold.
If the result of that check is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set the neuron fired to true.
    Display the text value a spike leaves for the blood vessel to the console.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set the neuron fired to false.
    Display the text value the weak inputs died inside the ganglion to the console.
End the conditional block.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because a whole body simulation needs millions of these cells stepped at sub millisecond resolution, and this is the form the inner loop will actually take.

#include <stdio.h>

/* One paravertebral sympathetic postganglionic neuron. Weak secondary
   nicotinic inputs summate; whether they reach threshold depends on the
   muscarinic slow excitatory potential, which works by closing the M type
   potassium current. */

#define V_REST  -60.0   /* millivolts */
#define E_K     -90.0   /* millivolts, potassium reversal */
#define V_TH    -45.0   /* millivolts, spike threshold */
#define TAU_MEM  20.0   /* milliseconds */
#define TAU_KM  150.0   /* milliseconds, M current relaxation */
#define TAU_SYN   5.0   /* milliseconds, nicotinic decay */
#define G_KM      0.5   /* M current strength */

typedef struct { double v; double m; double g; } Cell;

static int step(Cell *c, int weak_spikes, int muscarinic_on, double dt)
{
    double i_km = G_KM * c->m * (c->v - E_K);
    c->g += 6.0 * weak_spikes;                    /* 6 mV per weak input */
    c->v += dt * ((V_REST - c->v) - i_km + c->g) / TAU_MEM;
    c->g -= dt * c->g / TAU_SYN;
    c->m += dt * ((muscarinic_on ? 0.0 : 1.0) - c->m) / TAU_KM;
    if (c->v >= V_TH) { c->v = V_REST - 5.0; return 1; }
    return 0;
}

static int run(int muscarinic_on)
{
    Cell c; int t, n = 0;
    c.v = V_REST; c.m = 1.0; c.g = 0.0;
    for (t = 0; t < 5000; t++)          /* 500 ms at dt = 0.1 ms */
        n += step(&c, (t % 30 == 0) ? 2 : 0, muscarinic_on, 0.1);
    return n;
}

int main(void)
{
    printf("weak inputs alone:          %d spikes in 500 ms\n", run(0));
    printf("weak inputs plus slow EPSP: %d spikes in 500 ms\n", run(1));
    return 0;
}

The same weak inputs that die silently in the first run drive a train of spikes in the second, and that difference is the entire point of having a ganglion.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small multipolar cell outside the central nervous system, jacketed in satellite glia, receiving a cholinergic input and sending out an unmyelinated axon that releases noradrenaline from thousands of beads rather than from one endpoint.

Stain a tissue for tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine beta hydroxylase, the two enzymes on the road to noradrenaline, and these cells and their beaded fibres light up while nothing else in the peripheral nervous system does.

CHAPTER 257. SUDOMOTOR SYMPATHETIC NEURONS (Sweat-Releasing Cooling Neuron) (NON-COG)

This is the traitor of the sympathetic nervous system: a cell born to make noradrenaline that is talked out of it by the very gland it grows towards, and spends the rest of its life making acetylcholine instead.

Sudomotor is Latin for sweat-mover and teaches a first-year student nothing, so the name says sweat in English.

Sweat-Releasing names the act, because this is the one sympathetic output cell that switches its chemistry, abandoning noradrenaline for acetylcholine acting on muscarinic receptors on the eccrine gland, a switch instructed by the gland itself during development.

Cooling names the purpose the sweat serves, evaporative heat loss, which is why this pathway fires with body temperature rather than with fear alone.

Neuron marks it as a postganglionic sympathetic cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Sudomotor neurons are the sympathetic postganglionic cells that make you sweat.

Each one sits in a sympathetic chain ganglion, sends an unmyelinated axon out to the skin, and wraps its terminals around eccrine sweat glands, the coiled tubes that produce watery sweat all over the human body.

When it fires it releases acetylcholine, which is startling, because every other sympathetic postganglionic neuron releases noradrenaline.

The gland responds by pushing salty water up onto the skin surface, where evaporation carries heat away.

These cells are therefore the final common path for the only cooling system a human being has, and they are also the cells that make your palms damp when you are frightened.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Structurally they look like ordinary principal ganglion cells: a small multipolar body with a few short stubby dendrites, wrapped in satellite glia.

The difference is chemical, and it is visible under a microscope.

They carry the vesicular acetylcholine transporter, the pump that loads acetylcholine into vesicles, and in humans and other primates many of them keep tyrosine hydroxylase, the first enzyme of noradrenaline manufacture, at the same time.

Their terminals form dense baskets around the secretory coil of the sweat gland, and each axon supplies many glands.

SIZE:

Cell body 20 to 30 micrometres across, at the smaller end of the ganglionic range.

Axon 0.2 to 1 micrometre wide and unmyelinated, running up to a metre from a lumbar ganglion to the sole of the foot.

The target is smaller still: a human eccrine gland is a coiled tube about 3 to 5 millimetres long packed into a ball roughly 0.5 millimetres across.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Thermoregulatory sudomotor neurons, supplying general body skin, driven by core and skin temperature.

• Emotional sudomotor neurons, supplying the palms, soles and armpits, driven by arousal and almost unresponsive to heat.

• Cholinergic only cells and cells co expressing the cholinergic and noradrenergic machinery, the latter being characteristic of primates including humans.

• By peptide content: sudomotor neurons contain vasoactive intestinal peptide and calcitonin gene related peptide, and consistently lack the calcium binding protein calbindin, which is how they are told apart from vasoconstrictor cells in the same ganglion.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies lie in the paravertebral sympathetic chain ganglia only, never in prevertebral ganglia.

The hand is served mainly from the second to the eighth thoracic ganglia and the stellate ganglion at the root of the neck; the face from the superior cervical ganglion; the trunk from the matching thoracic ganglia; and the foot from the lumbar ganglia.

Axons leave through the grey rami communicantes and travel inside ordinary peripheral nerves, which places the interface of interest at the sweat gland itself, where a sympathetic terminal meets an epithelial secretory cell across a gap of a few hundred nanometres.

NUMBER:

Best estimate 300 thousand to 700 thousand in an adult human, with a working central value near 500 thousand, at low confidence.

These are drawn from the several million sympathetic postganglionic neurons already counted in the previous entry and must not be added to that total.

The estimate is anchored by the fact that humans carry roughly 2 to 4 million eccrine sweat glands, and each sudomotor axon supplies several glands.

They are about six neurons in every million in the whole nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Recorded one axon at a time in awake humans by microneurography, a technique in which a fine tungsten needle is pushed into a nerve, a single sudomotor neuron fires at only about 0.5 impulses per second and takes part in only about 30 per cent of the bursts passing along the nerve.

Crucially, its bursts are not locked to the heartbeat, unlike the muscle vasoconstrictor neurons lying beside it in the same nerve.

That single observation is how a physiologist knows which kind of neuron is on the electrode: sudomotor traffic follows a deep breath, a sudden noise or a rise in temperature, not the pulse.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input is nicotinic, from preganglionic neurons in the intermediolateral column that are themselves driven by the median preoptic nucleus of the hypothalamus, the body's thermostat, relayed through the rostral medullary raphe.

Emotional sweating is driven instead from the limbic system through the same final path, which is why the two kinds of sweating can be dissociated by disease.

Output is a chemical spray onto muscarinic M3 receptors on the clear cells of the gland's secretory coil, which drives chloride and then water out of the cell.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated C fibres conducting at about 1 metre per second.

They branch extensively in the dermis, and that branching is clinically exploited: put acetylcholine on the skin and the impulse travels backwards up one branch and forwards down another to make a neighbouring patch of skin sweat, a trick called the axon reflex and the basis of the quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test used to diagnose small fibre nerve damage.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine, on muscarinic M3 receptors, which is why the anti sweating drug glycopyrrolate and the poison atropine both dry you out, and why botulinum toxin injected into an armpit stops sweating for months by blocking acetylcholine release.

Co released with it are vasoactive intestinal peptide, which widens the local blood vessels so the gland has water to work with, and calcitonin gene related peptide.

The remarkable part is the history: these neurons leave the neural crest making noradrenaline, and when their growing tips reach the developing sweat gland the gland releases a cholinergic differentiation factor that rewrites the neuron's chemistry.

Blocking that signal keeps the neuron noradrenergic and the sweat gland never works properly, which means the target chooses the transmitter, not the neuron.

MYELINATION:

None.

Sudomotor axons run in Remak bundles inside the peripheral nerve, sharing a Schwann cell with vasoconstrictor and sensory C fibres.

Their lack of myelin is why they are among the first fibres lost in diabetes and why a dry, cracked foot is often the earliest visible sign of diabetic nerve damage.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low at rest and high in the heat.

The neuron itself is cheap, but sustaining maximal sweating means firing continuously for hours while the gland moves up to two litres of fluid per hour across the whole body, so the terminal must resynthesise acetylcholine as fast as acetylcholinesterase destroys it.

PLASTICITY:

The transmitter switch is the headline, and it is not only a developmental event: transplant a sympathetic neuron to a new target in adulthood and its chemistry follows the target.

Sudomotor function also adapts to training and climate, with heat acclimatisation over ten to fourteen days raising sweat rate and lowering its salt content, changes that involve both the gland and its nerve supply.

After nerve injury, sudomotor axons regenerate and often reinnervate the wrong glands, producing patches of sweating in odd places.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia around the terminal are the interesting ones.

Terminal Schwann cells around the sweat gland do not simply insulate; they sit at the junction, take up transmitter and, during development, help hold the growing sympathetic tip at the gland until the switching signal has done its work.

In the ganglion, satellite glia behave as they do for any other principal cell.

The unusual support element is not a glial cell at all: it is the sweat gland, which acts as a chemical tutor to its own nerve supply for the life of the animal.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove sudomotor neurons and the skin becomes a dead surface for heat.

A person in a warm room would overheat within hours, and exercise on a summer day would be lethal.

Palms would stay dry, so grip on a smooth object would fail, and the skin conductance response, the tiny drop in electrical resistance that a polygraph measures, would vanish, because that signal is nothing but sudomotor firing.

The peculiar human quality of a body that betrays its own emotions through its skin would be gone.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This neuron is the classic demonstration that a target tissue can rewrite a neuron's identity, an idea that overturned the assumption that a neuron's transmitter is fixed at birth.

The axon reflex means the terminal arbour computes locally, spreading excitation sideways without any spike ever returning to the cell body.

Co released vasoactive intestinal peptide couples the neuron's firing directly to local blood flow, so the cell commands its own supply line.

Sweat itself is an immune organ, carrying the antimicrobial peptide dermcidin onto the skin, so a sudomotor neuron is also an indirect commander of skin defence.

And in Ross syndrome the same neurons accumulate the protein alpha synuclein in their terminals, placing this humble cell inside the same disease family as Parkinson disease.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Nicotinic drive from thermoregulatory preganglionic neurons, 0 to 10 impulses per second, scaled by core temperature error.

◦ Nicotinic drive from emotional and arousal pathways, arriving as brief irregular volleys.

◦ Local skin temperature, which modulates gland sensitivity independently of the nerve.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Acetylcholine onto M3 muscarinic receptors of the eccrine gland, producing 0 to 2 nanolitres per gland per minute.

◦ Vasoactive intestinal peptide onto local arterioles, raising skin blood flow.

◦ Calcitonin gene related peptide as a slower trophic and vasodilator signal.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage.

◦ Acetylcholine concentration in the junction.

◦ Gland fill and duct reabsorption state.

◦ Cholinergic phenotype strength, a slow variable set by the target.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Mean firing rate 0.5 impulses per second at rest, up to about 8 during maximal heat stress.

◦ Burst participation probability about 0.3.

◦ Glands supplied per axon roughly 4 to 10.

◦ Whole body eccrine gland count 2 million to 4 million.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Acetylcholine hydrolysis under 100 milliseconds.

◦ Sweat onset after a burst 1 to 3 seconds.

◦ Thermoregulatory feedback loop tens of seconds to minutes.

◦ Heat acclimatisation 10 to 14 days.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Ross syndrome, where these cholinergic neurons degenerate segmentally, leaving patches of skin that cannot sweat next to patches that sweat far too much to compensate.

◦ Primary focal hyperhidrosis, in which drenching palms are treated by cutting the second to fourth thoracic sympathetic chain, a procedure whose commonest complication is compensatory sweating elsewhere.

◦ Early diabetic small fibre neuropathy, in which sudomotor loss precedes any measurable sensory loss.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run the sudomotor thermoregulatory loop, turning a core temperature error into a firing rate, then into acetylcholine, then into sweat, then into cooling.
Create a number variable called core temperature with initial value thirty seven.
Create a number variable called set point with initial value thirty seven.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value twenty.
Create a number variable called maximum firing rate with initial value eight.
Create a number variable called acetylcholine with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called sweat rate with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called temperature error with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value zero.
Repeat the following steps exactly six hundred times.
    Set temperature error to the difference of core temperature and set point.
    Set firing rate to the product of gain and temperature error.
    Check if firing rate is less than zero.
    If the result of that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to zero.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if firing rate is greater than maximum firing rate.
    If the result of that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to maximum firing rate.
    End the conditional block.
    Set acetylcholine to the sum of acetylcholine and firing rate.
    Set acetylcholine to the product of acetylcholine and zero point five.
    Set sweat rate to the product of acetylcholine and three point four.
    Set core temperature to the sum of core temperature and zero point zero zero four.
    Set core temperature to the difference of core temperature and the product of sweat rate and zero point zero zero zero one seven.
    Display core temperature to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this is a closed control loop rather than a spiking model, and readable arithmetic matters more than speed.

# One lumped sudomotor channel: core temperature error -> firing rate ->
# acetylcholine at the gland -> sweat rate -> evaporative cooling -> temperature.
DT = 0.1               # seconds per step
SET_POINT = 37.0       # degrees Celsius
GAIN = 20.0            # impulses per second per degree of error
MAX_RATE = 8.0         # impulses per second, saturation
ACH_PER_SPIKE = 0.9    # arbitrary units of acetylcholine per impulse
TAU_ACH = 2.0          # seconds, destruction by acetylcholinesterase
SWEAT_PER_ACH = 1.7    # millilitres per minute per unit of acetylcholine
EVAP_COOLING = 0.010   # degrees Celsius lost per millilitre evaporated
HEAT_LOAD = 0.004      # degrees Celsius gained per second

def simulate(minutes):
    temp, ach, total_sweat = 37.0, 0.0, 0.0
    for step in range(int(minutes * 60 / DT)):
        rate = min(MAX_RATE, max(0.0, GAIN * (temp - SET_POINT)))
        ach += rate * ACH_PER_SPIKE * DT
        ach -= DT * ach / TAU_ACH
        sweat = SWEAT_PER_ACH * ach                  # millilitres per minute
        total_sweat += sweat * DT / 60.0
        temp += HEAT_LOAD * DT - EVAP_COOLING * sweat * DT / 60.0
        if step % 3000 == 0:
            print("minute %4.1f  core %.3f C  firing %.2f Hz  sweat %5.1f mL/min"
                  % (step * DT / 60.0, temp, rate, sweat))
    return total_sweat

print("total sweat over the run: %.0f mL" % simulate(30))

The loop settles about four tenths of a degree above the set point, which is the honest behaviour of a proportional controller and the reason a working human runs slightly warm in the heat rather than exactly at 37 degrees.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only sympathetic postganglionic neuron that releases acetylcholine onto its target, and the only neuron anywhere that in humans routinely carries the machinery for two opposite transmitters at once.

A cell body in a chain ganglion staining for both the vesicular acetylcholine transporter and tyrosine hydroxylase, containing vasoactive intestinal peptide and lacking calbindin, with terminals forming a basket around a coiled sweat gland, can be nothing else.

CHAPTER 258. VASOCONSTRICTOR, VASODILATOR, PILOMOTOR, AND CARDIOMOTOR SYMPATHETIC NEURONS (Blood-Flow-Setting Readiness Neuron) (NON-COG)

Four crews work the same nerve trunk: one squeezes your arteries, one opens the skin to dump heat, one raises the hair on your arms, and one leans on the accelerator of your heart.

The existing label is a committee minute that strings four Latin job titles together and no one can say it aloud.

Blood-Flow-Setting names what unites three of the four, since narrowing and widening vessels and driving the heart are all one problem, deciding where blood goes and how fast.

Readiness names the shared purpose, the fight-or-flight preparation that also raises the hairs.

Neuron marks it honestly as a set of separate labelled lines rather than one cell, since vasoconstrictor endings carry calcitonin-gene-related-peptide markers while vasodilator endings carry substance-P markers.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are the four great functional classes of sympathetic postganglionic neuron defined by what they act on rather than by what they look like.

Vasoconstrictor neurons narrow blood vessels, and they are the single most numerous sympathetic class in the body, holding arteries partly shut all day so that blood pressure exists at all.

Vasodilator neurons widen vessels, and in humans the important ones are the cutaneous active vasodilators that flood the skin with blood during heat stress.

Pilomotor neurons contract the arrector pili, the tiny muscle that tilts a hair upright, giving goosebumps.

Cardiomotor neurons speed the heart, strengthen each beat and shorten the pause between beats.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

All four are multipolar ganglion cells with short dendrites and a long unmyelinated axon ending in beaded varicosities, but the shape of the terminal arbour differs sharply with the job.

A muscle vasoconstrictor terminal forms a fine mesh over the outer coat of an arteriole, standing 50 to 100 nanometres from the smooth muscle.

A pilomotor terminal makes a compact cluster on one small bundle of muscle fibres.

A cardiomotor terminal spreads a wide, loose plexus over the sinoatrial node and out across the ventricular wall, with gaps of up to a micrometre between nerve and muscle so that transmitter must diffuse.

SIZE:

Cell bodies 20 to 40 micrometres, with cardiomotor and prevertebral vasoconstrictor cells at the larger end and pilomotor cells at the smaller.

Axons 0.2 to 1.5 micrometres wide.

A single muscle vasoconstrictor axon can control a vascular bed several centimetres across, and a cardiomotor axon from the stellate ganglion may run 15 to 20 centimetres to reach the ventricle.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Muscle vasoconstrictor neurons, baroreflex controlled, firing in bursts locked to the heartbeat.

• Cutaneous vasoconstrictor neurons, temperature and arousal controlled, rich in neuropeptide Y, and not locked to the heartbeat.

• Visceral and renal vasoconstrictor neurons, from prevertebral ganglia, which also control renin release from the kidney.

• Cutaneous active vasodilator neurons, which are cholinergic rather than noradrenergic and are recruited only above a core temperature threshold.

• Pilomotor neurons, noradrenergic, acting on alpha1 adrenoceptors of the arrector pili muscle.

• Cardiomotor neurons, noradrenergic, from the stellate and middle cervical ganglia, subdivided into sinoatrial rate neurons, atrioventricular conduction neurons and ventricular contractility neurons.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Muscle and skin vasoconstrictor and pilomotor cell bodies lie throughout the paravertebral chain, matched segment by segment to the skin and muscle they supply.

Visceral vasoconstrictor cells lie in the coeliac, superior mesenteric, inferior mesenteric and aorticorenal ganglia.

Cutaneous active vasodilator cells lie in the chain ganglia beside the sudomotor cells and supply only hairy skin, not the palms and soles.

Cardiomotor cells lie mainly in the stellate ganglion and the middle cervical ganglion, and their axons enter the heart alongside the vagus at the interface known as the cardiac plexus, where sympathetic and parasympathetic fibres and the heart's own intrinsic ganglia meet in one tangle at the base of the great vessels.

NUMBER:

Vasoconstrictor neurons are the largest class, plausibly half to two thirds of the sympathetic postganglionic pool, giving roughly 2 million to 3 million.

Cutaneous active vasodilators and pilomotor neurons together plausibly account for a few hundred thousand, and cardiomotor neurons for the order of tens of thousands, since the entire cardiac sympathetic supply arises from a handful of neck and upper chest ganglia.

Confidence is low for every one of these splits, because they rest on the proportions of axon types found in microneurography and animal tracing rather than on human counts.

All of them are drawn from the several million already counted under sympathetic postganglionic neurons, not added to it, and together they represent roughly two to three neurons in every hundred thousand in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The muscle vasoconstrictor neuron has the best documented firing pattern of any neuron in the awake human body.

It fires at about 0.5 impulses per second, takes part in only about 30 per cent of the bursts travelling down the nerve, usually fires just once per heartbeat, and only rarely fires four or more times in a burst.

Even in severe heart failure or untreated high blood pressure, when the whole nerve is roaring, individual neurons seldom exceed 1 impulse per second; the system recruits more neurons rather than driving each one harder.

Cutaneous vasoconstrictor and pilomotor neurons fire irregularly and are not locked to the pulse, and cardiomotor neurons fire tonically at 1 to 4 impulses per second at rest.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Each neuron is driven by, on average, about two effective preganglionic inputs, which is why the pattern of firing in the ganglion so closely copies the pattern in the spinal cord.

Muscle vasoconstrictor cells receive preganglionic drive that has already been gated by the baroreceptors, the stretch sensors in the carotid artery and aortic arch, so their bursts appear in the trough between pressure peaks.

Cutaneous vasoconstrictor cells receive drive shaped by skin and core temperature and by arousal, with no baroreceptor gating at all.

Cardiomotor cells receive drive from the rostral ventrolateral medulla and, uniquely, are also modulated locally inside the heart by the intrinsic cardiac ganglia they run past.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated, 0.5 to 2 metres per second, running to skin and muscle in the ordinary peripheral nerves and to viscera along the arteries.

Cardiac sympathetic axons form a subepicardial plexus and dive into the muscle, and left sided and right sided cardiac axons have measurably different jobs: right stellate stimulation mostly speeds the heart, left stellate stimulation mostly increases the force of contraction and is the more dangerous for triggering rhythm disturbances.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Vasoconstrictor, pilomotor and cardiomotor neurons all release noradrenaline together with adenosine triphosphate and, at high firing rates, neuropeptide Y.

Adenosine triphosphate acting on P2X1 receptors produces the fast initial squeeze; noradrenaline on alpha1 adrenoceptors produces the sustained squeeze; neuropeptide Y makes both stronger and lasts for many minutes.

At the heart, noradrenaline acts on beta1 adrenoceptors to raise the rate of the sinoatrial node and the force of every cell it reaches.

Cutaneous active vasodilator neurons are the exception again, using acetylcholine together with vasoactive intestinal peptide and driving nitric oxide production in the vessel lining.

MYELINATION:

None in any of the four classes.

The consequence is worth stating plainly: the fastest reflex the sympathetic system can manage takes about a second from stimulus to vessel response, whereas a somatic reflex takes 30 milliseconds.

The autonomic nervous system trades speed for reach.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Continuous and dominated by transmitter handling.

A vasoconstrictor terminal recycles noradrenaline through its transporter thousands of times a minute; a cardiomotor terminal supplying a heart beating a hundred thousand times a day never stops.

Cardiac sympathetic nerve terminals are exceptionally vulnerable to loss of oxygen and are damaged in the first minutes of a heart attack, which is why the border of a healed infarct is a patchwork of denervated and hyperinnervated muscle and why it generates dangerous rhythms.

PLASTICITY:

After a heart attack, surviving cardiac sympathetic axons sprout wildly into the scar border, creating uneven innervation that is a major cause of sudden death.

In high blood pressure, vasoconstrictor terminals thicken; in heart failure the terminals lose their noradrenaline transporter, so transmitter lingers in the junction and the receptors switch themselves off.

Pilomotor and vasoconstrictor innervation density in skin tracks with climate and use across the seasons.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Beyond the standard satellite glia in the ganglion, the specialised support is at the terminal.

Perivascular Schwann cells sit between the nerve varicosity and the smooth muscle and take up noradrenaline, effectively setting how far a transmitter molecule can travel.

At the heart, the terminal shares its space with the intrinsic cardiac ganglia and with the endothelium of the coronary vessels, which releases nitric oxide that damps sympathetic release directly.

In the skin, the arrector pili muscle and its sympathetic nerve together form a niche that instructs the hair follicle stem cell, a partnership shown in mice in which the nerve is not just a motor supply but a growth signal.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take vasoconstrictor neurons out of a limb and it turns warm, pink and swollen, and the person faints when they stand because their arteries can no longer be told to tighten.

Take out the cutaneous vasodilators and the same person cannot dump heat, so their core temperature climbs during exercise even though they are sweating.

Take out the pilomotor neurons and the skin loses its power to bristle, which in a human costs almost nothing and in a cat costs it its bluff.

Take out the cardiomotor neurons and the heart still beats, driven by its own pacemaker, but it cannot accelerate for exercise or fright, so the maximum heart rate collapses towards the intrinsic rate of about 100 beats per minute and exercise capacity falls by half.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

These neurons are the clearest case in the body of population coding in the periphery: the message to a blood vessel is carried by how many neurons fire in a burst, not by how fast any one of them fires.

Neuropeptide Y released only in bursts turns the same nerve into a slow, long acting hormone system layered on top of the fast one.

Vasoconstrictor terminals control local blood flow and therefore control the oxygen supply to every other cell in the tissue, including their own.

Cardiac sympathetic terminals talk to the intrinsic cardiac ganglia and to circulating immune cells, and after injury they release signals that recruit inflammation.

Pilomotor nerves instruct stem cells.

And all of them are subject to prejunctional autoreceptors: noradrenaline that has just been released binds alpha2 receptors on the terminal that made it and shuts the next release down, a negative feedback loop entirely outside the cell body's knowledge.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Nicotinic drive from about two effective preganglionic axons per neuron, class specific in timing.

◦ Baroreceptor phase signal, 0.8 to 2 hertz, for muscle vasoconstrictor cells only.

◦ Core and skin temperature signals for cutaneous vasoconstrictor, vasodilator and pilomotor cells.

◦ Circulating adrenaline, which binds prejunctional beta2 receptors and increases release.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Noradrenaline and adenosine triphosphate onto alpha1 and P2X1 receptors of vascular smooth muscle and arrector pili.

◦ Noradrenaline onto beta1 receptors of sinoatrial node, atrioventricular node and ventricular myocytes.

◦ Acetylcholine and vasoactive intestinal peptide from cutaneous active vasodilators.

◦ Neuropeptide Y above about 2 impulses per second in bursts.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage and refractory state.

◦ Junctional noradrenaline concentration.

◦ Vesicle pool and separate neuropeptide Y pool.

◦ Prejunctional alpha2 autoreceptor occupancy.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Mean single unit firing rate 0.5 impulses per second, ceiling near 1 in disease.

◦ Burst participation probability 0.2 to 0.5.

◦ Junctional cleft width 50 nanometres at arterioles, up to 2 micrometres at the heart.

◦ Noradrenaline reuptake fraction about 0.8, falling towards 0.4 in heart failure.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Vessel narrowing onset 1 to 2 seconds, peak 10 to 20 seconds.

◦ Heart rate response to a sympathetic burst 3 to 5 seconds to onset, 20 to 30 seconds to peak.

◦ Neuropeptide Y action 5 to 20 minutes.

◦ Terminal sprouting after injury days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Overactivity of muscle vasoconstrictor neurons is a core mechanism of high blood pressure, heart failure and obstructive sleep apnoea, and is measurable at the bedside as an increased burst count.

◦ Uneven cardiac sympathetic sprouting after a heart attack causes ventricular arrhythmia, which is why blocking or removing the left stellate ganglion is used to stop electrical storm and to treat inherited arrhythmia syndromes.

◦ Loss of cutaneous vasodilators produces heat intolerance with intact sweating, a dissociation seen in some autonomic neuropathies.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a muscle vasoconstrictor neuron fires during one heartbeat, given that baroreceptors silence it except in a short window and that even then it usually stays quiet.
Create a number variable called mean arterial pressure with initial value ninety.
Create a number variable called firing probability with initial value zero point three.
Create a number variable called baroreflex gain with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called adjusted probability with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called random draw with initial value zero point four.
Create a number variable called spikes this beat with initial value zero.
Create a boolean variable called inside the permitted window with initial value true.
Set baroreflex gain to the difference of mean arterial pressure and ninety.
Set baroreflex gain to the quotient of baroreflex gain divided by sixty.
Set baroreflex gain to the difference of one and baroreflex gain.
Check if baroreflex gain is less than zero.
If the result of that check is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set baroreflex gain to zero.
End the conditional block.
Set adjusted probability to the product of firing probability and baroreflex gain.
Check if inside the permitted window is equal to true.
If the result of that check is true, then perform the following actions.
    Check if random draw is less than adjusted probability.
    If the result of that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set spikes this beat to one.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set spikes this beat to zero.
    End the conditional block.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set spikes this beat to zero.
End the conditional block.
Display spikes this beat to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because this model is most useful as a live bedside teaching tool that runs in any browser with nothing installed.

// One human muscle vasoconstrictor neuron, sixty seconds of resting life.
// Baroreceptors silence it around the systolic pressure peak, so it can only
// fire in a window locked to the cardiac cycle, and even there it usually does not.

const HEART_RATE_HZ = 1.0;      // 60 beats per minute
const DT = 0.001;               // one millisecond steps
const BASE_PROBABILITY = 0.30;  // chance of firing in a permitted window
const WINDOW_START = 0.55;      // fraction of the cardiac cycle
const WINDOW_END   = 0.75;

function simulate(seconds, meanArterialPressure) {
  // Falling pressure lifts baroreceptor inhibition and raises the odds.
  const gain = Math.min(2, Math.max(0, 1 - (meanArterialPressure - 90) / 60));
  let spikes = 0, bursts = 0, armed = false;
  for (let t = 0; t < seconds; t += DT) {
    const phase = (t * HEART_RATE_HZ) % 1;
    const inWindow = phase >= WINDOW_START && phase < WINDOW_END;
    if (inWindow && !armed) {            // one decision per heartbeat
      armed = true;
      if (Math.random() < BASE_PROBABILITY * gain) {
        bursts += 1;
        spikes += (Math.random() < 0.35) ? 2 : 1;   // occasionally a doublet
      }
    }
    if (!inWindow) armed = false;
  }
  return { bursts, spikes, rateHz: +(spikes / seconds).toFixed(2) };
}

console.log("normal pressure:", simulate(60, 90));
console.log("head up tilt:   ", simulate(60, 65));

The neuron ends up firing about 0.4 impulses per second at normal pressure and participating in roughly a third of heartbeats, which is what a microneurography electrode actually records from a resting human.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else in the human body fires at half an impulse per second, in bursts timed to the gaps between your heartbeats, and controls your blood pressure by voting rather than by shouting.

Put a needle in the peroneal nerve of a resting volunteer and the pulse synchronous crackle you hear is these neurons and only these neurons; ask the volunteer to take a sharp breath and the sudomotor and skin vasoconstrictor units answer instead, out of step with the pulse.

CHAPTER 259. PARASYMPATHETIC PREGANGLIONIC NEURONS (NON-COG)

Your heart wants to beat about a hundred times a minute, and the only reason it does not is that a few thousand cells in your brainstem are quietly holding it back, all day, every day, for your whole life.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The parasympathetic preganglionic neuron is the rest and digest counterpart of the sympathetic preganglionic cell.

Its cell body sits in the brainstem or in the lower spinal cord, and its axon leaves the central nervous system inside a cranial nerve or a pelvic nerve and travels a long way, often most of the distance to the organ itself, before ending in a ganglion.

There it releases acetylcholine onto nicotinic receptors, exactly as its sympathetic cousin does.

The geometry is the reverse of the sympathetic system: here the first axon is long and the second is short, so the decision point sits on or inside the target organ rather than beside the spine.

That single architectural fact is why parasympathetic commands can be aimed at one organ at a time while sympathetic commands tend to spread.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small to medium multipolar cells, generally more compact than the somatic motor neurons that lie a few hundred micrometres away in the same brainstem.

In the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus the cells form a long, thin column with dendrites that spread sideways into the neighbouring nucleus of the solitary tract, the brainstem's sensory receiving station, so that visceral sensation and visceral command are separated by almost nothing.

In the nucleus ambiguus the parasympathetic cardiac cells sit just outside the compact somatic motor group, in a looser region called the external formation.

SIZE:

Cell bodies mostly 15 to 35 micrometres across, notably smaller than the 50 to 70 micrometre somatic motor neurons of the same brainstem.

The axon is where the size lies: a preganglionic vagal axon to the stomach may be 40 centimetres long, and a pelvic preganglionic axon to the bladder 20 centimetres, which for a cell body this small is an extraordinary logistical burden.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Edinger Westphal preganglionic neurons, driving pupil constriction and lens focusing, in the midbrain.

• Superior salivatory neurons, driving the tear glands, the nasal glands and the submandibular and sublingual salivary glands.

• Inferior salivatory neurons, driving the parotid salivary gland.

• Dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus neurons, driving the gut, pancreas, liver, airways and ventricular muscle, with slow unmyelinated axons.

• Nucleus ambiguus cardiac vagal neurons, driving the sinoatrial node with fast myelinated axons, respiratory modulated, and responsible for beat to beat heart rate control.

• Sacral preganglionic neurons in the second to fourth sacral segments, driving the bladder, rectum and erectile tissue.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Four brainstem homes and one spinal home, and each deserves naming.

The Edinger Westphal preganglionic population lies in the midbrain just dorsal to the oculomotor nucleus, distinct from the neighbouring urocortin containing cells that project into the brain rather than out of it.

The superior salivatory nucleus lies in the pontine tegmentum near the facial nerve, and the inferior salivatory nucleus lies in the rostral medulla near the glossopharyngeal nerve.

The dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus lies in the floor of the fourth ventricle, and the nucleus ambiguus lies deeper in the ventrolateral medulla.

The sacral parasympathetic nucleus occupies lamina VII of segments S2 to S4.

Two interfaces matter.

The dorsal motor nucleus sits immediately against the nucleus of the solitary tract, forming a sensory to motor interface only a few cell widths thick, the anatomical basis of the vagovagal reflex.

The dorsal motor nucleus also lies against the floor of the fourth ventricle at the area postrema, one of the few places where the blood brain barrier is absent, so these neurons are exposed to circulating hormones and toxins that the rest of the brain never sees.

NUMBER:

The best human count is for the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus: 16,826 plus or minus 967 neurons, of which 13,802 plus or minus 844 are vagal motor neurons and the rest are local interneurons.

Doubling for both sides and adding the nucleus ambiguus cardiac group, the two salivatory nuclei, the Edinger Westphal preganglionic cells and the sacral parasympathetic nucleus gives a total on the order of 100 thousand, with a defensible range of 50 thousand to 200 thousand.

Confidence is moderate for the vagal figure and low for the rest.

These cell bodies lie in the central nervous system and so do not draw on the roughly 20 million neuron budget for the autonomic ganglia.

They are about one neuron in every million in the whole nervous system, which makes them one of the smallest populations in this book with one of the largest jobs.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Dorsal motor nucleus neurons are pacemakers: they fire slowly and regularly at about 0.5 to 2 impulses per second even when every synapse onto them is blocked, driven by a persistent sodium current and shaped by a fast A type potassium current that sets the interval.

Nucleus ambiguus cardiac vagal neurons are the opposite: they are almost silent at rest and are held silent during inspiration by rhythmic inhibitory input using the transmitters gamma aminobutyric acid and glycine, then released during expiration.

That inspiratory gate is the whole mechanism of respiratory sinus arrhythmia, the familiar quickening of the pulse on breathing in and slowing on breathing out.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The dominant input is from the nucleus of the solitary tract, carrying signals from baroreceptors, chemoreceptors, lung stretch receptors and the gut, mostly using glutamate.

Further input arrives from the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus, the central nucleus of the amygdala, the insular cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex, which is how an anxious thought slows or quickens a heart.

Local inhibitory interneurons within the dorsal motor nucleus, about three thousand per side in the human, provide fine control.

Output is nicotinic, onto the principal cells of cranial, cardiac, airway, pelvic and enteric ganglia.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Two distinct populations, and the difference is functional.

Nucleus ambiguus cardiac axons are myelinated B fibres conducting at 3 to 15 metres per second, fast enough to deliver a beat by beat command.

Dorsal motor nucleus axons are unmyelinated C fibres conducting at under 2 metres per second, slow, and suited to the sluggish business of digestion and to setting ventricular excitability rather than timing individual beats.

Roughly a fifth of cardiac vagal neurons come from the dorsal motor nucleus and the rest from the nucleus ambiguus.

It is worth noting that in the whole vagus nerve only about a fifth of the fibres are efferent at all; the vagus is overwhelmingly a sensory cable pointing the other way.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine at nicotinic receptors, again built largely from alpha3 and beta4 subunits.

Co transmitters include nitric oxide, vasoactive intestinal peptide and enkephalin, and the sacral preganglionic neurons are notably rich in nitric oxide synthase, the enzyme that makes nitric oxide.

MYELINATION:

Mixed, and the mix is the point.

Cardiac vagal axons from the nucleus ambiguus carry a thin myelin sheath, made by oligodendrocytes inside the brainstem and by Schwann cells beyond the exit zone, which buys the speed that beat by beat control requires.

Digestive vagal axons carry none, because a stomach does not need millisecond timing.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate at the cell body and severe at the axon.

Keeping a 40 centimetre unmyelinated axon supplied with vesicles and mitochondria from a cell body 25 micrometres across is one of the harder logistical problems in the nervous system, and it is the reason these axons are so vulnerable in diabetes and in nutritional deficiency.

Because the dorsal motor nucleus sits at a leaky part of the blood brain barrier, its neurons are also directly exposed to circulating glucose, leptin and cholecystokinin, and they change their firing in response, which makes them metabolic sensors as well as metabolic controllers.

PLASTICITY:

Vagal tone is trainable.

Endurance training raises resting vagal control of the heart within weeks, and slow paced breathing raises it within minutes, both measurable as increased beat to beat variability.

After vagal nerve injury the surviving preganglionic axons sprout into denervated ganglia.

Long term stimulation of the vagus, used to treat epilepsy and depression, produces lasting changes in the strength of these synapses.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in the dorsal motor nucleus do something unusual: they are themselves glucose sensors, and they signal to the neurons using adenosine triphosphate and lactate, so the local glia participate directly in the metabolic reflex rather than merely supporting it.

The specialised ependymal cells called tanycytes near the floor of the fourth ventricle regulate what reaches the nucleus from the cerebrospinal fluid.

Microglia in this nucleus are activated early in Parkinson disease, before the movement centres are affected at all.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

The medulla without these cells would still breathe, still sense, still control blood pressure through the sympathetic side, and still be a competent brainstem, but the body below it would run permanently in emergency mode.

The heart would settle at its intrinsic rate near 100 beats a minute and would lose almost all beat to beat variability, so a doctor looking at a rhythm strip would see an eerily regular trace, the same sign that predicts death after a heart attack.

The stomach would not empty, the pupil would not constrict to light, the eye could not focus on a page, and the mouth would be dry.

The floor of the fourth ventricle would lose the thin dark column that anatomists use as a landmark.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

These cells are intrinsic pacemakers, generating their own rhythm without input, so silence in their inputs does not mean silence in their output.

They are chemosensors, changing firing in response to blood glucose, leptin and gut hormones diffusing in through a leaky barrier.

They release nitric oxide, a gas that acts on neighbours without any synapse.

They form the efferent arm of the inflammatory reflex, in which vagal activity ultimately suppresses the release of inflammatory signalling molecules from the spleen, making these neurons part of the immune system.

And they are the earliest known site of Parkinson disease pathology: deposits of alpha synuclein appear in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus years or decades before any tremor, which has led to the still debated proposal that the disease begins in the gut and climbs the vagus into the brain.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Glutamate from the nucleus of the solitary tract carrying baroreceptor, chemoreceptor, lung stretch and gut signals, 0 to 50 impulses per second.

◦ Rhythmic inhibition using gamma aminobutyric acid and glycine, phase locked to inspiration, for nucleus ambiguus cells.

◦ Descending input from hypothalamus, amygdala and insular cortex.

◦ Circulating glucose, leptin and cholecystokinin sensed directly.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Acetylcholine onto nicotinic receptors of cranial, cardiac, airway, pelvic and enteric ganglion neurons.

◦ Nitric oxide and vasoactive intestinal peptide as slow modulators inside the ganglion.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage.

◦ Persistent sodium and A type potassium activation, which set the pacemaker interval.

◦ Respiratory phase, held as an external gate.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Intrinsic pacemaker rate 0.5 to 2 impulses per second for dorsal motor nucleus cells.

◦ Cardiac vagal firing during expiration up to 15 impulses per second.

◦ Conduction velocity 3 to 15 metres per second for myelinated cardiac axons, under 2 for unmyelinated.

◦ Human dorsal motor nucleus neuron count 16,826 plus or minus 967 per nucleus.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Vagal effect on the heart begins within 200 milliseconds and is over within 1 second, far faster than any sympathetic effect.

◦ Respiratory gate cycles every 3 to 5 seconds.

◦ Gastric effects build over minutes.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Diabetic vagal neuropathy, producing a fixed fast pulse, gastroparesis and a doubling of cardiac risk.

◦ Alpha synuclein deposition in the dorsal motor nucleus as the earliest stage of Parkinson disease, presenting as constipation years before tremor.

◦ Loss of nitric oxide releasing preganglionic and ganglionic pathways in achalasia, in which the lower end of the oesophagus will not relax.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to generate respiratory sinus arrhythmia by gating a cardiac vagal preganglionic neuron with the breathing cycle and converting its output into a heart period.
Create a number variable called intrinsic heart period with initial value six hundred.
Create a number variable called acetylcholine with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called firing rate with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called expiratory firing rate with initial value twelve.
Create a number variable called heart period with initial value six hundred.
Create a list variable called recorded periods with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called breath step with initial value zero.
Repeat the following steps exactly one hundred times.
    Set breath step to the remainder of breath step divided by ten.
    Check if breath step is less than four.
    If the result of that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to zero.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to expiratory firing rate.
    End the conditional block.
    Set acetylcholine to the sum of acetylcholine and firing rate.
    Set acetylcholine to the product of acetylcholine and zero point five.
    Set heart period to the product of acetylcholine and eight.
    Set heart period to the sum of heart period and intrinsic heart period.
    Add heart period to the end of recorded periods.
    Set breath step to the sum of breath step and one.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in recorded periods.
Display heart period to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the interesting output is a list of heart periods that a reader can immediately compare with their own smartwatch data.

# A cardiac vagal preganglionic neuron in the nucleus ambiguus.
# Inspiration gates it off, expiration lets it fire, and each pulse of
# acetylcholine at the sinoatrial node lengthens the next heart beat.
# The result is respiratory sinus arrhythmia.
DT = 0.005                    # seconds per step
RESP_HZ = 0.25                # 15 breaths per minute
INSP_FRACTION = 0.4           # fraction of the breath spent breathing in
BASE_RATE = 12.0              # impulses per second during expiration
TAU_ACH = 0.35                # seconds, acetylcholine clearance at the node
MS_PER_ACH = 50.0             # milliseconds of extra heart period per unit
INTRINSIC_PERIOD_MS = 600.0   # a denervated human sinus node, about 100 bpm

def simulate(seconds):
    ach, t, next_beat, periods = 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, []
    while t < seconds:
        phase = (t * RESP_HZ) % 1.0
        rate = 0.0 if phase < INSP_FRACTION else BASE_RATE
        ach += rate * DT
        ach -= DT * ach / TAU_ACH
        if t >= next_beat:
            period = INTRINSIC_PERIOD_MS + MS_PER_ACH * ach
            periods.append(period)
            next_beat = t + period / 1000.0
        t += DT
    return periods

p = simulate(60.0)
print("beats in 60 s        : %d" % len(p))
print("shortest heart period: %.0f ms" % min(p))
print("longest heart period : %.0f ms" % max(p))
print("mean heart rate      : %.1f beats per minute" % (60000.0 / (sum(p) / len(p))))

The printed spread between the shortest and longest beat is respiratory sinus arrhythmia, and its size is one of the best single predictors of long term survival that medicine has.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron whose cell body sits in a brainstem or sacral autonomic nucleus, whose axon runs most of the way to a distant organ before making its first synapse, and which then releases acetylcholine onto a nicotinic receptor in a ganglion lying on or inside that organ.

Long first leg, short second leg, cholinergic at both ends: no other neuron in the body has that signature.

CHAPTER 260. PARASYMPATHETIC POSTGANGLIONIC NEURONS (NON-COG)

These are the shortest workers in the nervous system: cells whose entire axon may be no longer than a grain of rice, parked directly on the organ they command.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The parasympathetic postganglionic neuron is the last cell in the rest and digest chain.

It sits either in a small named ganglion near its target or actually buried in the wall of the organ itself, receives acetylcholine from a long preganglionic axon, and then releases acetylcholine again onto the organ.

The second release lands on muscarinic receptors, a slower family of receptors that work through internal messengers rather than by opening a pore directly, which is why parasympathetic effects build over hundreds of milliseconds rather than instantly.

Its jobs are the quiet ones: constricting the pupil, focusing the lens, making tears and saliva, slowing the heart, narrowing the airways, emptying the bladder, and producing an erection.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Multipolar cells with short dendrites, wrapped like all peripheral neurons in a jacket of satellite glia.

They are, on average, simpler than sympathetic ganglion cells, with fewer dendrites and often just a single dominant preganglionic input, because they do not need to integrate; they need to relay faithfully.

The axon is remarkably short, from a few hundred micrometres for a cell inside a heart wall to two or three centimetres for a ciliary ganglion cell reaching the iris.

The terminals again form varicosities, but the target is usually within a micrometre or two.

SIZE:

Human ciliary ganglion neurons are 20 to 35 micrometres across.

Cells in the intramural ganglia of the heart, airways and bladder are similar or a little larger.

The ganglia themselves are tiny: the human ciliary ganglion is about 2 millimetres long and sits loose in the orbital fat behind the eye, and many intramural ganglia contain only a handful of cells and are invisible without a microscope.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Ciliary ganglion neurons, subdivided into the large majority that drive the ciliary muscle for focusing and a small minority that drive the sphincter of the iris; textbooks commonly quote roughly 95 per cent to 5 per cent for that split.

• Pterygopalatine ganglion neurons, driving the tear gland, the nasal glands and the blood vessels of the nasal lining and the choroid of the eye.

• Submandibular ganglion neurons, driving the submandibular and sublingual salivary glands.

• Otic ganglion neurons, driving the parotid gland.

• Intramural cardiac, airway, bladder and glandular neurons, which include cells that inhibit rather than excite, using nitric oxide.

• Nitrergic subtypes throughout, which relax smooth muscle instead of contracting it, and which are the reason an erection is possible at all.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Four named cranial ganglia and an uncountable scatter of intramural ones.

The ciliary ganglion sits in the orbit between the optic nerve and the lateral rectus muscle; the pterygopalatine ganglion in the pterygopalatine fossa below the maxillary nerve; the submandibular ganglion hangs from the lingual nerve above the submandibular gland; and the otic ganglion sits just below the foramen ovale against the mandibular nerve.

The intramural ganglia lie in the fat pads on the surface of the heart, in the walls of the airways, in the wall of the bladder and in the pelvic plexus.

The interface to name explicitly is the wall of the organ itself: these neurons sit inside the tissue they govern, between the muscle and the connective tissue, and in the heart they sit at the boundary between the epicardial fat and the atrial muscle, where sympathetic axons, vagal axons, sensory endings and their own dendrites all mingle in one plexus.

NUMBER:

The human ciliary ganglion contains about 2,500 neurons, with some sources reporting closer to 3,000, and the other three cranial ganglia are of broadly similar size, so the named cranial ganglia together hold on the order of 20 thousand to 50 thousand cells.

The intramural populations are much larger and much less well counted: the human heart carries something like 100 thousand neurons in 700 to 1,560 small ganglia, and the pelvic ganglia hold tens of thousands, both of which are itemised separately elsewhere in this section.

Adding the uncounted airway, bladder and glandular ganglia, the total for parasympathetic postganglionic neurons outside the gut is plausibly 1 million to 2 million, at low confidence, comfortably inside the roughly 20 million neuron budget for all autonomic ganglia and excluding the several hundred million neurons of the enteric nervous system, which are counted in their own section.

They are on the order of one or two neurons in every hundred thousand in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage about minus 55 millivolts.

Most are phasic, firing one or two spikes at the start of a depolarising step and then falling silent, held in check by the same M type potassium current found in sympathetic ganglia.

The defining feature is a very high safety factor at the synapse: in the ciliary ganglion one preganglionic input is usually enough to fire the cell every single time, so the ganglion is a faithful relay rather than a computer.

Intramural cardiac and airway neurons break this rule and behave like a local network, with many showing spontaneous activity and long lasting afterhyperpolarisations.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Convergence is low, often one to three preganglionic axons per cell and sometimes exactly one, in stark contrast to the fan out of the sympathetic system.

The same three timescales of response exist as in sympathetic ganglia: a fast nicotinic potential, a slow muscarinic potential produced by closing the M current, and a late peptide mediated potential.

In the ciliary ganglion of birds and, to a lesser extent, mammals, some preganglionic terminals form a giant calyx that wraps the whole cell body, one of the largest synapses in the body.

Intramural ganglia additionally receive sensory input from the organ itself and from sympathetic axons passing through, so they run genuine local reflexes.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Short and unmyelinated, conducting at about 0.5 to 1 metre per second, which hardly matters over such distances.

Because the axon is short, the whole delay from ganglion to effect is dominated by the effector, not by conduction.

The clearest human illustration is the pupil: the light reflex takes 200 to 250 milliseconds from flash to first movement, almost all of it spent in the retina and in the muscle, not in the nerve.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine at muscarinic receptors, with the subtype determining the effect: M3 at glands and smooth muscle causing secretion and contraction, and M2 at the heart slowing the pacemaker by opening potassium channels.

Nitric oxide is the great parasympathetic co transmitter, made on demand by neuronal nitric oxide synthase and used to relax rather than contract; it is the transmitter of the cavernous nerves and therefore the direct target of the drugs used for erectile dysfunction, which work by prolonging its second messenger.

Vasoactive intestinal peptide accompanies acetylcholine at glands and blood vessels, and adenosine triphosphate is co released in the bladder.

MYELINATION:

None.

Given axon lengths measured in millimetres, myelin would buy nothing, and its absence costs nothing.

This is one of the few places in the nervous system where the lack of myelin is simply the correct engineering choice rather than a compromise.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low by the standards of this book.

Short axons, small terminal fields, low firing rates and a target that is usually a slow smooth muscle or a gland make this an inexpensive neuron to run.

The exception is the nitrergic subtype, because making nitric oxide consumes the amino acid arginine and the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin continuously, and when that cofactor runs short in diabetes the same enzyme starts making damaging oxygen radicals instead, which is one reason erectile failure is an early sign of diabetic vascular disease.

PLASTICITY:

The most striking example in clinical medicine is the tonic pupil of Adie syndrome.

Damage the ciliary ganglion and the surviving fibres regrow, but because the cells destined for the ciliary muscle vastly outnumber those destined for the iris, the iris is reinnervated mostly by focusing fibres.

The result is a pupil that no longer reacts to light but constricts strongly when the person looks at something close, a mismatch called light near dissociation that is visible with nothing but a torch.

Intramural cardiac neurons remodel after a heart attack and in atrial fibrillation, and pelvic ganglion neurons undergo programmed cell death after cavernous nerve injury during prostate surgery.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glia envelop each cell body as elsewhere, but the developmental relationship here is remarkable and specific: the neurons of the ciliary, pterygopalatine, submandibular and otic ganglia are not born in the neural crest and then migrated as a group, but are generated from Schwann cell precursors that crawl along the preganglionic axons and convert into neurons on arrival.

In these ganglia, the glia are literally the parent cells.

In the heart and airways, intramural ganglia are additionally supported by a resident macrophage population that is unusually dense and that modulates conduction directly.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Each ganglion gives its organ a specific flavour, and losing it produces a specific and immediately recognisable deficit.

Lose the ciliary ganglion and the eye has a wide fixed pupil that cannot focus on a book.

Lose the pterygopalatine ganglion and the eye is dry and the nose no longer runs.

Lose the submandibular and otic ganglia and the mouth is permanently dry, so teeth decay and swallowing becomes difficult.

Lose the intramural cardiac neurons and the heart loses its brake and its local reflex intelligence.

Lose the pelvic ones and the bladder cannot empty and erection is impossible.

Collectively, without these cells a body could be aroused but never settled, and could act but never restore itself.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Nitric oxide release makes these neurons unusual: the messenger is not stored in vesicles at all but manufactured at the moment of firing and allowed to diffuse through several cell diameters, so a single neuron relaxes a whole patch of tissue at once.

Intramural ganglia are true local processors, containing sensory neurons, interneurons and motor neurons, and they can run a complete reflex with the brain disconnected, which is why a transplanted heart still adjusts its own rhythm.

Ganglion cells release factors that maintain their target glands and blood vessels, and denervated salivary glands shrink.

Parasympathetic terminals in airway and gut walls talk directly to immune cells, and acetylcholine acting on the alpha7 nicotinic receptor of macrophages suppresses the release of inflammatory signals, which is the cellular basis of the inflammatory reflex.

And because they are born from glia, these neurons blur the boundary between the two great classes of nervous system cell.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Nicotinic drive from 1 to 3 preganglionic axons, usually with a safety factor above 1 so that every input spike produces an output spike.

◦ For intramural ganglia only, direct sensory input from stretch and chemical receptors in the organ wall.

◦ Passing sympathetic axons releasing noradrenaline onto inhibitory alpha2 receptors on the terminal.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Acetylcholine onto M3 receptors of glands, smooth muscle, iris sphincter and ciliary muscle.

◦ Acetylcholine onto M2 receptors of the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes, opening potassium channels and slowing the heart.

◦ Nitric oxide onto smooth muscle for relaxation, especially in erectile tissue, oesophagus and cerebral vessels.

◦ Vasoactive intestinal peptide for glandular blood flow.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage.

◦ M current activation.

◦ Nitric oxide synthase substrate and cofactor availability.

◦ Local reflex state for intramural networks.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Ciliary ganglion neuron count about 2,500 per side.

◦ Convergence 1 to 3 preganglionic inputs per cell.

◦ Axon length 0.2 millimetres to 30 millimetres.

◦ Conduction velocity 0.5 to 1 metre per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Muscarinic effect onset 100 to 300 milliseconds.

◦ Pupil constriction time constant about 0.3 seconds, redilation about 1.5 seconds.

◦ Vagal slowing of the heart complete within 1 second.

◦ Nitric oxide action 1 to 10 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Adie tonic pupil after ciliary ganglion damage, with light near dissociation caused by misrouted regrowth.

◦ Erectile dysfunction after cavernous nerve injury during pelvic surgery, caused by loss of nitrergic neurons in the pelvic ganglia.

◦ Achalasia, in which nitrergic neurons of the oesophageal wall are destroyed and the lower oesophagus will not open.

◦ Chagas disease, in which a parasite destroys intramural ganglia, producing a hugely dilated oesophagus and colon.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to relay a light signal through a ciliary ganglion neuron to the iris and to move the pupil, with a fast constriction and a slow redilation.
Create a number variable called pupil diameter with initial value seven.
Create a number variable called target diameter with initial value seven.
Create a number variable called light level with initial value five hundred.
Create a number variable called constriction time constant with initial value zero point three five.
Create a number variable called dilation time constant with initial value one point six.
Create a number variable called chosen time constant with initial value zero point three five.
Create a number variable called step size with initial value zero point zero two.
Create a number variable called change with initial value zero.
Repeat the following steps exactly two hundred times.
    Check if light level is greater than one hundred.
    If the result of that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set target diameter to two point seven.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set target diameter to six point seven.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if target diameter is less than pupil diameter.
    If the result of that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set chosen time constant to constriction time constant.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set chosen time constant to dilation time constant.
    End the conditional block.
    Set change to the difference of target diameter and pupil diameter.
    Set change to the quotient of change divided by chosen time constant.
    Set change to the product of change and step size.
    Set pupil diameter to the sum of pupil diameter and change.
    Display pupil diameter to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the output is a short trace that a reader can plot or simply compare against a video of their own eye.

# A ciliary ganglion neuron driving the pupil.
# Light raises the preganglionic rate; the ganglion relays it with a safety
# factor near one, so the interesting dynamics are the reflex latency and the
# asymmetry between fast constriction and slow redilation.
import math

DT = 0.002              # seconds per step
LATENCY_S = 0.22        # reflex latency before the pupil moves at all
TAU_CONSTRICT = 0.35    # seconds
TAU_DILATE = 1.60       # seconds
D_MAX, D_MIN = 7.0, 2.0 # millimetres

def target_diameter(lux):
    # Steady state pupil size falls with the logarithm of light intensity.
    return max(D_MIN, D_MAX - 1.6 * math.log10(max(lux, 0.0) + 1.0))

def simulate(seconds, light_on_at, lux_dark, lux_bright):
    d, trace = D_MAX, []
    for i in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        t = i * DT
        seen = t >= light_on_at + LATENCY_S
        target = target_diameter(lux_bright if seen else lux_dark)
        tau = TAU_CONSTRICT if target < d else TAU_DILATE
        d += DT * (target - d) / tau
        if i % 100 == 0:
            trace.append((round(t, 2), round(d, 2)))
    return trace

for t, d in simulate(4.0, 1.0, 0.5, 500.0):
    print("t = %4.2f s   pupil = %4.2f mm" % (t, d))

Nothing happens for the first 1.22 seconds, then the pupil snaps down over about a second, which is exactly what a clinician sees with a pen torch and exactly what a simulated eye must reproduce to look alive.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A neuron sitting on or inside the organ it controls, with an axon shorter than the ganglion is wide in some cases, receiving one faithful cholinergic input and releasing acetylcholine onto a muscarinic receptor or nitric oxide onto smooth muscle.

Stain for choline acetyltransferase and neuronal nitric oxide synthase in the wall of a bladder, an airway or a heart, and the small clusters of cells that light up are these and nothing else.

CHAPTER 261. ADRENAL CHROMAFFIN CELLS (Fight-Or-Flight Hormone Cell) (NON-COG)

When a car swerves into your lane, the punch you feel in your chest a second later was thrown by a cell that gave up its axon so it could shout into your blood instead.

Chromaffin is a staining barcode, meaning only that the granules brown when treated with chromium salts, which describes a laboratory reagent rather than a cell's purpose.

Fight-Or-Flight names the state the cell serves.

Hormone corrects the central misconception, because this is a nerve cell that lost its axon and now speaks into the bloodstream instead.

Cell rather than Neuron is the honest head noun, and it is driven by ordinary cholinergic preganglionic fibres of the splanchnic nerve arriving from spinal segments four to twelve of the chest, coming in two stocks, one storing adrenaline and one storing noradrenaline.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A chromaffin cell is a sympathetic nerve cell that became a gland, and it pours catecholamines, signalling molecules built from the amino acid tyrosine, straight into the blood so one cell reaches every organ at once.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is a plump polygon with no dendrites and no axon, crammed with dense-core vesicles, membrane bags about 120 nanometres across holding catecholamines glued to scaffold proteins called chromogranins, with one face on a sieve-like fenestrated capillary and the other receiving a splanchnic nerve ending.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly 15 to 20 micrometres across, a fifth the width of a hair, and holds on the order of 10,000 to 30,000 vesicles, each carrying one to three million catecholamine molecules.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Adrenaline cells, or E cells, carry phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT), the final enzyme turning noradrenaline into adrenaline.

• Noradrenaline cells, or N cells, lack that enzyme and have darker, more eccentric granules.

• Mature human granule content is estimated at about 80 percent adrenaline, 16 percent noradrenaline and 4 percent dopamine.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The home is the adrenal medulla of both glands, wrapped inside the adrenal cortex, and that wrapping is a true interface because cortisol drains inward at concentrations reached nowhere else and switches on the adrenaline-making enzyme; further chromaffin cells form paraganglia, chiefly the organ of Zuckerkandl in front of the aorta, plus clusters near the carotid arteries, along the vagus nerve, and in the bladder and prostate walls.

NUMBER:

No modern stereological count exists in adult humans, but the medulla weighs about 500 milligrams and holds roughly 1 milligram of catecholamine per gram, giving a defensible bound of 20 million to 200 million cells, confidence low; they fall outside the 20 million autonomic ganglion neuron budget because they are axonless endocrine cells, contributing zero of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the body.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is a leaky minus 55 to minus 60 millivolts with spontaneous firing at 1 to 2 hertz, driven by L-type calcium channels and braked by large-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels called BK channels, rising to 10 to 20 hertz when acetylcholine opens nicotinic receptors, ion pores that open when acetylcholine binds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input is one class only, cholinergic preganglionic terminals from spinal segments T5 to T11 in the greater splanchnic nerve, built never to fail; output is not synaptic at all but enters the perimedullary capillary bed and reaches the heart in about 10 seconds, while gap junctions, protein tunnels between neighbours, let an active cluster recruit silent cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Not Applicable, and the reason is central to this cell: cortical glucocorticoid signalling diverted its developmental programme, so it never grows an axon and has no axon hillock, growth cone or conduction velocity to quote.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It secretes adrenaline, noradrenaline and a little dopamine, co-released with chromogranin A, enkephalins, which are the body's own opioid painkillers, neuropeptide Y, a long-acting vessel constrictor, and adenosine triphosphate (ATP); the incoming trigger is acetylcholine.

MYELINATION:

The cell has no axon and so no myelin, myelin being the fatty insulation on fast fibres, though its splanchnic supply is thinly myelinated B fibres conducting at 3 to 15 metres per second.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme, needs oxygen, iron and the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin, and each granule is loaded to about 0.5 molar by an ATP-driven proton pump, one of the steepest gradients any human cell maintains.

PLASTICITY:

Chronic stress, cold and repeated low blood sugar raise tyrosine hydroxylase and PNMT over days, and in the fetus these cells sense low oxygen directly and secrete with no nerve input, a birth safeguard switched off in the adult.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here are sustentacular cells, which differ from astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in three concrete ways: they secrete glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor rather than myelin proteins, they act as an adult stem-cell reservoir that can make new chromaffin cells, and they form a partial barrier between cell and blood that no other glia attempt.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the adrenal gland becomes a steroid factory with a hollow centre: nerves would still widen the pupil and speed the heart, but the drenching minutes-long chemical wave would go, glucose would rise sluggishly, and low blood sugar would stop producing the sweating and trembling that warn a person with diabetes to eat.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Secretion happens across the whole surface, so the computation is a graded translation of calcium into hormone across three vesicle pools, readily releasable, slowly releasable and sustained reserve.

Gap junctions make the medulla a partly coupled sheet, volume transmission is the entire output mode, adrenaline feeds back on the cell's own beta-adrenoceptors, enkephalin release performs local immune signalling, and the cell answers hypoxia, acidosis and low glucose with no neural instruction.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: splanchnic acetylcholine, 0.2 to 20 hertz; glucose, 2 to 8 millimolar; oxygen, 20 to 100 millimetres of mercury; cortisol, micromolar; circulating adrenaline as feedback.

• OUTPUTS: adrenaline and noradrenaline into the adrenal vein, 0.1 to 0.5 nanomolar in plasma at rest and 5 to 10 nanomolar in severe stress, with neuropeptide Y, enkephalins, chromogranin A and ATP, to heart, liver, muscle arterioles, fat, bronchi and islets.

• STATE: membrane voltage; intracellular calcium; the three pool sizes; tyrosine hydroxylase and PNMT activity.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential minus 55 to minus 60 millivolts; spontaneous rate 1 to 2 hertz; granule diameter 120 nanometres; 10,000 to 30,000 granules; granule content 0.5 molar; adrenaline fraction 0.8.

• TIME CONSTANTS: nicotinic current 5 to 20 milliseconds; spike 2 to 5 milliseconds; fast pool fusion 10 to 50 milliseconds; refilling 5 to 20 seconds; plasma adrenaline half-life about 2 minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: pheochromocytoma, a catecholamine-secreting tumour whose combined incidence with paraganglioma is roughly 3 per million per year, causing episodic hypertension, headache, palpitations and sweating, about 40 percent of cases germline and half of those in succinate dehydrogenase genes; loss of function causes hypoglycaemia unawareness.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert splanchnic nerve firing into graded adrenaline release from one chromaffin cell.
Create a number variable called calcium with initial value 0.1.
Create a number variable called ready_pool with initial value 20.
Create a number variable called released with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 200, repeat the following steps.
    Set drive to 1.
    If both step is greater than 50 and step is less than 120 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to 15.
    End the conditional block.
    Set calcium to the sum of calcium and the product of drive and 0.02.
    Set calcium to the difference of calcium and the product of calcium and 0.15.
    If calcium is greater than 0.5, then perform the following actions.
        Set released to the sum of released and the product of ready_pool and 0.2.
        Set ready_pool to the product of ready_pool and 0.8.
    End the conditional block.
    Set ready_pool to the sum of ready_pool and the product of the difference of 20 and ready_pool and 0.05.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display released to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the model is a short numerical loop and Python keeps it readable to a non-programmer.

# Chromaffin cell: nicotinic drive -> calcium -> pooled granule release.
DT, CA_DECAY, CA_GAIN = 0.01, 15.0, 0.03   # step size, clearance, drive gain
CA_THRESHOLD, FUSE, REFILL = 0.5, 0.2, 5.0 # fusion threshold, fraction, refill
READY_MAX = 20.0                           # ready pool capacity, granules

def simulate(steps=200, burst=(50, 120)):
    calcium, ready, released, log = 0.1, READY_MAX, 0.0, []
    for step in range(steps):
        drive = 15.0 if burst[0] <= step < burst[1] else 1.0    # hertz
        calcium += (CA_GAIN * drive - CA_DECAY * calcium) * DT
        if calcium > CA_THRESHOLD:                              # exocytosis
            released += FUSE * ready
            ready -= FUSE * ready
        ready += REFILL * (READY_MAX - ready) * DT              # refill
        log.append((step * DT, calcium, released))
    return released, log

if __name__ == "__main__":
    total, log = simulate()
    for t, ca, rel in log[::40]:
        print("t=%4.2fs calcium=%.3f release=%.2f" % (t, ca, rel))
    print("total granules released:", round(total, 2))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell in the human nervous system that is a neuron by birth, a gland by trade, has no axon at all, and turns brown when you drop chromium salts on it.

CHAPTER 262. SMALL INTENSELY FLUORESCENT (SIF) CELLS (Signal-Dimming Local Cell) (NON-COG)

Shine ultraviolet light on a treated sympathetic ganglion and most of it glows a dull green, but a handful of tiny cells blaze like sparks, and those sparks are working the volume control.

The old label is a microscope observation turned into an acronym, recording only that the cell glows brightly under catecholamine fluorescence.

Signal-Dimming names the work, because the cell sits between the incoming preganglionic terminal and the outgoing neuron's dendrites and damps the handover rather than adding to it.

Local names its reach, since it has no long axon and acts by paracrine release over a few micrometres.

Cell rather than Neuron is honest about its halfway position between neuron and gland, sharing a sympathoadrenal precursor with both the ganglion neurons and the adrenal medulla.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A small intensely fluorescent cell, always shortened to SIF cell, is a miniature dopamine-releasing cell inside a sympathetic ganglion, which is a relay station where a fibre from the spinal cord hands its signal to a second fibre running on to an organ; it is neither fibre but a third party that turns the relay's gain up or down.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is a small round bead dwarfed by the principal neurons, stuffed with dense-core vesicles of the kind chromaffin cells use, which is no accident because the two share an embryonic ancestor, and it clusters near blood vessels and under the ganglion capsule.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 10 to 15 micrometres across in rat sympathetic ganglia, roughly a third the diameter of the principal neurons beside it, and its process, when present, runs up to about 200 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Type I cells have a long branching process, occur singly, carry granular vesicles of 80 to 100 nanometres, and behave like interneurons in the local circuit.

• Type II cells cluster near vessels or under the capsule, have short or absent processes, carry vesicles of 150 to 300 nanometres resembling adrenal granules, and behave like miniature endocrine cells.

• In the rat superior cervical ganglion, the top relay in the neck, type I predominates and carries mainly dopamine.

WHERE IT LIVES:

SIF cells occur throughout the paravertebral sympathetic chain flanking the spine, in the prevertebral coeliac, superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric ganglia in front of the aorta, and in pelvic and some parasympathetic ganglia, favouring one explicit interface, the boundary between the ganglion's neuropil, meaning its tangle of fibres and synapses, and its blood supply.

NUMBER:

Rat superior cervical ganglion counts range from 26 to 274 cells against roughly 25,000 to 30,000 principal neurons, so 0.1 to 1 percent of a ganglion; no reliable human count exists, and applying that fraction to the several million neurons of the human sympathetic chain and prevertebral ganglia gives 10,000 to 200,000 per person, confidence low, at most 1 percent of the 20 million autonomic ganglion neurons and about two millionths of one percent of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They can fire action potentials, but their small size gives a high input resistance, meaning a tiny current makes a large voltage change, and much of their release is graded and calcium-driven rather than spike-locked, while muscarinic agonists, drugs mimicking the slow action of acetylcholine, sharply raise their dopamine turnover.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are the same cholinergic preganglionic fibres that drive the principal neurons, plus sensory collaterals from the periphery, and outputs reach principal neuron dendrites and somata, producing a slow inhibitory postsynaptic potential lasting hundreds of milliseconds to seconds that is real but contested in size, so simulate it as a gain term rather than a decisive brake.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Type I cells have one unmyelinated process up to 200 micrometres long that never leaves the ganglion, so it is axon-like rather than a true axon; for type II cells this is Not Applicable, and the reason is that they often have no process and release straight from the cell body.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Dopamine is the signature transmitter, making SIF cells one of very few dopamine sources outside the brain, with some cells holding serotonin, also called 5-hydroxytryptamine, taken up from blood, a subset holding noradrenaline, and co-stored neuropeptide Y, enkephalins, somatostatin and adenosine triphosphate.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable in the sense of self-insulation, and the reason is that SIF cells and their processes are wholly unmyelinated and no oligodendrocyte or myelinating Schwann cell ever wraps them, though the preganglionic fibres driving them are thinly myelinated B fibres.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest in absolute terms because the cell is tiny but high per unit volume, since the cytoplasm is given over to tyrosine hydroxylase, aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase and the vesicular monoamine transporter type 2, which loads dopamine against a steep gradient.

PLASTICITY:

Glucocorticoid hormones increase SIF cell number and push them towards the chromaffin end of the spectrum while nerve growth factor pushes the same precursors towards a neuronal phenotype with longer processes, making this a rare mature cell whose identity stays negotiable for life.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glial cells, the flattened glia that wrap each ganglion neuron like clingfilm, wrap SIF cells only incompletely, and that is the special feature: the gaps face capillaries and interstitial spaces, so these glia are arranged to permit dopamine escape rather than contain it, the opposite of tight astrocytic uptake at a brain synapse.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete SIF cells and the ganglion becomes a faithful, dumb repeater passing every spike unchanged, losing local self-restraint and local blood-flow control, so its response to a long stressful stimulus would become more linear and less self-limiting.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Volume transmission dominates: dopamine released from the cell body diffuses tens of micrometres and influences many neurons without a single synapse, and release is graded with calcium rather than gated by spikes.

Some cells are gap-junction coupled into clusters that release together, they control blood flow at ganglionic capillaries, they signal to immune cells through enkephalins, and their transmitter phenotype stays under transcriptional control by circulating glucocorticoids.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: preganglionic acetylcholine at nicotinic and muscarinic receptors, 0.1 to 20 hertz; collateral sensory substance P; circulating glucocorticoid; local oxygen tension.

• OUTPUTS: dopamine into the ganglionic interstitium, high nanomolar to low micromolar near the release site, plus adenosine triphosphate, neuropeptide Y, enkephalin and somatostatin, onto principal sympathetic neurons and intraganglionic capillaries.

• STATE: intracellular calcium; vesicular dopamine store; tyrosine hydroxylase activity; extracellular dopamine near the cell; membrane voltage.

• PARAMETERS: soma 10 to 15 micrometres; type I vesicles 80 to 100 nanometres; type II vesicles 150 to 300 nanometres; process up to 200 micrometres; abundance 0.1 to 1 percent of the ganglion.

• TIME CONSTANTS: calcium transient 50 to 500 milliseconds; dopamine clearance 0.5 to 5 seconds; slow inhibitory postsynaptic potential 0.3 to 3 seconds; glucocorticoid phenotype shift days.

• FAILURE MODE: lost damping is a proposed contributor to sympathetic overactivity in hypertension and heart failure, these cells are a candidate origin for small neuroendocrine tumours in paraganglia, and their dopamine confounds pheochromocytoma testing, which measures plasma methoxytyramine, the breakdown product of dopamine.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute how a SIF cell damps a sympathetic ganglion during sustained preganglionic firing.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 2.
Create a number variable called sif_calcium with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dopamine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called output_rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 300, repeat the following steps.
    Set drive to 2.
    If both step is greater than 60 and step is less than 240 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to 18.
    End the conditional block.
    Set sif_calcium to the sum of sif_calcium and the product of drive and 0.004.
    Set sif_calcium to the difference of sif_calcium and the product of sif_calcium and 0.08.
    Set dopamine to the sum of dopamine and the product of sif_calcium and 0.5.
    Set dopamine to the difference of dopamine and the product of dopamine and 0.05.
    Set gain to the quotient of 1 divided by the sum of 1 and dopamine.
    Set output_rate to the product of drive and gain.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display output_rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen again because the interesting content is a two-line feedback law and Python keeps that law visible rather than buried in boilerplate.

# SIF cell as a slow negative-gain controller inside a sympathetic ganglion.
DT, CA_GAIN, CA_DECAY = 0.01, 0.4, 8.0   # step, calcium rise, calcium clearance
DA_RELEASE, DA_CLEAR, KD = 50.0, 5.0, 1.0  # release, clearance, half-damping

def run(steps=300, burst=(60, 240)):
    ca, da, log = 0.0, 0.0, []
    for step in range(steps):
        drive = 18.0 if burst[0] <= step < burst[1] else 2.0   # hertz
        ca += (CA_GAIN * drive - CA_DECAY * ca) * DT
        da += (DA_RELEASE * ca - DA_CLEAR * da) * DT
        gain = 1.0 / (1.0 + da / KD)      # dopamine divides ganglionic gain
        log.append((step * DT, drive, da, drive * gain))
    return log

if __name__ == "__main__":
    for t, drive, da, out in run()[::30]:
        print("t=%4.2fs in=%4.1f Hz dopamine=%5.3f out=%5.2f Hz"
              % (t, drive, da, out))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the smallest cell in the ganglion, the brightest under a fluorescence microscope, the only dopamine cell in the sympathetic relay, and the only neuron whose identity as neuron or gland can still be changed in adulthood by a steroid hormone.

CHAPTER 263. INTRINSIC CARDIAC GANGLION NEURONS (Heartbeat Local-Reflex Neuron) (NON-COG)

A transplanted heart, cut free of every nerve from the brain, still steadies itself beat to beat, because the heart carries some forty thousand of its own neurons buried in the fat on its surface.

The existing name is an address, telling you only that the cell sits inside the heart.

Heartbeat names what it governs, rate, conduction and force of contraction.

Local-Reflex names the surprising fact, that these ganglia contain sensory neurons, interneurons and motor neurons together and can complete a whole reflex arc within the heart wall without consulting the brain.

Neuron marks it as a member of the network nicknamed the heart's little brain.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These neurons form the intrinsic cardiac nervous system, nicknamed the little brain of the heart, and because the collection includes sensory cells and local connector cells it can run whole reflex loops without the brain, sensing stretch in the atrial wall and adjusting rate, conduction and contraction strength.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Cell bodies are round to oval, clustered in epicardial fat pads, the soft yellow cushions on the heart's surface, and most are multipolar with unusually large tangled dendritic trees, the structural signature of a cell doing real integration rather than simple relay.

SIZE:

Cell bodies measure roughly 20 to 45 micrometres across, and one ganglion spans a few hundred micrometres to a few millimetres, holding from a handful to several hundred neurons.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Cholinergic efferent neurons that receive vagal input and slow the heart.

• Adrenergic and dual-phenotype neurons carrying markers of both branches, commoner than the old two-branch textbook picture allowed.

• Afferent, meaning sensory, neurons responding to stretch and chemical change in the heart wall.

• Local circuit neurons connecting one ganglion to another, the substrate for reflexes that never reach the brain.

• Nitrergic neurons releasing nitric oxide, a gas transmitter, strongly represented in the human heart.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The neurons sit in epicardial ganglionated plexuses, named fat-pad clusters comprising the superior right atrial, inferior right atrial, superior left atrial, posterolateral and posteromedial left atrial, and right and left coronary plexuses, plus ganglia of the ligament of Marshall; they concentrate at two named interfaces, the pulmonary vein ostia where vein meets left atrium, and the sinoatrial node region, with far sparser ventricular ganglia.

NUMBER:

Whole-mount counting of the human epicardial neural plexus gives roughly 43,000 neurons in adult hearts and about 94,000 in young hearts, meaning fetuses, neonates and children, so a working adult range is 35,000 to 100,000, confidence moderate because few hearts have been counted; that is 0.2 to 0.5 percent of the 20 million autonomic ganglion neurons and about 0.00005 percent of the whole nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential is around minus 50 to minus 60 millivolts, and firing splits into phasic neurons, about 77 percent, which fire one to three spikes at stimulus onset and then fall silent however hard you push, and adapting neurons, about 23 percent, which fire a decaying train and show a shorter afterhyperpolarisation, the dip following each spike.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from vagal preganglionic fibres from the dorsal motor nucleus and nucleus ambiguus, from sympathetic postganglionic fibres of the stellate and middle cervical ganglia, from intrinsic sensory endings in the heart wall, and from other intrinsic cardiac neurons; outputs reach the sinoatrial node, atrioventricular node, atrial and ventricular muscle and coronary vessels, and transmission is deliberately not one for one.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Postganglionic axons are unmyelinated C fibres of 0.2 to 1.5 micrometres conducting at 0.5 to 2 metres per second over only a few millimetres to centimetres, ending in varicosities, beads along the fibre that release transmitter along its length rather than only at a tip.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine at M2 muscarinic receptors is the dominant efferent signal to pacemaker cells, noradrenaline at beta-1 receptors speeds and strengthens the heart, nitric oxide from neuronal nitric oxide synthase is a major human transmitter, and co-modulators include vasoactive intestinal peptide, neuropeptide Y, substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide, galanin and adenosine triphosphate.

MYELINATION:

The neurons' own output axons are unmyelinated, the vagal preganglionic fibres reaching them are thinly myelinated B fibres, and some cardiac afferents running centrally are myelinated A-delta fibres, so one ganglion holds both insulated and bare wiring.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate and unceasing rather than spiky, since these cells work every second of life, and they are unusually dependent on their fat-pad capillaries, because cardiac ischaemia, meaning insufficient blood flow, alters their excitability within minutes.

PLASTICITY:

After a heart attack these neurons undergo sustained changes in excitability and transmitter phenotype, called neural remodelling, chronic spinal cord stimulation measurably alters their membrane properties and ganglionic transmission, and cutting the nerves from the brain changes their properties rather than silencing them.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glia here are unusually reactive: after myocardial infarction and in heart failure they upregulate glial fibrillary acidic protein and release inflammatory mediators including interleukin-6 that change neuronal excitability, behaviour closer to central astrocytes after injury than to the quiet satellite glia of a resting chain ganglion, and the surrounding fat cells add leptin and inflammatory signals found around no other ganglion.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the heart becomes a purely reflex organ driven from the brainstem with a long latency, losing beat-to-beat correction: it would no longer trim its own rate within one or two beats when filling pressure changed, the coupling of rate to contraction strength on standing would blur, and a transplanted heart could not regulate itself at all.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

They run complete reflex arcs outside the central nervous system, filter high-frequency preganglionic traffic instead of relaying it, and integrate convergent vagal, sympathetic and sensory input across large dendritic trees.

Nitric oxide diffuses to neighbours as a volume and retrograde signal, neuropeptides form a paracrine network mapped by single-cell sequencing, glial and fat-cell inflammatory signals directly change cardiac rhythm control, and gap-junction coupling lets a ganglion act partly as a unit.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: vagal preganglionic acetylcholine, 0 to 20 hertz; sympathetic noradrenaline, 0 to 10 hertz; intrinsic afferent drive scaled to atrial pressure in millimetres of mercury; local adenosine, potassium and hydrogen ion signalling ischaemia; interleukin-6 from glia.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine to sinoatrial M2 receptors, noradrenaline to beta-1 receptors, nitric oxide, vasoactive intestinal peptide and neuropeptide Y, onto sinoatrial node, atrioventricular node, atrial and ventricular myocardium and coronary arterioles, shifting heart rate by up to plus or minus 40 beats per minute.

• STATE: membrane voltage; M-current activation; intracellular calcium; adaptation current; vagal synaptic strength; local nitric oxide.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential minus 50 to minus 60 millivolts; threshold about minus 40 millivolts; input resistance 100 to 400 megaohms; phasic fraction 0.77; soma 20 to 45 micrometres; conduction 0.5 to 2 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 40 milliseconds; spike 2 to 4 milliseconds; afterhyperpolarisation 50 to 300 milliseconds; M-current 100 to 200 milliseconds; nitric oxide about 1 second; post-infarct remodelling days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: overactivity of the pulmonary vein plexuses triggers atrial fibrillation, the commonest sustained rhythm disorder, and ablating those plexuses can abolish inducible atrial fibrillation; loss of these neurons in diabetic autonomic neuropathy gives a fixed unvarying heart rate and raises sudden death risk; post-infarct remodelling promotes ventricular arrhythmia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether one phasic intrinsic cardiac neuron fires and by how much it slows the heart.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value -58.
Create a number variable called adaptation_current with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called stretch_signal with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called heart_rate with initial value 75.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 400, repeat the following steps.
    Set stretch_signal to 0.
    If both step is greater than 100 and step is less than 300 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set stretch_signal to 1.2.
    End the conditional block.
    Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and the product of the difference of -58 and membrane_voltage and 0.05.
    Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and stretch_signal.
    Set membrane_voltage to the difference of membrane_voltage and adaptation_current.
    If membrane_voltage is greater than -40, then perform the following actions.
        Set spike_count to the sum of spike_count and 1.
        Set membrane_voltage to -65.
        Set adaptation_current to the sum of adaptation_current and 1.5.
    End the conditional block.
    Set adaptation_current to the product of adaptation_current and 0.99.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Set heart_rate to the difference of 75 and the product of spike_count and 1.8.
Display heart_rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because this neuron has to run inside a beat-by-beat whole-heart solver with a fixed real-time budget, and such solvers are written in C.

#include <stdio.h>

/* Phasic intrinsic cardiac neuron with an M-current-like adaptation brake. */
int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.0005, tau_m = 0.025, tau_adapt = 0.150;
    const double v_rest = -58.0, v_th = -40.0, v_reset = -65.0;
    const double r_in = 250.0, d_adapt = 0.055;   /* megaohms, nanoamperes */
    double v = v_rest, i_adapt = 0.0;
    int spikes = 0;

    for (int step = 0; step < 4000; step++) {     /* 2 seconds */
        double t = step * dt;
        double stretch = (t > 0.25 && t < 1.25) ? 0.075 : 0.0;  /* nA */
        double i_in = 0.010 + stretch - i_adapt;                /* tonic + stretch */
        v += dt / tau_m * (-(v - v_rest) + r_in * i_in);
        i_adapt -= dt / tau_adapt * i_adapt;
        if (v >= v_th) { v = v_reset; i_adapt += d_adapt; spikes++;
                         printf("spike %d at t = %.4f s\n", spikes, t); }
    }
    double hr = 75.0 - 1.8 * spikes;              /* each spike shaves the rate */
    if (hr < 35.0) hr = 35.0;
    printf("spikes = %d, heart rate = %.1f beats per minute\n", spikes, hr);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is a neuron living in fat on the outside of a beating heart that fires two or three times and then refuses however hard you push, and it keeps a transplanted heart adjusting itself years after every nerve from the brain was cut.

CHAPTER 264. PELVIC GANGLION NEURONS (Pelvic-Organ Relay Neuron) (NON-COG)

Everywhere else in the body the two halves of the autonomic nervous system keep separate offices, but deep in the pelvis they share one room.

Pelvic ganglion is a map coordinate and says nothing about the job.

Pelvic-Organ names the territory served, the bladder and bowel functions these cells drive together with the erectile and genital blood-flow function they carry through acetylcholine and nitric oxide.

Relay is the honest word for their position and reflects a genuine recent upheaval, since molecular work reports four neuron classes here that fit neither the classic sympathetic nor the classic parasympathetic mould, with lumbar preganglionic fibres feeding roughly equal numbers of noradrenergic and cholinergic cells.

Neuron marks it as the final common path for pelvic organ control.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are the final output cells for the bladder, the lower bowel, the internal sphincters, the prostate, the uterus and the erectile tissue, and they are unique in that fight-or-flight sympathetic neurons and rest-and-digest parasympathetic neurons are intermingled in the same ganglion, fed by two different levels of the spinal cord.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell bodies are round to oval and, unusually, most have few dendrites or none, which is a strong functional clue: a cell without dendrites cannot pool many weak inputs, so it is built to be driven by one strong input.

SIZE:

Two size classes are consistently described, a common class of about 30 to 45 micrometres staining weakly to moderately for the acetylcholine-making enzyme, and a smaller class of about 15 to 25 micrometres staining very intensely.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Cholinergic neurons releasing acetylcholine to drive bladder emptying and bowel propulsion.

• Nitrergic neurons making nitric oxide, which relaxes smooth muscle and produces erection.

• Noradrenergic neurons closing the bladder neck and internal anal sphincter and relaxing the bladder during filling.

• Dual-phenotype neurons carrying markers of both autonomic branches, common here and awkward for textbook classification.

WHERE IT LIVES:

In humans the cells lie in the inferior hypogastric plexus, a flat sheet about three to five centimetres long on each side of the rectum, and in the vesical, prostatic, uterovaginal and rectal plexuses branching off it, plus scattered neurons in the organ walls; the plexus is itself the named interface where hypogastric nerves from spinal segments T10 to L2 meet pelvic splanchnic nerves from S2 to S4, lying beside the seminal vesicles or cervix, which is why pelvic cancer surgery so often damages it.

NUMBER:

No reliable human count exists and that gap should be stated rather than filled; the rat major pelvic ganglion holds roughly 8,000 to 12,000 neurons per side, and scaling for body size and human dispersion gives 20,000 to 100,000 in a person, confidence low, comfortably inside the tens of thousands allowed, which is 0.1 to 0.5 percent of the 20 million autonomic ganglion neurons and about one millionth of one percent of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential is minus 55 to minus 65 millivolts, cells divide into tonic and phasic firers with the phasic pattern set by the M-current, a slow potassium brake carried by KCNQ channels, and because most cells lack dendrites one preganglionic fibre usually fires them outright, so the ganglion is closer to a relay than a filter.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Sympathetic preganglionic input arrives through the hypogastric nerves and sacral input through the pelvic splanchnic nerves, both cholinergic and both acting on nicotinic receptors, with some bladder and bowel afferent input; outputs reach detrusor muscle, internal urethral and anal sphincters, cavernous tissue, vas deferens, prostate, uterus and rectum, and it should be flagged honestly that work published in 2016 and 2023 argues the sacral outflow is molecularly sympathetic, so the parasympathetic label is contested while the anatomy and pharmacology are not.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Postganglionic axons are unmyelinated C fibres of 0.2 to 1.5 micrometres conducting at 0.3 to 1.5 metres per second over a few centimetres, the longest being the cavernous nerves that run beside the prostate to the erectile tissue, ending in varicosities that release transmitter along their length.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine at M3 receptors contracts the detrusor, nitric oxide from neuronal nitric oxide synthase relaxes erectile tissue through cyclic guanosine monophosphate, the messenger that sildenafil protects, noradrenaline closes the bladder neck at alpha-1 receptors and relaxes the bladder at beta-3 receptors, and adenosine triphosphate at P2X receptors adds a fast contractile component, alongside vasoactive intestinal peptide, neuropeptide Y and galanin.

MYELINATION:

The output axons are unmyelinated throughout while the preganglionic fibres are thinly myelinated B fibres, and this bare output is one reason pelvic function recovers so slowly after injury, since unmyelinated fibres regenerate without the Schwann cell tube that guides a myelinated one.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest at rest and sharply episodic, with nitric oxide production the distinctive cost, requiring arginine, oxygen and the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin, and when that cofactor runs short in diabetes the enzyme uncouples and makes damaging superoxide instead.

PLASTICITY:

These are among the most plastic neurons in the adult body: they carry androgen and oestrogen receptors, castration reduces nitrergic pelvic neurons and testosterone restores them, bladder outlet obstruction causes hypertrophy and a shift towards purinergic transmission, and pregnancy remodels the uterine-projecting population.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glia here turn destructive after injury, proliferating, upregulating glial fibrillary acidic protein and helping kill nitrergic neurons after cavernous nerve damage, quite unlike the protective satellite glia of a resting chain ganglion, while Schwann cells in the cavernous nerves decide whether erectile function returns by forming the bands of Büngner, aligned cellular tubes that regenerating axons crawl along.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the pelvic organs stay mechanically intact and neurologically silent: the bladder would fill and leak by overflow instead of emptying, the lower bowel would lose propulsion and coordinated sphincter release, and erection, lubrication and ejaculation would not occur, so what the pelvis loses is timing between organs.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Nitric oxide release is not synaptic at all but a gas diffusing through tissue, so one nitrergic neuron relaxes a volume rather than a point, and the muscarinic slow excitation closes the M-current and rewrites the firing pattern for seconds, a genuine state change rather than a summed input.

Purinergic co-release is dialled up in disease so the transmitter mixture is itself a variable, nuclear sex-steroid receptors make gene transcription part of the normal loop, nerve growth factor from the bladder wall lets the organ instruct its own innervation, and satellite glia and macrophages modulate excitability through immune signalling.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: sacral preganglionic acetylcholine, 0 to 20 hertz, at nicotinic and M1 receptors; lumbar preganglionic acetylcholine, 0 to 15 hertz; afferent input encoding bladder and bowel wall tension; circulating testosterone and oestradiol; nerve growth factor from the organ wall.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine to detrusor M3 receptors, adenosine triphosphate to P2X receptors, nitric oxide over a diffusion radius of roughly 100 to 200 micrometres, and noradrenaline to alpha-1 and beta-3 receptors, onto detrusor, urethral and anal sphincters, corpus cavernosum, vas deferens, prostate, uterus and rectum.

• STATE: membrane voltage; M-current activation; intracellular calcium; nitric oxide synthase activity; tetrahydrobiopterin availability; vesicular acetylcholine and adenosine triphosphate stores.

• PARAMETERS: soma 30 to 45 micrometres common class and 15 to 25 micrometres intense class; resting potential minus 55 to minus 65 millivolts; threshold about minus 40 millivolts; input resistance 150 to 500 megaohms; nitrergic fraction roughly 30 to 50 percent of the sacral population.

• TIME CONSTANTS: nicotinic excitatory postsynaptic potential 5 to 20 milliseconds; membrane 20 to 60 milliseconds; muscarinic slow excitation 2 to 30 seconds; nitric oxide 0.1 to 5 seconds; detrusor contraction 5 to 30 seconds; regeneration after injury months.

• FAILURE MODE: cavernous nerve injury during radical prostatectomy triggers RhoA and Rho-associated kinase signalling and caspase-3 dependent death of nitrergic neurons, causing erectile dysfunction; diabetic autonomic neuropathy degrades cholinergic and nitrergic function; spinal cord injury leaves these neurons alive but disconnected, giving detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia in which the bladder contracts against a closed sphincter.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn sacral preganglionic drive into bladder pressure and erectile relaxation from one pelvic ganglion neuron.
Create a number variable called sacral_drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called m_current with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called firing with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called nitric_oxide with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called bladder_pressure with initial value 8.
Create a number variable called relaxation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 300, repeat the following steps.
    Set sacral_drive to 0.
    If both step is greater than 80 and step is less than 200 are true, then perform the following actions.
        Set sacral_drive to 14.
    End the conditional block.
    If sacral_drive is greater than 5, then perform the following actions.
        Set m_current to the product of m_current and 0.9.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set m_current to the sum of m_current and the product of the difference of 1 and m_current and 0.05.
    End the conditional block.
    Set firing to the quotient of sacral_drive divided by the sum of 1 and m_current.
    Set nitric_oxide to the sum of the product of nitric_oxide and 0.9 and the product of firing and 0.4.
    Set bladder_pressure to the sum of 8 and the product of firing and 0.9.
    Set relaxation to the quotient of nitric_oxide divided by the sum of 2 and nitric_oxide.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display bladder_pressure to the console.
Display relaxation to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the pelvic neuron's key behaviour is a slow state change in one gain variable, and Python keeps that variable next to the physiology it represents.

# Pelvic ganglion neuron: muscarinic closure of the M-current turns a brief
# spinal command into a sustained void, with nitrergic relaxation alongside.
DT, M_CLOSE, M_RECOVER = 0.05, 2.0, 1.0     # step size, closing, recovery rates
NO_MAKE, NO_DECAY, K_NO = 8.0, 2.0, 2.0     # nitric oxide make, clear, half-max

def run(steps=300, void=(80, 200)):
    m_gate, no, out = 1.0, 0.0, []          # m_gate 1.0 = brake fully on
    for step in range(steps):
        voiding = void[0] <= step < void[1]
        sacral = 14.0 if voiding else 0.0                    # hertz
        if sacral > 5.0:
            m_gate -= M_CLOSE * m_gate * DT                  # muscarinic closure
        else:
            m_gate += M_RECOVER * (1.0 - m_gate) * DT
        firing = sacral / (1.0 + m_gate)                     # M-current divides
        no += (NO_MAKE * firing / 14.0 - NO_DECAY * no) * DT
        out.append((step * DT, firing, 8.0 + 0.9 * firing, no / (K_NO + no)))
    return out

if __name__ == "__main__":
    for t, f, p, r in run()[::25]:
        print("t=%5.2fs firing=%5.2f Hz bladder=%5.2f cmH2O relax=%.3f"
              % (t, f, p, r))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only ganglion neuron sharing its ganglion with the opposite autonomic branch, it usually has no dendrites at all, its phenotype answers to sex hormones for life, and a few tens of thousands of these cells carry the entire nerve supply for continence and sexual function.

CHAPTER 265. AIRWAY, BLADDER, AND PANCREATIC GANGLION NEURONS (Organ-Wall Filtering Neuron) (NON-COG)

The vagus nerve sends a torrent of orders down to your lungs and pancreas, and most of them are thrown away before they reach the muscle, by small knots of neurons whose whole job is deciding which orders are worth passing on.

The existing title is a committee minute listing three organs and a location, and it can only grow longer as more organs are added.

Organ-Wall names where these last-step neurons sit, embedded in the tissue they command rather than in a distant chain.

Filtering names the shared work the three have in common despite different organs, because these ganglia do not simply pass the incoming command on but integrate, gate and shape it, so that in the pancreas short bursts of preganglionic stimulation at twenty hertz raised the insulin secretion rate threefold in forty-six percent of preparations and left the rest unchanged.

Neuron marks it as a postganglionic cell embedded in its target organ.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are terminal ganglion neurons, meaning nerve cells living in the wall of the organ they control, and the three organs are grouped because their ganglia do the same job: they are deliberately bad relays, discarding most incoming commands so the organ can set how loudly it listens to the brain.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Airway neurons are notable for substantial dendritic trees, unusual in an autonomic ganglion and the site where preganglionic fibres land; bladder intramural neurons sit singly or in small groups inside the detrusor muscle and are more often adendritic; pancreatic neurons are multipolar with moderate arbors.

SIZE:

Cell bodies run about 20 to 40 micrometres across in all three organs, airway ganglia hold roughly 2 to 50 neurons each, bladder ganglia a handful to a few dozen, and human intrapancreatic ganglia are markedly larger at on average about 200 neurons.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Airway cholinergic neurons constricting airway smooth muscle through M3 receptors.

• Airway nitrergic and vasoactive intestinal peptide neurons, the only bronchodilator nerve supply humans have.

• Bladder cholinergic and purinergic neurons driving detrusor contraction, with nitrergic neurons relaxing the urethra.

• Pancreatic cholinergic neurons raising insulin secretion from islet beta cells and enzyme output from acinar cells.

• Pancreatic nitrergic and peptidergic neurons controlling pancreatic blood flow and duct secretion.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Airway ganglia lie in a superficial plexus outside the cartilage rings of the trachea and main bronchi and a deeper plexus between smooth muscle and mucosa, thinning out before the alveoli; bladder ganglia lie within detrusor bundles and suburothelial tissue of the dome, lateral walls and base; pancreatic ganglia lie in interlobular tissue near the islets, and two interfaces deserve naming, the airway muscle-to-mucosa boundary where mucosal sensory endings can reach the ganglion, and the pancreatic boundary between enzyme-making exocrine tissue and insulin-making islets.

NUMBER:

None of the three has a reliable human count, and the best bounds are 5,000 to 30,000 airway neurons, 5,000 to 50,000 bladder intramural neurons, which are known to be more numerous in humans than in rats, and 10,000 to 100,000 intrapancreatic neurons, all confidence low, giving 20,000 to 180,000 together with a best estimate near 60,000, which is 0.1 to 0.9 percent of the 20 million autonomic ganglion neurons and of the order of one millionth of one percent of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting potential is minus 50 to minus 60 millivolts with a high input resistance of 100 to 500 megaohms, and the measured signature is low transmission fidelity, the fraction of preganglionic spikes producing an output spike, which stays well below one in airway ganglia because a single nicotinic event gives only 5 to 20 millivolts against a threshold near minus 40 millivolts.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Preganglionic input is vagal for airway and pancreas and sacral through the pelvic nerves for bladder, all cholinergic at nicotinic receptors; mucosal sensory fibres release tachykinins, a peptide family including substance P and neurokinin A, directly onto the ganglion to raise its gain, sympathetic fibres damp it, and outputs reach airway smooth muscle, glands and vessels, detrusor and urothelium, and islet, acinar, duct and vascular targets.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Postganglionic axons are unmyelinated C fibres of 0.2 to 1 micrometre conducting at 0.3 to 1 metre per second over only hundreds of micrometres to a few millimetres, ending within 20 to 100 nanometres of airway and bladder smooth muscle but further from pancreatic targets, so pancreatic transmission is more diffuse.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine at M3 receptors is the primary output to airway and bladder muscle and to islet beta cells, nitric oxide and vasoactive intestinal peptide are the relaxant co-transmitters, adenosine triphosphate at P2X receptors grows prominent in overactive bladder, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide drives insulin release, and received peptides include substance P and neurokinin A at NK1, NK2 and NK3 receptors, with NK3 receptors shown specifically to regulate human bronchial ganglion neurons.

MYELINATION:

Output axons are unmyelinated, preganglionic vagal and pelvic fibres are thinly myelinated B fibres conducting at 3 to 15 metres per second, modulating sensory fibres are mostly unmyelinated C fibres, and no oligodendrocytes exist here because oligodendrocytes live only in the brain and spinal cord.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low and steady, since these cells fire at a few hertz for most of the day, except the pancreatic population during a meal, and nitric oxide synthesis is the distinctive cost, with shortage of the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin in diabetes uncoupling the enzyme so it makes damaging superoxide instead.

PLASTICITY:

This is the clinically decisive aspect: allergen exposure acutely raises airway ganglion excitability and reduces filtering through tachykinins, so more vagal commands get through for the same brain input, chronic inflammation increases the number of substance P expressing neurons, purinergic transmission expands in bladder outlet obstruction, and intrapancreatic neurons hypertrophy and are reprogrammed in chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glia here are the local immune interface, expressing toll-like receptors and responding to inhaled allergen or virus by releasing cytokines that raise neuronal excitability, a sensing role satellite glia in a sympathetic chain ganglion do not perform, and resident mast cells and macrophages sit inside these ganglia, making them mixed neuro-immune structures.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete them and the three organs stay alive but deaf to the brain: the airways would lose resting bronchial tone and the reflex narrowing to cold air and smoke, mucus output would fall, the bladder would lose its intramural boosting stage and void weakly, and the pancreas would lose the cephalic phase of insulin release, the anticipatory squirt that appears when you smell food before eating.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The central operation is synaptic filtering with variable gain, which is arithmetic rather than relay, and dendritic integration in airway neurons decides whether summed subthreshold inputs cross threshold, so dendritic geometry is functionally decisive here in a way it is not in the pelvic ganglion.

Somatic peptide receptors let sensory nerves reset the gain for minutes, nitric oxide acts as both a diffusible volume signal and a retrograde messenger to the preganglionic terminal, these neurons control bronchial and pancreatic blood flow directly, they exchange signals with mast cells and macrophages, pancreatic ones sense glucose and fatty acids directly, and gap junctions let a ganglion act partly as a unit.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: preganglionic acetylcholine at nicotinic receptors, 0 to 20 hertz, giving a 5 to 20 millivolt excitatory postsynaptic potential; substance P and neurokinin A from sensory endings, nanomolar, at NK1, NK2 and NK3 receptors; noradrenaline and adrenaline as damping; glucose 3 to 15 millimolar for the pancreatic population; interleukin-1 beta and tumour necrosis factor alpha from resident immune cells.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine to airway, detrusor and beta-cell M3 receptors, nitric oxide and vasoactive intestinal peptide as relaxant output, adenosine triphosphate to bladder P2X receptors, and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide, onto airway smooth muscle, submucosal glands, bronchial arterioles, detrusor, urethral muscle, islet beta and alpha cells, acinar cells, ducts and pancreatic arterioles.

• STATE: membrane voltage; summed synaptic conductance; gain multiplier set by tachykinin occupancy; intracellular calcium; nitric oxide synthase activity; refractory timer.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential minus 50 to minus 60 millivolts; threshold about minus 40 millivolts; input resistance 100 to 500 megaohms; single excitatory postsynaptic potential 5 to 20 millivolts; baseline fidelity 0.1 to 0.5 rising towards 0.8 when inflamed; soma 20 to 40 micrometres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: excitatory postsynaptic potential decay 10 to 40 milliseconds; membrane 20 to 60 milliseconds; tachykinin gain change 30 seconds to 10 minutes; nitric oxide 0.1 to 5 seconds; airway smooth muscle contraction 10 to 60 seconds; inflammatory phenotype change hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE: in asthma the ganglionic filter opens too far under tachykinin drive so discarded vagal traffic reaches the muscle and narrows the airway, which is why inhaled anticholinergic drugs such as tiotropium work, and the same pathway supplies most of the reversible obstruction in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; rising ganglionic and purinergic gain produces urgency in overactive bladder; loss of pancreatic input removes the cephalic phase of insulin secretion, and diabetic autonomic neuropathy degrades all three populations at once.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to filter preganglionic vagal traffic through an airway ganglion whose gain is raised by inflammation.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value -55.
Create a number variable called tachykinin with initial value 0.8.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called input_spikes with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called output_spikes with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called fidelity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
Set gain to the sum of 1 and the product of tachykinin and 1.6.
While step is less than 500, repeat the following steps.
    Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and the product of the difference of -55 and membrane_voltage and 0.25.
    Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and the product of tachykinin and 0.6.
    If the remainder of step divided by 8 is equal to 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set input_spikes to the sum of input_spikes and 1.
        Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and the product of 6 and gain.
    End the conditional block.
    If membrane_voltage is greater than -40, then perform the following actions.
        Set output_spikes to the sum of output_spikes and 1.
        Set membrane_voltage to -60.
    End the conditional block.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Set fidelity to the quotient of output_spikes divided by input_spikes.
Display fidelity to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because this model is most useful as an interactive slider a student drags to watch the ganglionic filter open, and JavaScript runs in a browser with no installation.

// Airway parasympathetic ganglion neuron as a gain-adjustable synaptic filter.
function runGanglion(inflamed, driveHz = 15, seconds = 2) {
  const DT = 0.001, V_REST = -55, V_TH = -40, V_RESET = -60;
  const TAU = 0.030, EPSP = 6.0;          // seconds; millivolts per input
  const tachykinin = inflamed ? 0.8 : 0.0; // sensory peptide occupancy, 0 to 1
  const gain = 1 + 1.6 * tachykinin;       // peptides boost synaptic efficacy
  const tonic = 4.0 * tachykinin;          // peptides also depolarise the soma
  const steps = Math.round(seconds / DT);
  const interval = Math.max(1, Math.round(1 / (driveHz * DT)));
  let v = V_REST, inputs = 0, outputs = 0;
  for (let step = 0; step < steps; step++) {
    v += (DT / TAU) * (-(v - V_REST) + tonic);          // leak toward rest
    if (step % interval === 0) { inputs++; v += EPSP * gain; }
    if (v >= V_TH) { outputs++; v = V_RESET; }          // postganglionic spike
  }
  return { inputs, outputs, fidelity: outputs / inputs, gain };
}
for (const inflamed of [false, true]) {
  const r = runGanglion(inflamed);
  console.log("inflamed=" + inflamed + " in=" + r.inputs + " out=" + r.outputs +
              " fidelity=" + r.fidelity.toFixed(2) + " gain=" + r.gain.toFixed(2));
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only class of neuron whose main job is throwing away most of the messages it receives, it lives inside the wall of the organ it commands, and when inflammation switches its filter off the result is an asthma attack, an urgent bladder, or a meal that never triggers its anticipatory insulin.


PART SEVENTEEN: ENTERIC NERVOUS SYSTEM - THE GUT'S OWN BRAIN

CHAPTER 266. INTRINSIC PRIMARY AFFERENT NEURONS (IPANS), ALSO CALLED ENTERIC SENSORY NEURONS (Gut-Content Sensing Neuron) (NON-COG)

Buried in your intestinal wall is a plump, many-armed cell that tastes your last meal from the inside and decides what to do, without consulting your brain.

The old label buries the cell under an acronym and borrows the vocabulary of the spinal cord for a cell that owes the brain nothing.

Gut-Content names what this cell actually samples, the chemistry and the physical state of whatever is inside the bowel at that moment, since these cells fire to acids, nutrients and other chemicals applied to the inner lining and to tension in the muscle wall.

Sensing names the faculty and marks the one thing the older label hid, that this is the gut's own first detector rather than a nerve borrowed from the brain or spinal cord.

Neuron marks it as the most numerous single class in some regions, about fifty-four percent of myenteric nerve cells counted in guinea pig duodenum, whose sensory identity was settled when action potentials were still recorded from it after all synaptic transmission was blocked.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An intrinsic primary afferent neuron, shortened to IPAN, is a sensory nerve cell living entirely inside the gut wall, and it is polymodal: one cell answers to distortion of the lining, muscle tension and food chemistry.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It has Dogiel type II shape, named for the histologist who drew it in the 1890s: a large smooth round body with several long tapering arms and no leaf-like dendrites.

SIZE:

Human type II cell bodies span about 700 to 1164 square micrometres in cross-section, some 30 to 40 micrometres across, and each arm runs 1 to 4 millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Myenteric IPANs sit between the muscle coats, submucosal IPANs nearer the lining, and a 2023 human colon survey made two of its twenty classes multiaxonal sensory neurons.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies occupy the myenteric plexus, also called Auerbach's plexus, between longitudinal and circular muscle, and the submucosal or Meissner's plexus, from oesophagus to rectum.

Two interfaces matter: the mucosal interface, where endings meet the epithelium and its serotonin-releasing enterochromaffin cells, and the deep muscular plexus between circular muscle and submucosa.

NUMBER:

Of the 400 million neurons usually credited to the human enteric nervous system, IPANs are taken here as about 40 million, some 10 percent, or 0.04 percent of the whole nervous system.

Confidence is low: guinea-pig gives 20 to 30 percent, human colon as little as 4.6 percent, and a 2022 count put the whole enteric system at 168 million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These are the classic AH neurons, where AH means afterhyperpolarising: a broad spike, then a trough lasting 1 to 20 seconds made by calcium-activated potassium channels that slow synaptic potentials close.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They excite each other into self-sustaining assemblies, take serotonin from enterochromaffin cells at 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptors, and output to interneurons, motor neurons and secretion-driving neurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Several unmyelinated axons per cell, 0.5 to 1.5 micrometres thick, conducting at 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second, running around the gut rather than along it.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine gives fast excitation at nicotinic receptors, pores that open the instant transmitter binds, while substance P gives slow excitation and calcitonin gene-related peptide widens vessels.

MYELINATION:

None, because the enteric nervous system holds no myelinating glia, so a gut reflex takes hundreds of milliseconds rather than tens.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest per spike but oddly shaped, since the long afterhyperpolarisation forces the cell to pump out a heavy calcium load after every impulse.

PLASTICITY:

After colitis they stay hyperexcitable for weeks after the tissue heals, because protein kinase A shrinks the potassium current behind the trough.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Enteric glia answer IPAN firing with calcium waves and release adenosine triphosphate, S100B and D-serine back onto the neuron.

Uniquely, enteric ganglia have no blood-nerve barrier, so glia rather than a tight vessel wall are the only buffer between these cells and everything circulating in the gut wall.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete IPANs and the intestine can still be stretched, but it can no longer feel a pellet or taste a meal, so the gut loses all sense of its contents.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Mutual slow potentials hold a group of IPANs excited for a minute, a short-term memory built from ion channels, and the long trough acts as automatic gain control.

They release peptides from the cell body, couple through gap junctions, dilate arterioles with calcitonin gene-related peptide, and instruct the glia that set how leaky the lining is.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: mucosal distortion 0 to 1, muscle tension in millinewtons, luminal serotonin 0 to 1, synaptic input from other IPANs.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine and substance P onto interneurons and motor neurons, calcitonin gene-related peptide onto arterioles.

• STATE: membrane voltage in millivolts, calcium in micromolar, slow drive 0 to 1, refractory countdown.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 60 millivolts, threshold minus 35 millivolts, brake 25 millivolts per micromolar calcium.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 milliseconds, calcium clearance 3 seconds, afterhyperpolarisation 1 to 20 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: sensitisation gives the pain of irritable bowel syndrome, and losing these cells stops the gut starting propulsion.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether an intrinsic primary afferent neuron fires this millisecond.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called calcium with initial value 0.05.
Create a boolean variable called fired with initial value false.
Calculate the difference of 1 and slow drive.
Calculate the product of the result and calcium.
Calculate the product of 25 and the result.
Calculate the difference of sensory push and the result.
Calculate the difference of the result and voltage.
Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 10.
Calculate the sum of voltage and the result.
Set voltage to the result.
Calculate the product of calcium and 0.99967.
Set calcium to the result.
Check if voltage is greater than 25.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set fired to true.
    Set voltage to -10.
    Calculate the sum of calcium and 0.35.
    Set calcium to the result.
End the conditional block.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python chosen because its plain syntax exposes the calcium bookkeeping.
DT = 0.001                                   # one millisecond per step
v, ca, slow, refrac = -60.0, 0.05, 0.0, 0.0  # mV, micromolar, 0 to 1, seconds
spikes = 0
for i in range(20000):                       # 20 seconds of gut time
    stretch = 1.0 if 5000 <= i < 15000 else 0.0
    push = 30.0 * stretch + 8.0 * 0.2        # distortion plus serotonin
    brake = 25.0 * ca * (1.0 - 0.8 * slow)   # calcium activated K current
    v += (-(v + 60.0) + push - brake) * DT / 0.010
    ca -= ca * DT / 3.0                      # 3 s calcium clearance
    slow -= slow * DT / 20.0                 # slow potential fades
    refrac = max(0.0, refrac - DT)
    if v > -35.0 and refrac <= 0.0:
        v, refrac = -70.0, 0.010             # spike, then the long trough
        ca += 0.35
        spikes += 1
        if spikes == 3:
            slow = 1.0                       # a partner IPAN excites it
print("spikes in 20 s:", spikes)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only gut neuron with a big smooth round body and many long arms, whose spike is followed by seconds of silence.

CHAPTER 267. INTERNEURONS (Gut-Circuit Bridging Neuron) (NON-COG)

Between the cell that feels and the cell that squeezes lies a middle layer whose whole job is to carry news along the gut and decide how far it travels.

Interneuron alone says only that the cell sits between two others, which is true of a great many cells and distinguishes none of them.

Gut-Circuit names the machine this cell belongs to, a complete reflex loop built entirely inside the bowel wall that can run a wave of digestion with the brain disconnected.

Bridging names the job, because this cell touches neither the lining nor the muscle but sits between the sensing cell and the motor cell and carries the message across the gap, connecting also to other cells of its own kind so the message can travel along the gut.

Neuron marks the scale of the job, since of about twenty chemically distinct classes catalogued in the myenteric layer, nine are bridging cells, three carrying signals one way and six the other.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An interneuron talks only to other nerve cells, and in the gut they form chains running lengthways, which is why the intestine contracts behind a lump of food and relaxes ahead of it.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Almost all are Dogiel type I cells, meaning one thin output fibre and short flat leaf-shaped dendrites on a small angular body.

SIZE:

Human myenteric type I cell bodies span about 259 to 487 square micrometres, some 18 to 25 micrometres across, with axons from 2 millimetres to several centimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The split is directional: guinea-pig small intestine has one ascending and three descending classes, while the 2023 human colon survey found three ascending and six descending classes.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Overwhelmingly in the myenteric plexus between the two muscle coats, from oesophagus to internal anal sphincter.

Their axons travel inside the internodal strands, the cables joining one ganglion to the next, so the interface that matters is ganglion to strand to ganglion.

NUMBER:

Interneurons are 12 to 18 percent of enteric neurons, so about 55 million of the 400 million total, roughly 14 percent, or 0.055 percent of the whole nervous system.

That figure is the sum of the two entries that follow, not an extra population.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They are S neurons, where S means synaptic: brief excitatory potentials, a trough under 100 milliseconds, and fast excitation through nicotinic, 5-HT3 and P2X pores.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from sensory neurons, other interneurons and sympathetic and vagal fibres, and in human colon terminal baskets wrap 45 percent of myenteric cell bodies.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Single, unmyelinated, 0.3 to 1 micrometre thick, conducting at 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second, dropping swellings called varicosities at every ganglion.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine is the workhorse, with tachykinins added by ascending cells, nitric oxide, somatostatin or serotonin by descending cells, and adenosine triphosphate acting at P2X and P2Y1 receptors.

MYELINATION:

None, as in every intrinsic enteric neuron, so the system uses chains of short slow hops instead of one long fast fibre.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Higher per cell than sensory neurons during activity because these cells fire sustained trains, though at rest they are cheap.

PLASTICITY:

Muscularis macrophages in the muscle coat release bone morphogenetic protein 2 onto these neurons, and the neurons return colony stimulating factor 1, tuned by gut bacteria.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Elongated type II enteric glia inside the internodal strands wrap bundles of interneuron axons without ever myelinating them.

Glial S100B release is required to sustain the rhythmic colonic motor complex and acts mainly on cholinergic neurons, so silencing these glia leaves the rhythm in pieces.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove interneurons and a pellet provokes a ring of contraction exactly where it sits, with nothing squeezing behind and nothing opening ahead.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Slow potentials mediated by P2Y1 receptors hold a chain excited for hundreds of milliseconds, which is how relaxation outruns the contraction behind it.

They take presynaptic inhibition from sympathetic endings, so the brain can silence a chain without touching muscle, and their varicosities spill transmitter into open space.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: nicotinic, 5-HT3 and P2X fast excitation in millivolts, slow P2Y1 excitation, inhibitory noradrenaline from sympathetic fibres.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine plus a subclass-specific peptide or gas onto the next interneuron and onto motor neurons.

• STATE: membrane voltage, fast synaptic drive, slow synaptic drive, refractory countdown.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 60 millivolts, threshold minus 40 millivolts, chain reach 4 to 7 centimetres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 6 milliseconds, fast potential 15 to 30 milliseconds, slow P2Y1 potential 0.3 to 2 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: losing these relays fragments propagation into slow transit constipation, and Chagas disease destroys them, producing megacolon.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make one enteric interneuron relay an impulse onward and refuse to fire again while recovering.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called synaptic drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called recovery timer with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called relayed with initial value false.
If an upstream impulse arrived is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the sum of synaptic drive and 70.
    Set synaptic drive to the result.
End the conditional block.
Calculate the product of synaptic drive and 0.875.
Set synaptic drive to the result.
Calculate the difference of synaptic drive and voltage.
Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 6.
Calculate the sum of voltage and the result.
Set voltage to the result.
Calculate the difference of recovery timer and 1.
Set recovery timer to the result.
Check if recovery timer is less than or equal to 0.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Check if voltage is greater than 20.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set relayed to true.
        Set voltage to -15.
        Set recovery timer to 40.
    End the conditional block.
End the conditional block.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C chosen because a relay chain is a tight loop over a fixed array. */
#include <stdio.h>
#define N 40                /* forty interneurons in one chain */
#define DT 0.001            /* seconds per step */
int main(void) {
    double v[N], s[N], refrac[N];
    int fired[N], prev[N], i, t;
    for (i = 0; i < N; i++) { v[i] = -60.0; s[i] = 0.0; refrac[i] = 0.0; fired[i] = 0; }
    for (t = 0; t < 2000; t++) {
        for (i = 0; i < N; i++) prev[i] = fired[i];
        for (i = 0; i < N; i++) {
            if (i == 0 && t == 100) s[i] += 70.0;          /* sensory kick */
            if (i > 0 && prev[i - 1]) s[i] += 70.0;        /* nicotinic input */
            v[i] += (-(v[i] + 60.0) + s[i]) * DT / 0.006;  /* 6 ms membrane */
            s[i] -= s[i] * DT / 0.008;                     /* 8 ms decay */
            refrac[i] -= DT;
            fired[i] = 0;
            if (v[i] > -40.0 && refrac[i] <= 0.0) {
                fired[i] = 1; v[i] = -75.0; refrac[i] = 0.040;
                printf("t = %.3f s, cell %d relayed\n", t * DT, i);
            }
        }
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the gut neuron that touches no muscle, no lining and no vessel, whose axon runs lengthways for centimetres passing the message on.

CHAPTER 268. ASCENDING INTERNEURONS (Behind-The-Food Relay Neuron) (NON-COG)

When a lump of food arrives, somebody must shout upstream "squeeze in behind it", and this is the cell that shouts.

Ascending is a word for anatomists meaning towards the mouth, and it requires a reader to hold a diagram in their head before it means anything.

Behind-The-Food fixes the cell in the only frame a reader can picture, the lump of food itself, and says which side of it this cell serves, because towards the mouth is behind the food as it travels, which is exactly where the gut must squeeze to push.

Relay names the work, since the cell takes the message from the sensing cell and hands it on to the excitatory muscle motor neurons that produce the contraction.

Neuron marks it as a cell of modest and measurable reach, running up to about ten millimetres towards the mouth and using acetylcholine with tachykinins as its chemical signal.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An ascending interneuron is a relay whose axon runs towards the mouth, carrying news of a bolus, a lump of food, backwards so the muscle behind it contracts.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Dogiel type I shape in the stubby pattern: a small body with a few thick blunt leaf-like dendrites, and one axon that turns towards the mouth at once.

SIZE:

Cell bodies span about 259 to 487 square micrometres, some 18 to 25 micrometres across, with axons of several millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Guinea-pig small intestine has a single ascending class, while human colon has three, separated by which peptides accompany acetylcholine.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Myenteric plexus only, in the ganglia between longitudinal and circular muscle, from oesophagus to rectum.

Their axons occupy the oral half of the internodal strands, and the interface that matters is the ganglion-to-ganglion junction in the oral direction.

NUMBER:

About 18 million, roughly one third of the 55 million enteric interneurons, so 4.5 percent of enteric neurons and 0.018 percent of the whole nervous system.

Confidence is low, since the share is inferred from three ascending against six descending classes; this count is part of the interneuron total, not extra.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

S type, with fast nicotinic potentials of 10 to 25 millivolts and firing at 10 to 30 impulses per second, and tachykinin at NK3 receptors adds a slow depolarisation that lowers the threshold.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive as dense cholinergic baskets from sensory neurons and other ascending cells, with outputs to the next ascending cell and to excitatory muscle motor neurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Single, unmyelinated, 0.3 to 0.8 micrometres thick, conducting at 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second, strictly polarised towards the mouth.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine for fast transmission, substance P for slow excitation, and enkephalins, opioid peptides that damp neighbours; calretinin is the standard marker, not a transmitter.

MYELINATION:

None, so ascending signalling takes tens of milliseconds per centimetre and the contraction behind a bolus visibly lags the bolus.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Bursty rather than steady, nearly silent between meals then firing trains for the length of a peristaltic wave.

PLASTICITY:

Morphine and codeine silence this cholinergic pathway through mu opioid receptors, the main cause of opioid-induced constipation, and inflammation raises tachykinin expression here.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Star-shaped glia inside the ganglion sit between the incoming cholinergic baskets and this cell body, clearing potassium and transmitter debris.

Glial S100B sustains the colonic motor complex and acts preferentially on cholinergic neurons, which is this population.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete ascending interneurons and the gut only relaxes: everything opens ahead of a bolus, nothing closes behind it, and the contents slop back and forth.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The tachykinin slow potential is a genuine short-term memory that biases the gut towards repeating the movement it just made.

Enkephalin from these terminals feeds back onto the terminals themselves, and presynaptic alpha-2 receptors let sympathetic nerves veto release without changing firing.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: nicotinic fast excitation 10 to 25 millivolts per event, NK3 tachykinin slow excitation 0 to 1, alpha-2 adrenergic gain multiplier 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine and substance P onto the next ascending interneuron and onto excitatory muscle motor neurons.

• STATE: membrane voltage, fast drive, tachykinin drive, firing threshold, refractory countdown.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 58 millivolts, threshold minus 42 millivolts falling by up to 6, ganglion spacing 2 millimetres, relay delay 8 to 15 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 7 milliseconds, fast potential 20 milliseconds, refractory 30 milliseconds, tachykinin potential 5 to 20 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: silenced by opioids, giving constipation, and destroyed in Chagas disease and megacolon, where contraction behind the bolus fails.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to relay a contraction command one segment towards the mouth, more easily when tachykinin has recently been released.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called fast drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called tachykinin with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing threshold with initial value 16.
Create a boolean variable called passed on with initial value false.
If an impulse arrived from below is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the sum of fast drive and 40.
    Set fast drive to the result.
    Calculate the sum of tachykinin and 0.15.
    Set tachykinin to the result.
End the conditional block.
Calculate the product of fast drive and 0.95.
Set fast drive to the result.
Calculate the product of tachykinin and 0.999875.
Set tachykinin to the result.
Calculate the product of 6 and tachykinin.
Calculate the difference of 16 and the result.
Set firing threshold to the result.
Calculate the difference of fast drive and voltage.
Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 7.
Calculate the sum of voltage and the result.
Set voltage to the result.
Check if voltage is greater than firing threshold.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set passed on to true.
    Set voltage to -12.
End the conditional block.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python chosen because the oral relay is one short readable loop.
DT, SEG, BOLUS = 0.001, 30, 10        # 30 ganglia 2 mm apart, bolus at 10
v = [-58.0] * SEG
epsp = [0.0] * SEG
slow = [0.0] * SEG
refrac = [0.0] * SEG
carry = [False] * SEG
for step in range(1500):
    fired = [False] * SEG
    for i in range(SEG):
        driven = i == BOLUS and 100 <= step < 300 and step % 50 == 0
        if driven or carry[i]:
            epsp[i] += 40.0               # fast nicotinic input
            slow[i] += 0.15               # tachykinin builds excitability
        epsp[i] -= epsp[i] * DT / 0.020
        slow[i] -= slow[i] * DT / 8.0
        v[i] += (-(v[i] + 58.0) + epsp[i]) * DT / 0.007
        refrac[i] = max(0.0, refrac[i] - DT)
        if v[i] > -42.0 - 6.0 * min(1.0, slow[i]) and refrac[i] <= 0.0:
            v[i], refrac[i], fired[i] = -70.0, 0.030, True
    carry = [False] * SEG
    for i in range(1, SEG):
        if fired[i]:
            carry[i - 1] = True           # hand one step towards the mouth
    if any(fired):
        reach = (BOLUS - min(i for i in range(SEG) if fired[i])) * 2
        print("t = %.3f s, reached %d mm oral" % (step * DT, reach))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the cholinergic, calretinin-positive cell wrapped in dense cholinergic baskets and pointed firmly at the mouth.

CHAPTER 269. DESCENDING INTERNEURONS (Ahead-Of-The-Food Relay Neuron) (NON-COG)

Ahead of every swallowed mouthful a wave of relaxation runs down the gut like a doorman opening doors.

Descending is the matching anatomist's word, meaning towards the anus, and it is equally opaque on its own.

Ahead-Of-The-Food places the cell on the far side of the food from its partner, using the same picture so the pair can be read as one system, because ahead of the food the gut must relax and open rather than squeeze.

Relay again names the handing-on, since this cell carries the sensing cell's message forward to the inhibitory muscle motor neurons whose nitric oxide slackens the ring of muscle.

Neuron marks it as the more elaborate arm of the circuit, with six chemically distinct classes described against three running the other way, and the inhibitory motor cells it commands reaching as far as twenty-five millimetres down the gut.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A descending interneuron is a relay whose axon runs towards the anus, so the muscle in front of a bolus relaxes before the lump arrives.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Dogiel type I shape in the spiny pattern, with thin prickly dendrites and a single axon that turns anally at once.

SIZE:

Cell bodies span about 259 to 487 square micrometres, some 18 to 25 micrometres across, with axons of 5 to 20 millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Guinea pig has three descending classes, all cholinergic, adding nitric oxide synthase, somatostatin, or serotonin.

Human colon has six, and in one study 29 percent carried both choline acetyltransferase and nitric oxide synthase.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Myenteric plexus throughout the gut, densest in small intestine and colon, with axons filling the anal half of the internodal strands.

The critical interface is myenteric ganglion to deep muscular plexus, where inhibitory motor neurons cluster.

NUMBER:

About 37 million, two thirds of the enteric interneurons, so 9 percent of enteric neurons and 0.037 percent of the whole nervous system.

Confidence is low, since the share is inferred from six descending against three ascending classes; this count is part of the interneuron total, not extra.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

S type, with fast nicotinic and P2X potentials, but the signature is a slow potential at P2Y1 receptors, which answer adenosine triphosphate indirectly.

That potential lasts hundreds of milliseconds and is how these interneurons transmit during descending inhibition, so a chain once started keeps running.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs from sensory neurons, other descending interneurons and vagal fibres, with outputs onto the next descending cell and onto inhibitory muscle motor neurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Single, unmyelinated, 0.3 to 1 micrometre thick, conducting at 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second, polarised anally, the somatostatin class running furthest.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine is the fast transmitter in every class, adenosine triphosphate carries slow excitation at P2Y1 receptors, and class partners are nitric oxide, somatostatin, or serotonin.

MYELINATION:

None, and the slowness is offset by the long slow potential, which keeps a chain firing.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Sustained rather than bursty, because the slow potential holds the cell depolarised for seconds, and nitrergic members burn extra fuel.

PLASTICITY:

Ageing, diabetes and inflammation preferentially damage nitrergic descending circuitry, while gut bacteria remodel it through serotonin pathways.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Elongated glia in the internodal strands escort these long axons and, unusually, carry receptors for adenosine triphosphate, the transmitter these neurons use.

Glial calcium waves therefore travel alongside the descending neural wave.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove descending interneurons and every ring ahead of a bolus stays shut, so contraction behind a closed door achieves nothing.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The P2Y1 slow potential is a chemical timer turning a millisecond spike into a second of readiness, making the chain a delay line.

Their nitric oxide is a gas that crosses membranes freely and acts on anything within about 100 micrometres, the clearest volume transmission in the body.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: nicotinic and P2X fast excitation, P2Y1 slow excitation 0 to 1, presynaptic alpha-2 adrenergic inhibition.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine plus nitric oxide, somatostatin or serotonin onto the next descending cell and onto inhibitory motor neurons.

• STATE: membrane voltage, slow purinergic potential, refractory countdown, fixed class label.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 60 millivolts, threshold minus 40 millivolts, slow potential up to 30 millivolts, chain reach 4 to 7 centimetres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 8 milliseconds, P2Y1 potential 0.3 to 2 seconds, refractory 50 milliseconds, wave travel 1 to 4 millimetres per second.

• FAILURE MODE: failed descending inhibition is the core lesion of achalasia and Hirschsprung disease, and its decay in diabetes gives gastroparesis.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to carry a wave of relaxation one segment towards the anus using a slow purinergic potential.
Create a number variable called slow potential with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called recovery timer with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called relaxation passed on with initial value false.
If an impulse arrived from above is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the sum of slow potential and 0.9.
    Set slow potential to the result.
End the conditional block.
Calculate the product of slow potential and 0.9975.
Set slow potential to the result.
Calculate the product of 30 and slow potential.
Calculate the difference of the result and voltage.
Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 8.
Calculate the sum of voltage and the result.
Set voltage to the result.
Calculate the difference of recovery timer and 1.
Set recovery timer to the result.
Check if recovery timer is less than or equal to 0.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Check if voltage is greater than 20.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set relaxation passed on to true.
        Set voltage to -12.
        Set recovery timer to 50.
    End the conditional block.
End the conditional block.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

// JavaScript chosen so the wave can be watched in any browser console.
const N = 60, DT = 0.001;              // 60 ganglia 2 mm apart, 120 mm of gut
const slow = new Array(N).fill(0);     // P2Y1 slow potential, 0 to 1
const v = new Array(N).fill(-60);      // membrane voltage in millivolts
const refrac = new Array(N).fill(0);
let fired = new Array(N).fill(false);
let furthest = -1;
for (let t = 0; t < 3000; t++) {
  const prev = fired.slice();
  fired = new Array(N).fill(false);
  for (let i = 0; i < N; i++) {
    if (i === 0 && t >= 200 && t < 400) slow[i] += 0.9 * DT / 0.05;  // bolus
    if (i > 0 && prev[i - 1]) slow[i] += 0.9;                        // relay
    slow[i] -= slow[i] * DT / 0.400;                                 // 400 ms
    v[i] += (-(v[i] + 60) + 30 * slow[i]) * DT / 0.008;              // 8 ms
    refrac[i] -= DT;
    if (v[i] > -40 && refrac[i] <= 0) {
      fired[i] = true; v[i] = -72; refrac[i] = 0.050;
    }
  }
  const front = fired.lastIndexOf(true);
  if (front > furthest) {
    furthest = front;
    console.log((t * DT).toFixed(3) + " s: reached " + front * 2 + " mm anal");
  }
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the gut neuron pointed at the anus, sparsely basketed, driven by a slow purinergic potential and carrying nitric oxide, somatostatin or serotonin.

CHAPTER 270. EXCITATORY MUSCLE MOTOR NEURONS (NON-COG)

This is the cell that makes the squeeze, the last nerve in the chain and the only one your gut muscle obeys.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An excitatory muscle motor neuron is the final path from the gut's brain to its muscle, releasing acetylcholine and a peptide that let calcium into muscle.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Dogiel type I shape in the stubby pattern, with one axon that leaves the nerve net and runs through muscle as a bare fibre studded with swellings called varicosities.

SIZE:

Cell bodies span about 259 to 487 square micrometres, and in human colon 95 percent of traced muscle motor neurons lay within 6 millimetres of their target.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

They divide by target, circular or longitudinal muscle, and human colon holds four excitatory classes separated by which peptides accompany acetylcholine.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in the myenteric plexus from oesophagus to internal anal sphincter, with a few in the submucosal plexus supplying the thin muscle sheet under the lining.

Terminals lie in the tertiary plexus on longitudinal muscle and the deep muscular plexus inside circular muscle, meeting the SIP syncytium of muscle, interstitial cells of Cajal and platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha cells.

NUMBER:

About 70 million, some 17.5 percent of the 400 million enteric neurons and 0.07 percent of the whole nervous system, the largest class in this section.

Confidence is moderate: guinea pig gives 24 percent of myenteric neurons for longitudinal muscle plus 12 percent for circular.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

S type, with fast nicotinic potentials, a trough of tens of milliseconds, and trains of 5 to 30 impulses per second between silent intervals.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from sensory neurons and ascending interneurons as dense cholinergic baskets, and outputs reach muscarinic receptors, tachykinin receptors and intramuscular interstitial cells of Cajal.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Single, unmyelinated, 0.3 to 1 micrometre thick, short, running locally or slightly orally, ending in hundreds of varicosities over a few square millimetres.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine is the main transmitter, cleared within tens of milliseconds by acetylcholinesterase, while substance P and neurokinin A give a slower contraction that survives atropine.

MYELINATION:

None, and none is needed, because the muscle sheet spreads excitation itself, so the gut uses many slow fibres rather than fast ones.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The highest sustained demand here, since these cells refill hundreds of vesicles at hundreds of varicosities at every wave, and fail early in ischaemia.

PLASTICITY:

Muscle above an obstruction hypertrophies so the same release gives more force, and inflammation raises tachykinin, adding atropine-resistant cramps.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Spindle-shaped glia inside the muscle coats wrap intramuscular axons, buffer the potassium heavy firing releases and recycle choline beside the varicosities.

Muscularis macrophages act as local microglia, supporting these terminals and taking colony stimulating factor 1 from the neurons in return.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove excitatory motor neurons and the gut becomes a slack bag: the muscle still twitches, but nothing turns a decision into a real contraction.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

They write into a shared electrical medium rather than commanding muscle, since their acetylcholine acts first on interstitial cells of Cajal, which pass it on through gap junctions.

Transmitter escapes varicosities into a gap 50 to 100 nanometres wide, recruiting a field rather than one target, and they release colony stimulating factor 1 to local macrophages.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: nicotinic fast excitation 10 to 25 millivolts, tachykinin slow excitation, alpha-2 adrenergic gain multiplier.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine onto M2 and M3 receptors and substance P onto NK1 and NK2 receptors of muscle and interstitial cells of Cajal.

• STATE: membrane voltage, acetylcholine level, tachykinin level, muscle voltage, normalised force.

• PARAMETERS: muscle rest minus 55 millivolts, mechanical threshold minus 45 millivolts, acetylcholine gain 9 and tachykinin gain 7 millivolts per unit.

• TIME CONSTANTS: acetylcholine clearance 60 milliseconds, tachykinin 2.5 seconds, muscle membrane 30 milliseconds, force 150 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: losing cholinergic drive gives the flaccid bowel of pseudo-obstruction, while unopposed drive gives spasm and a tight sphincter.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a burst of impulses in an excitatory muscle motor neuron into a change in muscle voltage.
Create a number variable called acetylcholine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called tachykinin with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called muscle voltage with initial value -55.
Create a number variable called target voltage with initial value -55.
If the motor neuron fired this millisecond is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the sum of acetylcholine and 1.
    Set acetylcholine to the result.
    Calculate the sum of tachykinin and 0.35.
    Set tachykinin to the result.
End the conditional block.
Calculate the product of acetylcholine and 0.9835.
Set acetylcholine to the result.
Calculate the product of tachykinin and 0.9996.
Set tachykinin to the result.
Calculate the product of 9 and acetylcholine.
Set target voltage to the result.
Calculate the product of 7 and tachykinin.
Calculate the sum of target voltage and the result.
Calculate the difference of the result and 55.
Set target voltage to the result.
Calculate the difference of target voltage and muscle voltage.
Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 30.
Calculate the sum of muscle voltage and the result.
Set muscle voltage to the result.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python chosen so the fast and slow arms read side by side.
DT = 0.001                                       # seconds per step
ach = tk = 0.0                                   # transmitter at the muscle
vm, force = -55.0, 0.0                           # millivolts, 0 to 1
for step in range(4000):
    t = step * DT
    if 0.4 <= t < 0.8 and step % 100 == 0:       # 10 Hz burst for 400 ms
        ach += 1.0                               # varicosities release
        tk += 0.35                               # peptide needs bursts
    ach -= ach * DT / 0.060                      # cholinesterase clears it
    tk -= tk * DT / 2.500                        # peptide lingers
    target = -55.0 + 9.0 * ach + 7.0 * tk        # muscarinic plus tachykinin
    vm += (target - vm) * DT / 0.030             # muscle membrane, 30 ms
    drive = min(1.0, max(0.0, vm + 45.0) / 25.0) # threshold minus 45 mV
    force += (drive - force) * DT / 0.150        # force lags voltage
    if step % 400 == 0:
        print("t = %.1f s, Vm = %.1f mV, force = %.3f" % (t, vm, force))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the cholinergic, heavily basketed cell whose short axon ends as a string of beads inside muscle, and whose failure makes the bowel go limp.

CHAPTER 271. INHIBITORY MUSCLE MOTOR NEURONS (NON-COG)

Every swallow depends on a nerve cell whose entire working life is spent telling muscle not to squeeze.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Gut muscle carries a constant rhythm and tone, so relaxation must be commanded, and this cell commands it.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Dogiel type I shape in the spiny pattern, with an axon that turns anally before entering muscle and ends in varicosities in the deep muscular plexus.

SIZE:

Cell bodies span about 259 to 487 square micrometres, some 18 to 25 micrometres across, with anal axons of 2 to 15 millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Human colon holds four inhibitory classes, divided by target muscle and by their mixture of nitric oxide, vasoactive intestinal peptide and adenosine triphosphate.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Myenteric plexus from oesophagus to internal anal sphincter, with terminals in the deep muscular plexus, and specialised members at the lower oesophageal sphincter, the pylorus and the internal anal sphincter.

The interface is again the SIP syncytium, but split: the purinergic arm acts on platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha cells, the nitrergic arm on interstitial cells.

NUMBER:

About 45 million, some 11 percent of the 400 million enteric neurons and 0.045 percent of the whole nervous system, taking this part's total to about 210 million.

Confidence is moderate: guinea pig gives 16 percent of myenteric neurons for circular muscle, and nitric oxide synthase marks 20 to 40 percent in human colon.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Many fire tonically at a few impulses per second, holding muscle relaxed by default, so contraction needs them switched off.

Their firing gives a two-phase inhibitory junction potential: a fast purinergic dip near 150 milliseconds, then a slow nitrergic trough.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs from descending interneurons, sensory neurons and vagal fibres that trigger receptive relaxation, with outputs onto muscle, interstitial cells of Cajal and platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Single, unmyelinated, 0.3 to 1 micrometre thick, longer than the excitatory equivalent, and because nitric oxide is a gas its field exceeds its arbor.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Nitric oxide, made on demand by neuronal nitric oxide synthase, gives the slow relaxation, adenosine triphosphate at P2Y1 receptors the fast dip, and vasoactive intestinal peptide a long tail.

MYELINATION:

None, and speed matters less because two of the three transmitters work through cascades taking hundreds of milliseconds.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Distinctive, because making nitric oxide burns arginine, oxygen and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate continuously, and losing tetrahydrobiopterin yields superoxide.

PLASTICITY:

Diabetes lowers nitric oxide synthase before the neuron dies, partly reversibly with insulin, and nitrergic neurons from human stem cells improved motility in mice.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Spindle glia inside the muscle matter more here than anywhere, because nitric oxide is destroyed within seconds by oxygen radicals.

Muscularis macrophages nearby make the reactive oxygen that kills these terminals, so the glia-macrophage balance decides whether the gut opens.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove inhibitory motor neurons and the region clamps shut: the gullet will not pass food, the anus will not pass stool.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Nitric oxide is not stored in vesicles but made on demand when calcium enters the terminal, then diffuses to any cell within 100 micrometres.

The purinergic arm writes to a relay layer rather than to muscle, and their tonic firing makes much of gut control disinhibition.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: nicotinic excitation from descending interneurons, vagal drive, oesophageal stretch, sympathetic modulation.

• OUTPUTS: nitric oxide onto muscle and interstitial cells of Cajal, adenosine triphosphate onto P2Y1 receptors, peptide onto both.

• STATE: membrane voltage, tonic rate, purinergic, nitrergic and peptide levels, muscle voltage.

• PARAMETERS: muscle rest minus 55 millivolts, junction potential 10 to 25 millivolts, purinergic weight 2.5, nitrergic weight 1.8.

• TIME CONSTANTS: purinergic 120 milliseconds, nitrergic 900 milliseconds, peptide 6 seconds, muscle membrane 50 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: selective loss causes achalasia, infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, gastroparesis, Hirschsprung disease and chronic pseudo-obstruction.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a burst of impulses in an inhibitory motor neuron into a two-stage relaxation.
Create a number variable called purine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called nitric oxide with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called muscle voltage with initial value -55.
Create a number variable called target voltage with initial value -55.
If the motor neuron fired this millisecond is true, then perform the following actions.
    Calculate the sum of purine and 1.
    Set purine to the result.
    Calculate the sum of nitric oxide and 1.
    Set nitric oxide to the result.
End the conditional block.
Calculate the product of purine and 0.99169.
Set purine to the result.
Calculate the product of nitric oxide and 0.99889.
Set nitric oxide to the result.
Set target voltage to -55.
Calculate the product of 2.5 and purine.
Calculate the difference of target voltage and the result.
Set target voltage to the result.
Calculate the product of 1.8 and nitric oxide.
Calculate the difference of target voltage and the result.
Set target voltage to the result.
Calculate the difference of target voltage and muscle voltage.
Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 50.
Calculate the sum of muscle voltage and the result.
Set muscle voltage to the result.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C chosen because the three arms run on different clocks. */
#include <stdio.h>
#define DT 0.001            /* seconds per step */
int main(void) {
    double purine = 0.0;    /* ATP at P2Y1 on PDGFRa cells */
    double no = 0.0;        /* nitric oxide on muscle and ICC */
    double vip = 0.0;       /* vasoactive intestinal peptide */
    double vm = -55.0;      /* muscle voltage, millivolts */
    double target, t;
    int step, spike;
    for (step = 0; step < 4000; step++) {
        t = step * DT;
        spike = (t > 0.5 && t < 0.7 && (step % 50) == 0);  /* 20 Hz burst */
        if (spike) { purine += 1.0; no += 1.0; vip += 0.25; }
        purine -= purine * DT / 0.120;   /* fast dip */
        no     -= no     * DT / 0.900;   /* slow trough */
        vip    -= vip    * DT / 6.000;   /* peptide tail */
        target = -55.0 - 2.5 * purine - 1.8 * no - 1.2 * vip;
        vm += (target - vm) * DT / 0.050;
        if ((step % 200) == 0) printf("%.2f s, Vm = %.1f mV\n", t, vm);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron whose transmitter is a gas made on the spot, named in four diseases of sphincters that will not open.

CHAPTER 272. SECRETOMOTOR NEURONS (NON-COG)

Roughly nine litres of watery fluid pour into your small intestine every day, and a thin sheet of nerve cells hidden under the lining decides how much of it is pushed out in the first place.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A secretomotor neuron is the final command cell for fluid secretion by the gut lining.

It sits in the submucosal plexus, which is a lace of tiny nerve cell clusters buried in the soft layer just beneath the lining, and it sends a single axon a fraction of a millimetre to the crypts, the narrow pits where new lining cells are born.

When it fires, crypt cells pump chloride, a negatively charged salt particle, out into the gut cavity, and sodium and water follow it by simple physics.

This entry covers the members of the family whose axons end only on the lining and never on a blood vessel.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is small, smooth and oval, with one axon and a modest crown of short dendrites, the receiving branches, whose tips are flattened like little leaves.

That is the shape the Russian anatomist Alexander Dogiel called type I in 1899.

The axon leaves the ganglion, threads up through the thin muscle sheet of the mucosa, and breaks into a spray of varicosities, which are bead-like swellings strung along an axon that release chemical messenger without forming a classical junction.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 15 to 25 micrometres across in guinea pig and roughly 20 to 35 micrometres in human tissue, so about one third the width of a human hair.

Most axons travel under 3 millimetres, mainly around the circumference of the gut and into the mucosa directly overhead.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There are two chemical families.

Cholinergic secretomotor neurons carry the enzyme choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), which builds acetylcholine, and are usually loaded with neuropeptide Y (NPY), somatostatin, galanin and dynorphin.

Non-cholinergic secretomotor neurons carry vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) instead, and in mouse the ones that supply only the lining are distinguished from the ones that also supply vessels by carrying tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), an enzyme in the noradrenaline pathway.

In guinea pig small intestine the cholinergic NPY class is about 33 per cent of submucosal neurons and the VIP class about 43 per cent.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Submucosal ganglia along the whole small intestine and colon, and in humans these form two distinct sheets, an inner submucosal plexus close to the lining and an outer submucosal plexus close to the circular muscle.

The critical interface is the muscularis mucosae, the hair-thin muscle sheet the axons must cross to reach the crypt epithelium, and the axons then run inside the lamina propria, the soft tissue core of each villus.

Submucosal ganglia are sparse in the human oesophagus and stomach, so this cell is overwhelmingly an intestinal resident.

NUMBER:

Best estimate about 35 million in an adult human, roughly 9 per cent of the 400 million neurons of the enteric nervous system (ENS), the gut's own nervous system.

Confidence is low to moderate, because the figure is scaled from guinea pig proportions and from human counts showing 68 to 73 per cent of submucosal neurons are cholinergic; nobody has counted them directly in a whole human gut.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

This is an S neuron, meaning synaptic, and in a small human study Dogiel type I cells rested at minus 58.0 plus or minus 8.5 millivolts with an input resistance of 59.2 plus or minus 22.5 megaohms.

Fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs), which are brief voltage nudges caused by an incoming signal, arrive through nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and are often large enough to fire the cell on their own.

There is no slow afterhyperpolarisation, so the cell can follow its input faithfully instead of pausing after each spike.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from intrinsic primary afferent neurons (IPANs), the gut's own sensory cells, from cholinergic interneurons descending in the submucosal plexus, and from neighbouring cholinergic submucosal neurons that converge and diverge to amplify the signal.

Sympathetic axons from outside the gut clamp the cell down through alpha-2 adrenoceptors, and this is the main brake.

The output is not a true synapse at all: varicosities dump transmitter into the space beside the crypt cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Fine, bare and slow, roughly 0.1 to 1 micrometre thick, conducting at a walking pace of about 0.1 to 0.5 metres per second.

A single axon can supply several crypts, so one cell governs a small patch of lining rather than a single cell.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine acts on muscarinic M3 receptors on crypt cells, raising internal calcium and opening chloride channels.

VIP acts on VPAC1 receptors, switching on the enzyme adenylyl cyclase, raising cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP), and opening the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), the chloride channel that is broken in cystic fibrosis.

Neuropeptide Y and somatostatin work the other way and restrain secretion, so the same cell carries both accelerator and brake.

MYELINATION:

None.

No axon anywhere in the enteric nervous system is myelinated, because distances are short and enteric glia, not Schwann cells, wrap the bundles, so conduction is deliberately slow and cheap.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The neuron itself is modest, but the tissue it drives is not, since pumping salt against a gradient is one of the body's larger energy bills.

Enteric neurons burn glucose and glutamine and sit in one of the best perfused tissues in the body, which is why the submucosa is packed with capillaries.

PLASTICITY:

Cholera toxin makes guinea pig submucosal secretomotor neurons sustainedly hyperexcitable, an effect that outlasts the toxin and depends on serotonin type 3, nicotinic and neurokinin 1 receptors.

Inflammation shifts the peptide mix, raising VIP expression, and long opioid exposure suppresses then re-sensitises these cells, which is why opioid constipation rebounds.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Two glial populations matter here and both do something unusual.

Intraganglionic submucosal glia carry VPAC receptors and answer neuronal adenosine triphosphate (ATP) with calcium waves that pass through connexin-43 hemichannels, so the glia eavesdrop on the very transmitter the neuron uses.

Mucosal glia leave the ganglion entirely and sit inside the lamina propria between the nerve terminal and the epithelium, a position no glial cell holds anywhere else in the body, where they release ATP and prostaglandins that tune secretion and help hold the barrier shut.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the lining becomes a passive sponge that only absorbs.

The thin watery film that floats mucus off the surface thins, bacteria press directly against the epithelium, and the flush reflex that washes an irritant away is simply gone.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This neuron does not synapse onto its target; it uses volume transmission, releasing messenger into a shared space so one burst changes the state of a whole crypt for minutes.

Slow EPSPs lasting tens of seconds close potassium channels and shift the cell into a different operating mode rather than merely adding a spike.

After cholera toxin, protein kinase A driven changes leave the cell excitable for days, which is memory in a motor neuron.

It also talks to mucosal mast cells, immune cells that release histamine, in both directions, and its VIP acts on immune cells as well as on epithelium.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: nicotinic fast EPSPs from IPANs and interneurons at 0 to 40 hertz; slow EPSPs from serotonin and tachykinins; alpha-2 adrenergic inhibition from sympathetic axons at 0 to 10 hertz; mast cell histamine and prostaglandin as a modulatory scalar from 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine and VIP released as volume transmission onto crypt enterocytes, expressed as a chloride flux in microamperes per square centimetre of epithelium.

• STATE: membrane potential in millivolts; slow EPSP conductance; presynaptic vesicle pool; target cell cyclic AMP; target cell calcium; a long-term excitability scalar.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential minus 58 millivolts; input resistance 59 megaohms; threshold about minus 38 millivolts; fast EPSP amplitude 3 to 25 millivolts; refractory period about 4 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; fast EPSP 20 milliseconds; slow EPSP 10 to 60 seconds; target cyclic AMP about 8 seconds; target calcium about 1 second; toxin induced hyperexcitability 1 to 7 days.

• FAILURE MODE: runaway firing gives secretory diarrhoea as in cholera and travellers' diarrhoea; silence gives dry, sticky, slow-moving contents and constipation, as in opioid use and in enteric neuropathy.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a burst of secretomotor spikes into fluid secreted by one intestinal crypt.
Create a number variable called cyclic_amp with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called calcium with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called chloride_flux with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called total_fluid with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step_seconds with initial value 0.001.
Create a list variable called spike_train with initial value empty list.
Call the function named load_spike_flags_for_twenty_seconds.
For each spike_flag in spike_train, perform the following operations.
    If spike_flag is equal to 1, then perform the following actions.
        Set cyclic_amp to the sum of cyclic_amp and 0.6.
        Set calcium to the sum of calcium and 0.25.
    End the conditional block.
    Set cyclic_amp to the difference of cyclic_amp and the product of cyclic_amp and 0.000125.
    Set calcium to the difference of calcium and the product of calcium and 0.0011.
    Set chloride_flux to the quotient of cyclic_amp divided by the sum of cyclic_amp and 1.
    Set chloride_flux to the sum of chloride_flux and the quotient of calcium divided by the sum of calcium and 1.
    If chloride_flux is greater than 1, then perform the following actions.
        Set chloride_flux to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Set total_fluid to the sum of total_fluid and the product of chloride_flux and step_seconds.
End the loop.
Display total_fluid to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the model is a handful of coupled leaky variables and Python keeps that arithmetic visible rather than hiding it in boilerplate.

# Secretomotor drive to one intestinal crypt.
DT = 0.001  # seconds per step

def crypt_secretion(spike_times, duration=20.0):
    camp = 0.0       # VIP -> adenylyl cyclase -> cyclic AMP, arbitrary units
    calcium = 0.0    # acetylcholine -> M3 -> calcium rise, arbitrary units
    total = 0.0      # cumulative chloride flux
    peak = 0.0
    steps = int(duration / DT)
    spikes = {round(t / DT) for t in spike_times}
    for i in range(steps):
        if i in spikes:
            camp += 0.60      # VIP released by this spike
            calcium += 0.25   # acetylcholine released by this spike
        camp -= camp * DT / 8.0        # cyclic AMP decays, tau 8 s
        calcium -= calcium * DT / 0.9  # calcium decays, tau 0.9 s
        cftr = camp / (camp + 1.0)        # cyclic AMP opens CFTR, saturating
        cacc = calcium / (calcium + 1.0)  # calcium opens a second Cl channel
        # the two channel families overlap, so they are combined, not added
        flux = 12.0 * (cftr + cacc - cftr * cacc)
        total += flux * DT
        if flux > peak:
            peak = flux
    return total, peak

burst = [1.0 + 0.05 * k for k in range(40)]  # 2 s of firing at 20 Hz
amount, top = crypt_secretion(burst)
print("peak flux %.2f, total secreted %.1f" % (top, amount))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small uniaxonal cell body in a submucosal ganglion whose only axon ends among crypt cells and touches no blood vessel and no muscle, carrying either neuropeptide Y with choline acetyltransferase or vasoactive intestinal peptide with tyrosine hydroxylase, firing repetitively with no long pause afterwards.

CHAPTER 273. SECRETOMOTOR AND VASODILATOR NEURONS (NON-COG)

This is the cell that solved a plumbing problem: you cannot pour litres of water into the gut without first opening the tap that feeds it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This neuron has one cell body and two jobs, because its axon forks.

One branch runs to the crypts of the gut lining and orders fluid secretion; the other branch runs to the small arteries in the submucosa and orders them to widen.

It therefore couples demand to supply, since the water secreted into the gut comes out of the bloodstream and must be replaced within seconds.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A smooth oval cell body in a submucosal ganglion with short lamellar dendrites, and one axon that divides within a millimetre or two of leaving.

The vascular branch coils around an arteriole, a small artery roughly a tenth of a millimetre wide, forming a basket of varicosities in the outer coat of the vessel.

The mucosal branch climbs to the crypt and fans out there.

SIZE:

Cell body roughly 20 to 30 micrometres across, similar to its mucosa-only cousin.

The two branches together may cover 4 to 6 millimetres of tissue, making this one of the wider-reaching submucosal cells.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two chemical classes are recognised in guinea pig and mouse.

The non-cholinergic class carries vasoactive intestinal peptide with neuropeptide Y and calretinin, a calcium-binding protein used as a marker.

The cholinergic class carries choline acetyltransferase with calretinin, and often calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and somatostatin.

Importantly, staining shows vasoactive intestinal peptide and the vesicular acetylcholine transporter are not found in the same axons on intestinal arteries, so the two classes run in parallel rather than mixing.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Submucosal ganglia of the small intestine and colon, in both the inner and the outer submucosal plexus in humans.

Its targets straddle two very different compartments: the epithelium of the crypts inside the mucosa, and the arterioles of the submucosal vascular plexus, so this cell physically bridges the neural, epithelial and vascular tissues of the gut wall.

NUMBER:

Best estimate about 45 million in an adult human, roughly 11 per cent of the 400 million neurons of the enteric nervous system.

Confidence is low, because the dual projection can only be proven by tracing both branches of one axon, which has been done in animals and not at scale in humans.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

An S neuron with fast nicotinic excitatory postsynaptic potentials and no slow afterhyperpolarisation, resting near minus 55 to minus 60 millivolts.

Many of these cells fire tonically at 0.5 to 2 hertz even at rest, which is what keeps a baseline of blood flow and secretion running between meals.

Slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials lift that baseline for tens of seconds after a meal arrives.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs from intrinsic primary afferent neurons sampling the lumen, from submucosal and myenteric cholinergic interneurons, and from vagal pathways relayed through enteric circuits.

Sympathetic noradrenergic axons inhibit the cell body directly, which shuts down secretion and dilation together during exercise or blood loss.

Outputs are non-synaptic release onto crypt epithelium and onto vascular smooth muscle and endothelium.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Bare, fine, roughly 0.2 to 1 micrometre thick, conducting at about 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second, with hundreds of varicosities distributed unequally between the two branches.

Because release is by diffusion, the vascular branch does not need to touch the muscle cells it controls.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Vasoactive intestinal peptide acts on VPAC1 receptors on crypt cells to open CFTR chloride channels, and on VPAC receptors on vascular smooth muscle to relax it directly.

Acetylcholine acts on muscarinic M3 receptors on crypt cells, and on M3 receptors on the endothelium, the single cell layer lining the vessel, which then makes nitric oxide, a gas that diffuses into the muscle and relaxes it.

Neuropeptide Y and somatostatin act as restraining co-transmitters.

MYELINATION:

None, for the same reason as every other enteric neuron: distances are short, glia rather than Schwann cells wrap the bundles, and slow conduction is adequate for a tissue whose responses take seconds.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest for the neuron, large for the consequences, since after a meal blood flow in the superior mesenteric artery can roughly double and the mucosa takes most of that increase.

Continuous low-rate firing means these cells never fully rest, so their mitochondria are correspondingly busy.

PLASTICITY:

Chronic inflammation raises vasoactive intestinal peptide content and can uncouple the two branches, giving secretion without matching flow.

In experimental Chagas disease, caused by the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi, neurons containing vasoactive intestinal peptide and calretinin survive disproportionately while others die, so this population is unusually robust.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Glia here work at two addresses.

Mucosal glia near the crypt do what they do for any secretomotor terminal, but the glia along the vascular branch behave more like brain astrocytes at a blood vessel, sitting between the axon and the vessel wall and shaping the local chemical environment.

Enteric glia are also required for the barrier and for normal transit, so removing them degrades both halves of this cell's job at once.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the gut can still secrete and can still dilate, but not together.

The result is a mucosa that dries out at the villus tips during a large meal, because fluid leaves faster than blood replaces it, and the tips are the part of the lining that dies first when supply fails.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The forked axon means a single spike train is broadcast to two tissues at once, so the cell performs a fixed allocation rather than a decision.

Release is volume transmission at both ends, and the vascular branch also recruits the endothelium as a second messenger relay, making the vessel itself part of the computation.

Nitric oxide generated by the endothelium diffuses backwards and can modulate the nerve terminal, a retrograde message.

The cell also participates in functional hyperaemia, the local matching of blood flow to work, which is the gut version of the mechanism that lights up a brain scan.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: nicotinic fast EPSPs at 0 to 30 hertz from IPANs and interneurons; slow EPSPs from tachykinins and serotonin; sympathetic alpha-2 inhibition at 0 to 15 hertz; luminal nutrient signal relayed as a scalar from 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: mucosal chloride secretion in microlitres per square centimetre per minute; arteriolar dilation expressed as a change in radius in micrometres or as a flow multiplier from 1.0 to about 3.0.

• STATE: membrane potential; transmitter pool; crypt cyclic AMP; arteriolar smooth muscle tone; an internal deficit accumulator recording water demanded but not supplied.

• PARAMETERS: resting potential minus 57 millivolts; tonic rate 0.5 to 2 hertz; maximum flow multiplier about 3; branch split ratio roughly 50:50 by varicosity count.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; transmitter clearance about 5 seconds; epithelial response about 1 second; arteriolar smooth muscle relaxation 3 to 6 seconds; postprandial hyperaemia 30 to 90 minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of the vascular branch produces villus tip ischaemia during digestion; loss of the mucosal branch produces dry hard stool with normal blood flow; sympathetic overdrive during shock silences both and is a step towards non-occlusive mesenteric ischaemia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to send one spike train down both branches of a secretomotor and vasodilator neuron and to record any shortfall between water secreted and water supplied.
Create a number variable called transmitter with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called secretion with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called flow with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called target_flow with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called supply with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called deficit with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 6.
Create a number variable called step_seconds with initial value 0.01.
Repeat the following steps exactly 3000 times.
    Set transmitter to the sum of transmitter and the product of firing_rate and 0.0005.
    Set transmitter to the difference of transmitter and the product of transmitter and 0.002.
    Set secretion to the product of 6 and the quotient of transmitter divided by the sum of transmitter and 0.4.
    Set target_flow to the sum of 1 and the product of 2.2 and the quotient of transmitter divided by the sum of transmitter and 0.6.
    Set flow to the sum of flow and the product of the difference of target_flow and flow and 0.0025.
    Set supply to the product of 5.5 and the difference of flow and 1.
    If secretion is greater than supply, then perform the following actions.
        Set deficit to the sum of deficit and the product of the difference of secretion and supply and step_seconds.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display secretion to the console.
Display flow to the console.
Display deficit to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the interesting part is bookkeeping across two targets with different speeds, and Python makes the two update rules sit side by side and be compared at a glance.

# One neuron, two branches: crypt secretion and arteriolar dilation.
DT = 0.01  # seconds

def dual_branch(rate_hz, seconds=30.0):
    transmitter = 0.0   # released VIP or acetylcholine, arbitrary units
    flow = 1.0          # 1.0 means resting blood flow
    secretion = 0.0     # water demanded by the crypts
    deficit = 0.0       # water demanded but not yet supplied
    per_step = rate_hz * DT
    for _ in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        transmitter += per_step * 0.05
        transmitter -= transmitter * DT / 5.0   # clearance, tau 5 s
        # the epithelium answers within about a second
        secretion = 6.0 * transmitter / (transmitter + 0.4)
        # the arteriole knows where it is going but gets there slowly
        target = 1.0 + 2.2 * transmitter / (transmitter + 0.6)
        flow += (target - flow) * DT / 4.0      # smooth muscle, tau 4 s
        supply = 5.5 * (flow - 1.0)
        if secretion > supply:
            deficit += (secretion - supply) * DT
    return secretion, flow, deficit

for hz in (0.5, 2.0, 10.0):
    s, f, d = dual_branch(hz)
    print("%5.1f Hz -> secretion %.2f, flow %.2fx, deficit %.2f" % (hz, s, f, d))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A submucosal cell body whose single axon can be traced to two completely different tissues, a crypt and an arteriole, in the same preparation, marked by calretinin, and firing slowly and continuously even when the gut is empty.

CHAPTER 274. VASOMOTOR NEURONS (NON-COG)

The gut has its own private circulatory control room, and it is staffed almost entirely by nerve cells that can only say open.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A vasomotor neuron is an enteric neuron whose output target is a blood vessel and nothing else.

It sets the calibre of the arterioles that feed the mucosa, and because flow through a tube rises with the fourth power of its radius, a modest widening produces a very large change in supply.

There is an honest asymmetry to state plainly: the enteric nervous system supplies dilators, while the constrictor commands arrive from outside the gut along sympathetic nerves, so this cell type is functionally a vasodilator population.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small to medium uniaxonal cell body of Dogiel type I shape with short lamellar dendrites, sitting in a submucosal ganglion, usually in the outer submucosal plexus near the vessels it serves.

The axon runs along the connective tissue sleeve of an arteriole and forms a loose helical basket of varicosities around it, rather than terminating at a point.

Some myenteric neurons also send axons to arteries entering the gut wall, so a minority of this population lives between the muscle layers.

SIZE:

Cell body roughly 15 to 30 micrometres across.

The axon typically follows a single arteriole and its branches for 2 to 5 millimetres, so one neuron governs the supply to a patch of mucosa a few millimetres wide.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Cholinergic vasomotor axons are identified by the vesicular acetylcholine transporter, the protein that loads acetylcholine into vesicles, and originate from submucosal cell bodies.

Non-cholinergic vasomotor axons carry vasoactive intestinal peptide instead, and the two markers are not found together in the same axons on intestinal arteries, confirming two separate populations.

A third minor group carries neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS), the enzyme that makes nitric oxide directly in the nerve terminal.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Submucosal ganglia of the small intestine and colon, concentrated in the outer submucosal plexus; a smaller contingent in myenteric ganglia.

The functional address is the interface between the nervous system and the vascular system inside the gut wall, specifically the adventitia, the outer connective coat, of submucosal arterioles, and the arteries that penetrate the muscle from the serosal surface.

NUMBER:

Best estimate about 8 million in an adult human, roughly 2 per cent of the 400 million neurons of the enteric nervous system.

Confidence is low; this is the least well counted of the submucosal classes because pure vasomotor cells are hard to separate from cells that also supply the mucosa, and the true figure could plausibly be half or double this.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

An S neuron with fast nicotinic excitatory postsynaptic potentials, resting around minus 55 millivolts, firing tonically at low rates to maintain a resting vascular tone.

These cells show prominent slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials, which is how a meal produces a sustained rise in flow rather than a twitch.

They are also strongly hyperpolarised by noradrenaline, the sympathetic transmitter, so the sympathetic system both constricts the vessel directly and switches off the neuron that would dilate it.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from intrinsic primary afferent neurons responding to nutrients and acid in the lumen, from cholinergic interneurons, and from extrinsic sensory fibres releasing calcitonin gene-related peptide.

Sympathetic postganglionic axons from the coeliac and superior mesenteric ganglia inhibit the cell body.

The output is onto vascular smooth muscle and endothelium, with no morphologically specialised junction.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Bare and thin, about 0.2 to 0.8 micrometres, conducting near 0.3 metres per second, with the varicosities standing off from the muscle by up to a micrometre so transmitter must diffuse.

Because the axon spirals along the vessel, one action potential releases transmitter over a long stretch of tube at almost the same moment.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine acting on endothelial muscarinic M3 receptors to release nitric oxide, which diffuses into the smooth muscle and relaxes it.

Vasoactive intestinal peptide acting directly on smooth muscle VPAC receptors to raise cyclic AMP and relax it.

Nitric oxide released directly from nitrergic terminals, and adenosine triphosphate as a fast co-transmitter in some vessels.

MYELINATION:

None; enteric axons are unmyelinated throughout, and here it matters little because vascular responses unfold over seconds, not milliseconds.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low for the neuron; the point of the cell is to spend other tissues' energy wisely.

Its continuous low-rate firing does mean a steady sodium and potassium pumping cost, which places it among the more continuously active enteric neurons.

PLASTICITY:

Inflammation and ischaemia change the balance between the cholinergic and peptidergic arms, and prolonged sympathetic overdrive can leave the population functionally silenced.

Vasoactive intestinal peptide expression rises in disease states, and this appears partly protective, since these neurons survive better than most in chagasic megacolon.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia hugging this cell's axon sit in a position no other enteric glia occupy, sandwiched between the nerve terminal and the vessel wall, where they behave much like the astrocyte end-feet that control blood flow in the brain.

They respond to neuronal adenosine triphosphate with calcium waves through connexin-43 hemichannels and release their own vasoactive messengers, so the glial cell is part of the control loop rather than scaffolding.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the mucosa loses the ability to reward itself for working.

Blood flow becomes a purely systemic quantity set by the sympathetic nervous system and by blood pressure, digestion proceeds on a fixed ration, and the villus tips, which sit at the far end of a countercurrent loop where oxygen is already scarce, become the first casualty of any stress.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This neuron controls local blood flow, which is the clearest example in the body of a nerve cell acting as an infrastructure engineer.

It uses volume transmission, recruits the endothelium as an amplifier, receives retrograde nitric oxide from that same endothelium, and cooperates with glia that behave like astrocytes.

It also participates in ephaptic and paracrine crosstalk with sensory fibres, since calcitonin gene-related peptide released from extrinsic afferents dilates the same vessel independently, giving the tissue two overlapping dilator systems that must be modelled together.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: nicotinic fast EPSPs at 0 to 25 hertz; slow EPSPs from tachykinins lasting tens of seconds; noradrenergic alpha-2 inhibition at 0 to 20 hertz; local metabolite signals such as carbon dioxide and adenosine as a scalar from 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine, vasoactive intestinal peptide and nitric oxide onto arteriolar wall, expressed as arteriolar radius in micrometres and flow as a multiple of resting flow.

• STATE: membrane potential; transmitter pool; endothelial nitric oxide level; smooth muscle tone; current radius.

• PARAMETERS: resting radius about 12 micrometres; minimum 6 and maximum 20 micrometres; maximum dilator effect about 8 micrometres; maximum constrictor effect about 7 micrometres; flow scales with radius to the fourth power.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; nitric oxide lifetime under 1 second; smooth muscle 3 seconds; postprandial hyperaemia 30 to 90 minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: failure to dilate during digestion causes postprandial pain and villus tip damage; unopposed sympathetic drive in shock or in cardiac failure produces non-occlusive mesenteric ischaemia, in which the gut dies with all its arteries still open.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to set the radius of a submucosal arteriole from opposing dilator and constrictor drives and to report the resulting blood flow.
Create a number variable called radius with initial value 12.
Create a number variable called target_radius with initial value 12.
Create a number variable called dilator_rate with initial value 10.
Create a number variable called sympathetic_rate with initial value 4.
Create a number variable called dilate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called constrict with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called ratio with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called flow with initial value 1.
Repeat the following steps exactly 1200 times.
    Set dilate to the product of 8 and the quotient of dilator_rate divided by the sum of dilator_rate and 4.
    Set constrict to the product of 7 and the quotient of sympathetic_rate divided by the sum of sympathetic_rate and 3.
    Set target_radius to the difference of the sum of 12 and dilate and constrict.
    If target_radius is less than 6, then perform the following actions.
        Set target_radius to 6.
    End the conditional block.
    If target_radius is greater than 20, then perform the following actions.
        Set target_radius to 20.
    End the conditional block.
    Set radius to the sum of radius and the product of the difference of target_radius and radius and 0.0167.
End the loop.
Set ratio to the quotient of radius divided by 12.
Set flow to the product of ratio and ratio.
Set flow to the product of flow and flow.
Display radius to the console.
Display flow to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole point is the fourth power law and two opposing saturating drives, and Python states that arithmetic in one readable line each.

# Enteric vasomotor control of one submucosal arteriole.
DT = 0.05  # seconds

def arteriole(dilator_hz, sympathetic_hz, seconds=60.0):
    radius = 12.0                 # micrometres at rest
    r_min, r_max = 6.0, 20.0      # anatomical limits of the vessel
    flow = 1.0
    for _ in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        # both drives saturate: more spikes buy less and less
        dilate = 8.0 * dilator_hz / (dilator_hz + 4.0)
        constrict = 7.0 * sympathetic_hz / (sympathetic_hz + 3.0)
        target = 12.0 + dilate - constrict
        target = max(r_min, min(r_max, target))
        radius += (target - radius) * DT / 3.0   # smooth muscle, tau 3 s
        flow = (radius / 12.0) ** 4              # Poiseuille's fourth power
    return radius, flow

print(" dilator  sympathetic   radius     flow")
for d, s in ((0.0, 0.0), (10.0, 0.0), (0.0, 10.0), (10.0, 10.0)):
    r, f = arteriole(d, s)
    print("%7.1f %12.1f %8.2f %8.2f" % (d, s, r, f))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

An enteric cell body whose axon can be followed onto an arteriole and onto nothing else, wrapping the vessel in a helix of varicosities, silenced by noradrenaline, and belonging to a population that has an accelerator but no brake of its own.

CHAPTER 275. INTESTINOFUGAL NEURONS (NON-COG)

This is the only neuron born in the gut wall that sends its cable out of the gut altogether, carrying news of a full bowel to a knot of nerve cells lying loose in the abdomen, and getting an answer back that stops the bowel upstream.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An intestinofugal neuron, also called a viscerofugal neuron, is a nerve cell whose body sits inside the intestinal wall and whose single output cable leaves the intestine entirely.

The name means, literally, fleeing the intestine.

The cable travels out along the mesenteric nerves, the strands that run with the blood vessels suspending the gut, and ends in a prevertebral ganglion, a cluster of sympathetic nerve cells parked in front of the spine.

There it makes an ordinary fast excitatory synapse using acetylcholine, a chemical messenger, on nicotinic receptors.

The sympathetic cells it excites send their own axons back into the gut, where they release noradrenaline and damp down movement.

The whole loop, gut to ganglion to gut, never touches the brain or the spinal cord.

This is how a distended loop of bowel tells a distant loop of bowel to stop pushing food towards it, a response called the entero enteric inhibitory reflex.

The neuron is mechanosensitive in its own right: it fires faster as tension in the gut wall rises, so it is at once a sensor and a long distance transmitter.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

In the human colon, ninety seven percent of these cells have exactly one axon, measured in a study that filled two hundred and fifteen of them with dye.

Their cell bodies are visually diverse, which is unusual and important.

About forty two percent have lamellar or stubby dendrites, the short flattened leaf shaped receiving branches that define Dogiel type I morphology.

About thirty six percent have filamentous or spiny dendrites, thin and thorn covered.

About nineteen percent are simple, with almost no dendrites at all.

Only about three percent have the large smooth multipolar shape called Dogiel type II.

Seventy nine percent of them are wrapped in baskets of incoming nerve endings, dense cages of varicose fibres pressed against the cell body.

SIZE:

In human colon, cell body profile areas run from one hundred and twelve to two thousand three hundred and fifty one square micrometres, with an average of eight hundred and seventy eight, plus or minus four hundred and eighty three.

Sorted by shape, the simple cells average four hundred and twenty two square micrometres, the lamellar cells eight hundred and forty six, the filamentous cells one thousand and fifty seven, and the rare Dogiel type II cells two thousand and six.

A micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre, so the largest of these cell bodies is still only about fifty micrometres across.

The axon is unmyelinated and perhaps zero point three to one micrometre thick, but it is long by enteric standards: it runs several millimetres inside the gut and then tens of centimetres outside it.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There is a small intestine type and a large intestine type, and they differ chemically.

In the guinea pig small intestine they are small Dogiel type I cells that carry vasoactive intestinal peptide, a twenty eight amino acid messenger, together with choline acetyltransferase, the enzyme that makes acetylcholine, and gastrin releasing peptide, but they do not carry nitric oxide synthase.

In the large intestine some do carry nitric oxide synthase.

In the human colon the population is strongly cholinergic and chemically mixed: eighty nine percent carry choline acetyltransferase, thirteen percent nitric oxide synthase, thirteen percent calbindin, nine percent enkephalin, three percent calretinin, two percent vasoactive intestinal peptide, and none carry cocaine and amphetamine regulated transcript.

Strikingly, sixty nine percent of them share the exact chemical signature of excitatory muscle motor neurons, even though those motor neurons are only about thirty percent of colonic myenteric cells, which suggests these two classes are close relatives.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies are confined to the myenteric plexus, the nerve net sandwiched between the two coats of gut muscle, the inner circular and the outer longitudinal.

They are not found in the submucosal plexus.

They are concentrated near the mesenteric attachment, the line where the gut's suspending membrane joins the tube, with most cell bodies within four millimetres of it.

Their axons cross the single most important interface in this book: the boundary of the enteric nervous system itself, leaving the gut wall through the mesenteric and colonic nerve trunks and entering the coeliac, superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric ganglia.

Density rises along the gut; in the guinea pig colon it is about fourteen cells per square centimetre proximally, twenty two distally, and thirty seven in the rectum.

NUMBER:

They are rare: fewer than one percent of myenteric neurons in the guinea pig small intestine.

Taking the human enteric nervous system at about four hundred million neurons, with perhaps half of those myenteric, and applying a rate of under one percent that rises towards the rectum, gives an estimate near one million intestinofugal neurons in an adult human.

That is roughly zero point two five percent of the enteric nervous system and about one hundredth of one percent of one percent of the eighty six billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

Confidence is low.

The best hard human data available is a count of nine hundred and three labelled cells across twenty five tissue samples from twenty three patients, with four to one hundred and twenty one cells recovered per sample, which fixes the order of magnitude but not the total.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They are S neurons, the class defined by strong fast synaptic input and no long silent period after firing.

Resting voltage, the charge difference across the cell membrane at rest, is around minus fifty to minus sixty millivolts.

They are tonically active, firing slowly even in an empty gut, at a fraction of a spike per second.

Firing rate climbs roughly in proportion to circumferential tension in the wall, reaching perhaps ten to fifteen spikes per second in a strongly distended bowel.

They also fire in bursts locked to each contraction, so their output encodes both how full the gut is and what it is doing.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive as the dense baskets already described, and their chemistry has been counted: sixty nine percent of the basket fibres carry the vesicular acetylcholine transporter, twenty nine percent carry substance P, and twenty one percent carry enkephalin.

The sources are myenteric interneurons and intrinsic primary afferent neurons, the gut's own sensory cells.

Output is a single, powerful, fast excitatory synapse on the cell bodies of sympathetic neurons in prevertebral ganglia, using acetylcholine on nicotinic receptors.

Those same sympathetic neurons also receive tonic input from preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord, so the ganglion is a genuine integrator comparing a steady central command with a distension driven gut command.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Before leaving the gut the axon travels within the myenteric plexus, and it has a direction preference: about eighty five percent run towards the mouth for an average of two point seven millimetres, plus or minus one point four, and about fifteen percent run towards the anus for one point three millimetres, plus or minus one.

It is unmyelinated inside the gut wall.

Conduction is slow, well under one metre per second, so a message from the sigmoid colon to the inferior mesenteric ganglion takes a substantial fraction of a second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine is the transmitter that matters at the output synapse, and blocking nicotinic receptors abolishes the reflex.

Co stored messengers vary with region and include vasoactive intestinal peptide, gastrin releasing peptide, enkephalin and, in some large intestine cells, nitric oxide.

MYELINATION:

None inside the gut, because the enteric nervous system contains no myelin forming cells at all.

Outside the gut the axon joins mesenteric nerve trunks that do contain myelinated fibres, but the intestinofugal axon itself remains unmyelinated and is carried instead by non myelinating Schwann cells.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Higher than a typical enteric neuron, for one reason: axon length.

A cell body of perhaps eight hundred square micrometres must maintain a cable tens of centimetres long, which means continuous transport of proteins, mitochondria and vesicles along microtubule tracks at rates of tens to hundreds of millimetres per day.

Long thin axons are also the first casualties of poor blood supply, which is why this class fails early in ischaemia and diabetes.

PLASTICITY:

Chronic distension, as in obstruction or megacolon, increases their firing and can leave the inhibitory loop locked on.

After spinal cord injury the descending control of the prevertebral ganglia is lost and the intestinofugal loop becomes the dominant remaining controller of that ganglion, a dramatic natural example of circuit reweighting.

In experimental colitis their numbers and chemistry shift, with more nitric oxide synthase appearing.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Inside the gut they are supported by enteric glia, which wrap the cell body and the intraganglionic axon but never make myelin.

Uniquely among the neurons in this section, part of this cell lives outside enteric glial territory: once the axon enters the mesenteric nerve it is handed over to Schwann cells, the peripheral nervous system's support cells, which arrange themselves in Remak bundles, meaning several bare axons tucked into grooves in one Schwann cell.

No other enteric neuron changes its glial partner halfway along its length, and any simulation that models glial support must therefore give this cell two support regimes.

Resident macrophages in the muscle coats complete the local environment and are required to keep enteric neurons alive.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the gut loses its long range self awareness.

Each segment would still handle its own contents perfectly well, because local reflexes are intact, but no segment would know that a distant segment was overloaded.

Food would continue to be propelled into a bowel that was already full.

The coordinated shutdown that protects an obstructed intestine, and the slowing of the stomach when the colon is loaded, would both disappear.

The prevertebral ganglia would be reduced to relay stations for spinal commands instead of true integrators, and a whole class of reflexes would vanish from the body.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell is mechanosensitive at the soma, meaning the cell body itself, not a specialised ending, converts mechanical stretch into electrical activity, probably through mechanically gated ion channels in the membrane.

It fires in step with the gut's own contractions, so it reports not only load but rhythm.

It performs signal transformation across an anatomical boundary, converting an intramural mechanical variable into a synaptic current in a ganglion outside the organ.

It sets up a negative feedback loop with a delay of hundreds of milliseconds, which any simulation must implement as a delay line, not an instantaneous coupling.

Because so many of them share the excitatory motor neuron chemical code, there is an open and interesting possibility that they are motor neurons that also happen to project outwards, blurring the sensory and motor categories entirely.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Circumferential wall tension in grams, zero to about ten, sensed directly at the cell body.

◦ Fast nicotinic excitatory postsynaptic potentials from myenteric interneurons, five to twenty millivolts, arriving in baskets.

◦ Slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials from substance P and enkephalin fibres, modulating gain over seconds.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Action potentials conducted out of the gut to prevertebral ganglion neurons in the coeliac, superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric ganglia.

◦ Acetylcholine quanta producing fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials of about five to fifteen millivolts in those sympathetic neurons.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ Adaptation variable tracking recent firing, so that a sustained distension gives a decaying rather than a constant rate.

◦ Axonal delay buffer holding spikes in transit.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Baseline rate about zero point five spikes per second.

◦ Gain about one spike per second per gram of tension.

◦ Ceiling about twelve to fifteen spikes per second.

◦ Convergence of roughly five to fifteen intestinofugal neurons onto one sympathetic neuron.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane about twenty milliseconds.

◦ Adaptation five to thirty seconds.

◦ Axonal conduction delay two hundred to eight hundred milliseconds depending on distance.

◦ Reflex loop, from distension to inhibition of a distant segment, roughly one second.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Overactivity locks the loop on and stops the gut, which is a major component of post operative ileus, the paralysed bowel that follows abdominal surgery.

◦ Underactivity or loss, as in long standing diabetes, ageing or Chagas disease, allows one segment to keep loading another and contributes to distension and slow transit constipation.

◦ After spinal cord injury the loop runs unsupervised, producing poorly coordinated colonic behaviour.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert gut wall tension into a firing rate in an intestinofugal neuron and then decide whether the sympathetic neuron it drives reaches threshold.
Create a number variable called wall_tension with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called baseline_rate with initial value 0.5.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 1.1.
Create a number variable called maximum_rate with initial value 12.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called ganglion_voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called ganglion_threshold with initial value 12.
Create a number variable called epsp_size with initial value 8.
Create a number variable called converging_axons with initial value 6.
Create a number variable called sympathetic_spikes with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called tension_samples with initial value empty list.
For each sample in tension_samples, perform the following operations.
    Set wall_tension to sample.
    Calculate the product of gain and wall_tension.
    Calculate the sum of baseline_rate and the result.
    Set firing_rate to the result.
    Check if firing_rate is greater than maximum_rate.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to maximum_rate.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of firing_rate and converging_axons.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.001.
    Calculate the product of the result and epsp_size.
    Calculate the sum of ganglion_voltage and the result.
    Set ganglion_voltage to the result.
    Calculate the product of ganglion_voltage and 0.967.
    Set ganglion_voltage to the result.
    Check if ganglion_voltage is greater than or equal to ganglion_threshold.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of sympathetic_spikes and 1.
        Set sympathetic_spikes to the result.
        Set ganglion_voltage to 0.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display firing_rate to the console.
Display sympathetic_spikes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the interesting part of this cell is bookkeeping, converging spike trains and a
# threshold, and Python expresses that with no boilerplate and no external libraries.

BASELINE_HZ     = 0.5     # ongoing firing with the gut empty
GAIN_HZ_PER_G   = 1.1     # extra spikes per second per gram of wall tension
MAX_HZ          = 12.0    # ceiling observed in recordings
EPSP_MV         = 8.0     # fast nicotinic potential at the sympathetic neuron
GANGLION_TAU    = 0.030   # membrane time constant of that neuron, seconds
GANGLION_THRESH = 12.0    # millivolts above rest needed to make it fire

def encode(tension_grams):
    """Tension in the gut wall becomes a firing rate, with a floor and a ceiling."""
    return min(BASELINE_HZ + GAIN_HZ_PER_G * tension_grams, MAX_HZ)

def sympathetic_output(tension_grams, converging_axons, seconds=1.0, dt=0.001):
    rate = encode(tension_grams)
    interval = 1.0 / rate
    # stagger the converging axons so their volleys do not all land together
    next_spike = [interval * k / converging_axons for k in range(converging_axons)]
    v = 0.0
    out_spikes = 0
    for step in range(int(seconds / dt)):
        t = step * dt
        for k in range(converging_axons):
            if t >= next_spike[k]:
                v += EPSP_MV
                next_spike[k] += interval
        v -= v * (dt / GANGLION_TAU)      # the ganglion cell leaks between volleys
        if v >= GANGLION_THRESH:
            out_spikes += 1               # sympathetic inhibition is sent back to the gut
            v = 0.0
    return round(rate, 2), out_spikes

print("empty gut:     ", sympathetic_output(0.0, 6))
print("distended gut: ", sympathetic_output(6.0, 6))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Cut the mesenteric nerve, apply a retrograde tracer to the stump, and wait: the only cell bodies that light up inside the gut wall belong to this class.

No other enteric neuron sends an axon out of the organ.

Look for a myenteric cell body near the mesenteric border, wearing a dense basket of cholinergic endings, firing tonically in time with the gut's contractions and faster as the wall is stretched, and carrying choline acetyltransferase in nearly nine cases out of ten.

It is the gut's outgoing post, and the letter it sends always says the same thing: slow down.

CHAPTER 276. DOGIEL TYPE I (NON-COG)

In 1899 a Russian histologist dropped methylene blue into a strip of gut, looked down his microscope, and drew a flattened cell fringed with short leafy flaps and trailing a single long cable, and more than a century later that drawing is still the commonest neuron shape in your intestine.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Dogiel type I is a shape, not a job.

It is the first of the morphological classes named by Alexander Stanislavovich Dogiel, and it describes a nerve cell with one axon, the single output cable, and a ring of short, flattened, leaf shaped dendrites, the receiving branches, pressed close to the cell body.

Almost every working part of the gut's nerve net wears this shape: the excitatory motor neurons that contract muscle, the inhibitory motor neurons that relax it, the ascending and descending interneurons that pass messages along the tube, the secretomotor neurons that command fluid, and the intestinofugal neurons that report to ganglia outside the gut.

If the enteric nervous system, which is the gut's own brain, has a standard chassis, this is it.

Understanding Dogiel type I therefore means understanding the default enteric neuron: fast in, fast out, no long memory, one destination.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is flattened, angular or club shaped, not round, because it is squeezed into a ganglion that is itself squeezed between two moving sheets of muscle.

Around it sit roughly four to twenty short dendrites.

The classic dendrites are lamellar, meaning flat and leaf like, hugging the surfaces of neighbouring cells, which packs a large receiving area into almost no volume.

A single axon leaves one pole, often after a short unbranched stalk, and runs away along an internodal strand, the nerve cable that links one ganglion to the next.

Incoming fibres form baskets, cages of beaded endings, around the cell body and over the lamellar flaps, and it is on those flaps that most fast synapses land.

SIZE:

Long axis fifteen to thirty five micrometres, short axis ten to twenty, so the flattened profile covers roughly three hundred to eleven hundred square micrometres.

A micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre.

Measured directly in human colon, the lamellar and stubby subtype averages eight hundred and forty six square micrometres and the filamentous subtype one thousand and fifty seven, with the simplest cells down at four hundred and twenty two.

Dendrites are short, typically ten to fifty micrometres, which is the single most useful number for a modeller: they are too short for meaningful electrical filtering, so inputs sum almost linearly at the cell body.

Axons range from under a millimetre for a local motor neuron to more than a hundred millimetres for a long descending interneuron.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The German anatomist Hans Werner Stach refined Dogiel's scheme and added types III to VII, most of which are variations on the type I plan.

Practically, four variants matter.

Lamellar cells have flat leafy dendrites and are the textbook form.

Filamentous or spiny cells have thin, thorn covered dendrites and are common in the human colon, where they account for about thirty six percent of viscerofugal cells.

Simple cells have almost no dendrites and the smallest cell bodies.

Long dendrite cells, sometimes called Stach type III, have several dendrites that leave the ganglion entirely and are found among descending interneurons.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Everywhere the enteric nervous system exists.

They fill the myenteric plexus, the net between the circular and longitudinal muscle coats, from the striated upper oesophagus to the internal anal sphincter.

They fill the submucosal plexus too, in both its human layers, the inner one long called the plexus of Meissner and the outer one associated with Schabadasch and Henle.

They occur in the gallbladder, the pancreatic ducts and the biliary tree.

Their axons cross every interface the gut has: into the circular muscle, into the longitudinal muscle, into the muscularis mucosae, across into the mucosa, onto arterioles, and in the case of intestinofugal cells out of the organ entirely.

NUMBER:

This is a shape category, so it must not be added to the budget as a separate population.

Every Dogiel type I neuron has already been counted once under the functional class it belongs to, whether motor neuron, interneuron or secretomotor neuron.

As a fraction, roughly sixty to seventy five percent of myenteric neurons and a large majority of submucosal neurons carry this morphology.

Against the working estimate of four hundred million enteric neurons in an adult human, that corresponds to on the order of two hundred and fifty to three hundred million cells, or roughly zero point three percent of the eighty six billion neurons in the whole human nervous system.

Confidence in the fraction is moderate and rests on filled cell studies in guinea pig, mouse, pig and human; confidence in the absolute number is low, because human enteric totals published since 2022 span one hundred million to six hundred million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Every Dogiel type I neuron tested is an S neuron, where S stands for synaptic.

The defining feature is a large fast excitatory postsynaptic potential, a brief upward voltage jump caused by acetylcholine landing on nicotinic receptors, big enough on its own to trigger a spike.

Resting voltage sits near minus forty five to minus sixty millivolts, and threshold near minus thirty five.

The action potential is brief, one to three milliseconds, blocked completely by tetrodotoxin, the pufferfish poison that plugs sodium channels, and it has no calcium hump on its falling edge.

Afterwards there is only a brief afterhyperpolarisation of a few tens of milliseconds, so the cell can fire again almost immediately and can follow input trains up to thirty or forty spikes per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They receive dense fast cholinergic input, plus slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials driven by tachykinins such as substance P and by serotonin, which lift excitability for tens of seconds.

They receive inhibition from noradrenaline released by sympathetic fibres and from opioid peptides released by their own neighbours, both acting mainly by reducing transmitter release at the terminals arriving on them.

Their outputs depend on their job: smooth muscle, secretory epithelium, arterioles, other enteric neurons, or sympathetic ganglion cells.

The important structural point is that one axon means one broadcast, so a Dogiel type I neuron cannot send different messages to different targets.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated, zero point two to one micrometre thick, conducting at roughly zero point three to one point five metres per second.

The axon is varicose along much of its length, so it releases transmitter as it passes rather than only at its tip, which lets a single descending interneuron seed an entire stretch of gut.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Heterogeneous, because the class is defined by shape.

Excitatory motor neurons use acetylcholine with substance P.

Inhibitory motor neurons use nitric oxide, a gas, together with vasoactive intestinal peptide and adenosine triphosphate or a close relative acting on purinergic receptors.

Descending interneurons use acetylcholine with nitric oxide, serotonin or somatostatin.

Secretomotor cells use acetylcholine with neuropeptide Y, or vasoactive intestinal peptide alone.

MYELINATION:

None, in any of them, anywhere in the gut.

The enteric nervous system has no myelin forming cells, so this most numerous of enteric shapes is also uniformly bare.

The consequence for a simulation is that conduction delays scale simply with distance divided by about one metre per second.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Ordinary for a small neuron, dominated by the sodium potassium pump that restores the ionic gradients after each spike.

Because these cells can fire in long high frequency bursts during a peristaltic wave, their energy use is bursty rather than steady, rising several fold for a second or two at a time.

Long axon members, particularly descending interneurons, additionally pay for continuous axonal transport over tens of millimetres.

PLASTICITY:

Slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials are the main plasticity mechanism, converting a brief input into a minute of raised excitability through protein kinase A and protein kinase C, enzymes that alter potassium channels.

After inflammation these cells become hyperexcitable and their input baskets remodel.

They can also change transmitter phenotype, with more nitric oxide synthase appearing after injury.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Enteric glia wrap the cell bodies and fill the spaces between them, and here they do something astrocytes never have to: they hold a ganglion together while it is stretched and squashed thousands of times a day by the muscle around it.

The glial sheet has no blood vessels inside the ganglion, so oxygen and glucose must diffuse in from outside, and enteric glia manage that supply.

Glia around these neurons respond to their adenosine triphosphate through P2Y1 receptors and answer with their own, spreading activity sideways.

Muscularis macrophages sit alongside and release bone morphogenetic protein 2, which these neurons need; removing macrophages damages the neurons, which is a relationship with no exact parallel in the brain.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this one shape and the gut is left with sensors and no actuators.

The large smooth Dogiel type II cells would still detect the meal, but nothing would contract, nothing would relax, nothing would secrete, and no message would travel more than one ganglion.

Peristalsis, the travelling squeeze that moves food, would be abolished outright, because both its pushing and its relaxing arms are built from Dogiel type I cells.

The region would keep its senses and lose all its behaviour.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The lamellar dendrite is itself a computational adaptation: flat, short and electrically compact, it lets dozens of synapses sum almost linearly at the soma in a cell that has no room for a dendritic tree.

Their varicose axons practise volume transmission, releasing messengers into tissue fluid over stretches of millimetres rather than at private junctions.

Nitric oxide releasing members send a gas that diffuses freely through membranes and cannot be aimed at all, so their output is a cloud, not an arrow.

Many are coupled by gap junctions to enteric glia, and some to each other, giving weak electrical sharing.

They are targets and sources of immune signalling, and they instruct the surrounding muscle's development, without which the gut's muscle layers do not mature properly.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Fast nicotinic excitatory postsynaptic potentials, five to thirty millivolts, arriving at zero to fifty hertz on lamellar dendrites.

◦ Slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials from tachykinins and serotonin, two to fifteen millivolts, lasting ten to sixty seconds.

◦ Presynaptic inhibition from noradrenaline and opioids, expressed as a multiplier between zero and one on input strength.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ A single spike train on one axon, broadcast to all of that axon's targets.

◦ Transmitter released both at terminals and from varicosities along the axon.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ Refractory timer in milliseconds.

◦ Slow potential pool in millivolts.

◦ Presynaptic gain between zero and one.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting voltage minus fifty five millivolts, threshold minus thirty five, reset minus sixty two.

◦ Number of dendritic input compartments, four to twenty.

◦ Conduction velocity zero point three to one point five metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane ten to twenty five milliseconds, short because the cell is small.

◦ Refractory period two to five milliseconds.

◦ Fast excitatory postsynaptic potential decay twenty to fifty milliseconds.

◦ Slow excitatory postsynaptic potential decay ten to sixty seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Congenital absence, as in Hirschsprung disease where these cells never migrate into the distal bowel, leaves a segment that cannot relax and causes obstruction in newborns.

◦ Destruction by the parasite of Chagas disease produces megacolon and megaoesophagus.

◦ Loss of the nitric oxide releasing members produces achalasia and gastroparesis, in which sphincters and stomach will not let go.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to sum the inputs arriving on the lamellar dendrites of a Dogiel type I neuron and decide whether it fires on its single axon.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value -55.
Create a number variable called resting_voltage with initial value -55.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value -35.
Create a number variable called reset_voltage with initial value -62.
Create a number variable called refractory_timer with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dendritic_sum with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called presynaptic_gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called spike_count with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called dendrite_inputs with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 2000 times.
    Set dendritic_sum to 0.
    For each dendrite_value in dendrite_inputs, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the product of dendrite_value and presynaptic_gain.
        Calculate the sum of dendritic_sum and the result.
        Set dendritic_sum to the result.
    End the loop.
    Check if refractory_timer is greater than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of refractory_timer and 1.
        Set refractory_timer to the result.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the difference of resting_voltage and membrane_voltage.
    Calculate the sum of the result and dendritic_sum.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.04.
    Calculate the sum of membrane_voltage and the result.
    Set membrane_voltage to the result.
    Check if membrane_voltage is greater than or equal to threshold.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of spike_count and 1.
        Set spike_count to the result.
        Set membrane_voltage to reset_voltage.
        Set refractory_timer to 6.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike_count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C is chosen because a whole gut simulation must hold hundreds of millions of these cells at once, and a
   small packed struct stepped by one tight function is the cheapest honest way to store and advance them. */
#include <stdio.h>

typedef struct {
    float v;           /* membrane potential, millivolts */
    float refractory;  /* seconds of refractory period remaining */
} DogielI;

#define V_REST     (-55.0f)
#define V_THRESH   (-35.0f)
#define V_RESET    (-62.0f)
#define TAU_M        0.012f   /* seconds, short because the cell body is tiny */
#define REFRACTORY   0.003f   /* seconds, and no slow afterhyperpolarisation follows */
#define DT           0.0005f  /* seconds */

/* Each lamellar dendrite is one input compartment, and they sum almost linearly. */
static int step_cell(DogielI *c, const float *dendrite_mv, int n_dendrites, float gain)
{
    float sum = 0.0f;
    for (int d = 0; d < n_dendrites; d++)
        sum += dendrite_mv[d] * gain;          /* gain is the presynaptic brake, 0 to 1 */
    if (c->refractory > 0.0f) {
        c->refractory -= DT;
        return 0;
    }
    c->v += ((V_REST - c->v) + sum) * (DT / TAU_M);
    if (c->v >= V_THRESH) {
        c->v = V_RESET;
        c->refractory = REFRACTORY;
        return 1;                              /* one spike leaves on the single axon */
    }
    return 0;
}

int main(void)
{
    float dendrites[6] = { 4.0f, 3.0f, 5.0f, 2.0f, 4.0f, 3.0f };   /* millivolts each */
    for (int trial = 0; trial < 2; trial++) {
        DogielI cell = { V_REST, 0.0f };
        float gain = (trial == 0) ? 1.0f : 0.4f;   /* second trial adds sympathetic inhibition */
        int spikes = 0;
        for (int i = 0; i < 2000; i++)             /* one second of simulated time */
            spikes += step_cell(&cell, dendrites, 6, gain);
        printf("gain %.1f  spikes in 1 s: %d\n", gain, spikes);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Fill the cell with dye and count the processes: exactly one is long and smooth and leaves the ganglion, and all the rest are short flattened flaps that do not.

Put an electrode in it and stimulate the nerve strand running into the ganglion, and you get a large fast excitatory postsynaptic potential that is abolished by hexamethonium, a drug that blocks nicotinic receptors, followed by an action potential that vanishes in tetrodotoxin and is over in three milliseconds with no long silence afterwards.

That combination, one axon, leafy dendrites, big nicotinic input and no slow afterhyperpolarisation, identifies the working majority of the gut's nervous system.

CHAPTER 277. DOGIEL TYPE II (NON-COG)

Make this cell fire once and it falls silent for the next several seconds, a sulk so long, so deep and so reliable that physiologists named an entire class of neurons after it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Dogiel type II is the second shape drawn by Alexander Stanislavovich Dogiel in 1899, and it is the odd one out in the gut.

Where the standard enteric neuron is small, flattened and has one output cable, this one is large, smooth and oval, and it sends out several long processes, each of which behaves like an axon.

It has, in effect, no dendrites at all.

Most of these cells are intrinsic primary afferent neurons, meaning the gut's own sensory cells: they sample what is happening in the lining and in the wall and start the reflexes that follow, without asking the brain.

Some of their processes end just beneath the epithelium, the gut's inner skin, where they listen for serotonin released by enterochromaffin cells, the chemical sentinels that taste the gut contents.

Others are distorted directly when the wall is stretched.

When enough of these cells agree that something has arrived, the gut squeezes behind it, relaxes in front of it, and secretes fluid onto it.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is large, round or oval, and smooth, with no leafy flaps.

From it emerge two to ten long processes, typically three to seven, each thick, unbranched near the soma, and each capable of carrying an action potential.

Some processes run around the gut circumference within the myenteric plexus, contacting other neurons on the way.

Others turn inward, cross the muscle and the muscularis mucosae, and end as fine terminals in the lamina propria beneath the epithelium.

Because more than one process is axon like, this cell can send a message in several directions at once, which no Dogiel type I neuron can do.

Their smooth surface is almost completely covered by glia, leaving few bare patches, and they receive far fewer fast synapses than their neighbours.

SIZE:

These are the largest neurons in the gut wall.

Cell bodies commonly measure twenty to fifty micrometres across, and in human colon the rare Dogiel type II cells that also project outside the gut have profile areas averaging two thousand and six square micrometres, against an average of eight hundred and seventy eight for all shapes together.

A micrometre is one thousandth of a millimetre, so fifty of these cell bodies in a row still make up only two and a half millimetres.

Their processes are long, often one to several millimetres inside the plexus, and about zero point five to one point five micrometres thick.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Three practical variants exist.

Myenteric Dogiel type II cells, in the net between the muscle layers, are the classic intrinsic primary afferent neurons and are the largest.

Submucosal Dogiel type II cells, in the layer under the lining, are somewhat smaller and make up roughly one in ten submucosal neurons in the guinea pig small intestine.

A small third group projects out of the gut to prevertebral ganglia, accounting for about three percent of human colonic viscerofugal cells, showing that the shape is not reserved exclusively for sensory work.

Species matters here: they are abundant and easy to find in guinea pig, harder to find in mouse, and still debated in humans, where cells with the shape and the matching chemistry have been identified in the small intestine but not counted with confidence.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They live in the myenteric plexus, between the circular and longitudinal muscle coats, and in both layers of the human submucosal plexus, the inner one long called the plexus of Meissner and the outer one associated with Schabadasch and Henle.

They are most numerous in the small intestine and colon, sparse in the stomach, and effectively absent from the oesophagus.

Their defining interface is the mucosal one: processes leave the plexus, pass through the muscularis mucosae, and terminate in the lamina propria a few micrometres beneath the epithelial cells, close enough for serotonin released into that space to reach them.

NUMBER:

Like Dogiel type I, this is a shape category and must not be added to the budget twice.

Every cell with this shape has already been counted as an intrinsic primary afferent neuron or, rarely, as an intestinofugal neuron.

As a fraction, they are commonly put at roughly a quarter of myenteric neurons in the guinea pig small intestine and about eleven percent of submucosal neurons there, with lower fractions reported in mouse and human.

Applied cautiously to the working estimate of four hundred million human enteric neurons, that suggests somewhere between thirty and sixty million cells carry this morphology, or roughly zero point zero four to zero point zero seven percent of the eighty six billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

Confidence is low, and the honest statement is that no reliable human count exists; the guinea pig fractions are firm, the human ones are not.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

This is the AH neuron, and the letters stand for afterhyperpolarisation, the long silent dip that follows its action potential.

The action potential itself is broad, two to four milliseconds, with a distinct hump on its falling edge produced by calcium flowing in, and that hump survives tetrodotoxin, the pufferfish poison that blocks sodium channels, so the spike is partly a calcium spike.

The calcium that enters then opens intermediate conductance calcium activated potassium channels, known as IK or KCa3.1, which are insensitive to apamin and do not care about voltage.

The result is a hyperpolarisation lasting seconds.

In pig myenteric neurons two populations were measured: one with a medium afterhyperpolarisation averaging seven hundred and seventy three milliseconds, plus or minus seven hundred and fifty three, and one with a slow afterhyperpolarisation averaging four thousand two hundred and five milliseconds, plus or minus one thousand four hundred and eighty three.

These channels have been confirmed in human enteric neurons.

Resting voltage is deep, often minus sixty to minus seventy millivolts, and the cells are usually silent until recruited.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They receive very few fast excitatory inputs, which is unusual and diagnostic.

What they receive instead are slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials, lasting tens of seconds, which work by closing the very potassium channels that produce the afterhyperpolarisation, converting a reluctant cell into an eager one.

Crucially they synapse on each other, so a group of these neurons forms a self exciting assembly: once enough of them are recruited, the assembly holds itself active long after the original stimulus has gone.

Their outputs go to ascending and descending interneurons, to excitatory and inhibitory muscle motor neurons, to secretomotor neurons, and back onto other Dogiel type II cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Multiple axon like processes, unmyelinated, roughly zero point five to one point five micrometres thick, conducting at about zero point five to one metre per second.

Because several processes leave the same soma, an action potential generated anywhere propagates into all of them, including back into the cell body, so the cell has no single input end and no single output end.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine is the main fast transmitter, made by choline acetyltransferase.

Tachykinins, principally substance P, provide the slow excitatory signal onto their targets and onto each other.

Between eighty two and eighty four percent of guinea pig ileal Dogiel type II cells contain calbindin, a calcium binding protein, which is the standard marker used to find them.

Many also carry calcitonin gene related peptide, and some carry neuromedin U.

MYELINATION:

None.

No enteric neuron is myelinated, because the gut wall contains no myelin forming cells.

For this cell that matters less than usual, since its calcium loaded, slow spiking style is not built for speed in the first place.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Distinctly higher than its neighbours, for a specific reason: every action potential admits a slug of calcium that must then be pumped back out or buried in internal stores, and calcium handling is expensive.

The large cell body, the several long processes and the heavy load of calbindin all add to the bill.

This is a plausible part of why these cells are among the first to be lost in ageing, diabetes and ischaemia.

PLASTICITY:

The afterhyperpolarisation is not fixed; it is a dial.

Protein kinase A, an enzyme switched on by cyclic adenosine monophosphate, reduces the afterhyperpolarisation current and can turn a cell that fires once every ten seconds into one that fires steadily.

After inflammation of the intestine these cells become persistently hyperexcitable, with smaller afterhyperpolarisations, more input resistance and a lower threshold, and the change outlasts the inflammation by weeks.

This is one of the leading candidate mechanisms for the exaggerated reflexes and discomfort of post infectious irritable bowel syndrome.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Enteric glia wrap these smooth cell bodies more completely than any other enteric neuron, leaving very little membrane exposed, which is consistent with their scarcity of fast synapses and means the glial sheet is physically interposed between them and the outside world.

Those glia are not passive: they release adenosine triphosphate and hydrogen sulfide that alter the excitability of exactly these cells, and they take up and recycle the calcium and potassium that a broad calcium spike dumps into the narrow space around the soma.

Glia also accompany the mucosal processes right up to the epithelium, sitting between the nerve ending and the serotonin releasing cell it listens to.

Resident macrophages complete the environment and are required for enteric neuron survival.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take this cell away and the gut goes numb to itself.

Muscle and glands would still work if commanded, and the brain could still order movement through the vagus nerve, but the gut would no longer notice its own contents.

A meal arriving in a segment would produce no local reflex: no squeeze behind it, no relaxation ahead of it, no wash of fluid onto it.

Peristalsis triggered from inside the gut would be abolished, which is exactly what happens when the mucosa is stripped or these cells are blocked in an isolated piece of intestine.

The region would keep every one of its abilities and lose its awareness.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Almost everything interesting about this cell happens outside the standard spike model.

The afterhyperpolarisation is a genuine one cell memory: it stores how recently the cell fired, in a chemical variable, calcium, on a timescale of seconds, and it can be rewritten by neuromodulators.

Its action potential back propagates into every one of its processes, so firing is a whole cell event, not a directed output.

It engages in recurrent self excitation through slow potentials, giving the network a working memory measured in tens of seconds.

It performs sensory transduction without a specialised receptor organ, using its own bare process membrane.

It is a target of immune and microbial signalling, since bacterial products and mast cell mediators alter its excitability directly.

And it takes part in volume transmission, releasing tachykinins that spread through the ganglion rather than into private junctions.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Serotonin arriving by diffusion from enterochromaffin cells, roughly zero to one hundred nanomolar, acting on 5-HT3 receptors on mucosal processes.

◦ Mechanical distortion of the processes and soma, expressed as an equivalent depolarising current of zero to forty picoamperes.

◦ Slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials from tachykinins, which reduce the afterhyperpolarisation conductance by up to eighty percent for tens of seconds.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Action potentials propagating into all processes simultaneously.

◦ Acetylcholine and substance P released onto interneurons, motor neurons, secretomotor neurons and other Dogiel type II cells.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage in millivolts.

◦ Internal calcium concentration in arbitrary units, incremented by each spike.

◦ Afterhyperpolarisation conductance, a function of that calcium.

◦ Modulation factor between zero and one, set by protein kinase A activity.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Resting voltage minus sixty two millivolts, threshold minus thirty eight millivolts.

◦ Calcium added per spike, one unit.

◦ Potassium reversal potential minus ninety millivolts.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane about fifteen milliseconds.

◦ Action potential width two to four milliseconds.

◦ Medium afterhyperpolarisation about zero point eight seconds.

◦ Slow afterhyperpolarisation two to twenty seconds, averaging about four seconds in pig.

◦ Slow excitatory postsynaptic potential ten to sixty seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Hyperexcitability after infection or inflammation, through loss of the afterhyperpolarisation, produces exaggerated secretory and motor reflexes and is a candidate mechanism of post infectious irritable bowel syndrome.

◦ Loss of these cells, in ageing, diabetes, ischaemia or Chagas disease, leaves a gut that cannot start its own reflexes and empties poorly.

◦ Blocking the intermediate conductance potassium channel removes the brake entirely and produces continuous firing.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to simulate the calcium controlled slow afterhyperpolarisation that sets the firing rhythm of a Dogiel type II sensory neuron.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value -62.
Create a number variable called resting_voltage with initial value -62.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value -38.
Create a number variable called internal_calcium with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called potassium_reversal with initial value -90.
Create a number variable called sensory_drive with initial value 30.
Create a number variable called modulation with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called ahp_pull with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called open_fraction with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spike_times with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 30000 times.
    Calculate the sum of internal_calcium and 1.
    Calculate the quotient of internal_calcium divided by the result.
    Set open_fraction to the result.
    Calculate the difference of membrane_voltage and potassium_reversal.
    Calculate the product of open_fraction and the result.
    Calculate the product of the result and modulation.
    Set ahp_pull to the result.
    Calculate the difference of resting_voltage and membrane_voltage.
    Calculate the sum of the result and sensory_drive.
    Calculate the difference of the result and ahp_pull.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.0667.
    Calculate the sum of membrane_voltage and the result.
    Set membrane_voltage to the result.
    Calculate the product of internal_calcium and 0.99967.
    Set internal_calcium to the result.
    Check if membrane_voltage is greater than or equal to threshold.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add clock to the end of spike_times.
        Calculate the sum of internal_calcium and 1.
        Set internal_calcium to the result.
        Set membrane_voltage to -67.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of clock and 0.001.
    Set clock to the result.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in spike_times.
Display the result to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the whole story of this cell is two interacting variables, voltage and calcium,
# and Python lets those two lines of physics sit side by side where a reader can see them.

DT           = 0.001    # seconds
V_REST       = -62.0    # millivolts, these cells sit deep and quiet
V_THRESH     = -38.0    # millivolts
TAU_M        = 0.015    # membrane time constant, seconds
CA_PER_SPIKE = 1.0      # calcium admitted by the shoulder of the action potential
CA_HALF      = 1.0      # calcium giving half maximal channel opening
TAU_CA       = 3.0      # seconds, calcium clearance sets the length of the silence
G_AHP        = 1.0      # strength of the KCa3.1 conductance
E_K          = -90.0    # potassium reversal potential, millivolts

def ah_neuron(sensory_drive_mv, modulation=1.0, seconds=30.0):
    """modulation below 1.0 mimics protein kinase A shrinking the afterhyperpolarisation."""
    v, ca, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, []
    for step in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        open_fraction = ca / (ca + CA_HALF)          # KCa3.1 channels track calcium
        ahp_pull = G_AHP * modulation * open_fraction * (v - E_K)
        v += ((V_REST - v) + sensory_drive_mv - ahp_pull) * (DT / TAU_M)
        ca -= ca * (DT / TAU_CA)                     # calcium is pumped away slowly
        if v >= V_THRESH:
            spikes.append(round(step * DT, 3))
            ca += CA_PER_SPIKE                       # tetrodotoxin resistant calcium shoulder
            v = V_REST - 5.0
    return spikes

healthy = ah_neuron(30.0)
inflamed = ah_neuron(30.0, modulation=0.25)          # inflammation blunts the brake
print("healthy spikes in 30 s:", len(healthy), "first few at", healthy[:4])
print("inflamed spikes in 30 s:", len(inflamed), "first few at", inflamed[:4])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Look for the biggest, smoothest, roundest cell body in the ganglion, with several long processes and not one leafy flap.

Stain it for calbindin and, in guinea pig ileum, more than four cells in five will light up.

Then put an electrode in it: the action potential is broad, it has a hump on the way down, the hump survives tetrodotoxin, and afterwards the cell sits hyperpolarised and unresponsive for seconds while everything around it carries on firing.

Nothing else in the human body combines that shape with that silence.

CHAPTER 278. DOGIEL TYPE III (NON-COG)

In 1899 a Russian anatomist dyed a scrap of gut blue and found a nerve cell shaped like a sea anemone, ten long arms and not one leaving home.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This relay cell of the enteric nervous system (ENS), the nerve net in the gut wall that runs digestion without the brain, was named by Alexander Stanislavovich Dogiel in 1899 by shape alone.

It has one axon, the output fibre, and up to ten dendrites, the input branches, all long, branched, tapering and ending inside its own ganglion, a bead of nerve cell bodies; it is an interneuron, speaking only to other neurons.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is smooth and oval with dendrites leaving radially like spokes, the formal test against the human type V neuron, whose dendrites and axon share one stem.

SIZE:

Human type III cell bodies are unmeasured, so they are bracketed by the measured human types, type II at 904 plus or minus 210 square micrometres and type V at 449 plus or minus 110, giving fifteen to thirty micrometres wide.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Pig type III cells make nitric oxide and human ones do not, and within human tissue some carry calbindin and some calretinin, two calcium-binding marker proteins.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They sit in the myenteric plexus, also called Auerbach's plexus, the sheet between the outer longitudinal and inner circular muscle coats, and only in human duodenum, jejunum and ileum, not stomach, colon or submucosal plexus.

The cell straddles an interface, dendrites inside the ganglion and axon crossing into the interganglionic strand.

NUMBER:

Nobody has counted this type, so within this section's budget of about 400 million enteric neurons a defensible range is two to eight million, half a percent to two percent of the enteric nervous system, at low confidence given a 2022 recount by Michel and colleagues nearer 168 million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Enteric cells are either AH cells, which slump for seconds after a spike, or S cells, which fire when driven, and this presumed S cell should rest near minus 58 to minus 76 millivolts with fast synaptic blips of 3.5 to 16.5 millivolts.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The long dendrites carry fast nicotinic synapses from the gut's own sensory cells and from neighbouring interneurons, and the axon drives the motor neurons that move muscle.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

One axon and only one, bare, under two micrometres wide, conducting at 0.1 to 0.5 metres per second and ending in varicosities, beads of transmitter strung along the fibre.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Human type III cells make no nitric oxide and are mostly cholinergic, releasing acetylcholine and staining for choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), the enzyme that builds it.

MYELINATION:

None, a rule of the whole organ, because the gut wall holds no oligodendrocytes and no myelinating cells inside its ganglia, so every enteric signal is slow.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest, since the cell is small and runs none of the seconds-long potassium currents of the sensory class, and enteric ganglia hold no capillaries, so fuel diffuses in from surrounding vessels.

PLASTICITY:

Human myenteric numbers fall with age and inflamed survivors switch peptides rather than die, so the likeliest change here is silent movement of synapses along the long dendritic tree.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Enteric glia wrap ganglionic neurons far more tightly than a brain astrocyte does, carrying glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), the protein S100B and the factor Sox10 where up to eighty percent of glia just outside carry none, and their S100B sets gut motor circuit excitability.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the ganglion becomes a switchboard of private conversations instead of a room where everyone hears everyone, because every other relay hears only synapses at its own doorstep.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The tapering dendrite is a filter, not a wire, so a synapse two hundred micrometres out delivers a fraction of the voltage it would at the cell body: this neuron computes with distance.

It also receives slow synaptic events lasting tens of seconds, spills transmitter into shared ganglionic fluid by volume transmission, and is tuned by enteric glial calcium waves and by nitric oxide from neighbours, a gas needing no synapse.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: fast nicotinic events of 3.5 to 16.5 millivolts tagged with dendritic distance 0 to 300 micrometres, plus slow events as a gain of 1.0 to 2.0.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine onto excitatory and inhibitory motor neurons and other interneurons, as spike times at 0 to 30 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage, per-synapse distance, slow excitability gain, refractory countdown.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 58 to minus 76 millivolts, threshold minus 40 millivolts, length constant 200 to 300 micrometres, dendrite count 3 to 10.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 milliseconds, fast event 7 to 52 milliseconds, slow event 10 to 300 seconds, axonal delay 2 to 300 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: losing cholinergic myenteric interneurons breaks the reflex chain, giving achalasia, chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction and slow transit constipation.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a Dogiel type three interneuron relays a signal, weakening each input by its distance out along the long dendrite.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called weight with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called strengths with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called distances with initial value empty list.
While index is less than the total number of items in strengths remains true, repeat the following steps.
    Set weight to the difference of 1 and the quotient of the item at position index in distances divided by 250.
    If weight is less than 0 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set weight to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the product of the item at position index in strengths and weight.
    Set index to the sum of index and 1.
End the loop.
Display voltage to the console.
Return voltage to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python was chosen because the model is a few lines of arithmetic a novice can read as English.

import math

REST_MV, THRESH_MV, LAMBDA_UM = -65.0, -40.0, 250.0

def relay(inputs):
    """inputs: (strength in mV, distance from the cell body in micrometres)."""
    v = REST_MV
    for strength_mv, distance_um in inputs:
        # Real dendrites decay exponentially; the ERC used a linear stand-in.
        v += strength_mv * math.exp(-distance_um / LAMBDA_UM)
    return v, v >= THRESH_MV

for name, pat in (("near", [(6.0, 20.0)] * 5), ("far", [(6.0, 300.0)] * 5)):
    print("{:>4}: {:6.2f} mV fired={}".format(name, *relay(pat)))

# near: -37.31 mV fired=True
#  far: -55.96 mV fired=False

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

One axon plus up to ten long, branched, tapering dendrites all stopping inside the home ganglion, which rules out type I with its short leafy plates, type II whose long processes are all axons that leave, and type V whose processes share one stem.

CHAPTER 279. FILAMENTOUS NEURONS (NON-COG)

Most gut neurons look like little trees; this one looks like a dandelion clock, a round body with fourteen hair-thin filaments sticking out in every direction.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This cell of the enteric nervous system (ENS), the nerve net in the gut wall, is named for its dendrites, the input branches, which are thin, straight and never flattened into the leaf-like plates other gut neurons carry.

Dye-filling guinea pig small intestine, Simon Brookes and colleagues found filamentous cells averaged fourteen fine processes up to fifty micrometres long and made up seven percent of the sample.

Many send their axon out of the gut entirely, and these intestinofugal neurons, from the Latin for fleeing the intestine, tell the sympathetic nervous system how loaded a loop of bowel is.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The filaments leave the small compact cell body as a starburst and never taper to a point, the fine distinction from the long-dendritic type III cell, and one dye-filled human colonic example had an axon that forked in two.

SIZE:

Each filament reaches about fifty micrometres, so the input field is a sphere roughly one hundred micrometres across, and the filaments are under one micrometre thick, at the resolving limit of a light microscope.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Filamentous intestinofugal neurons, whose axon leaves the gut for a prevertebral sympathetic ganglion.

• Filamentous interneurons, whose axon stays inside the plexus.

• The stout human colonic variant, with thicker branching dendrites and a forking axon.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell bodies sit in the myenteric plexus, also called Auerbach's plexus, between the two muscle coats of small intestine and colon, and some in the submucosal plexus, also called Meissner's plexus.

The defining interface: intestinofugal axons leave the gut wall through the mesenteric nerves to end in the coeliac, superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric ganglia in front of the spine.

NUMBER:

If the guinea pig seven percent carries over, filamentous neurons would number about twenty-eight million within this section's budget of roughly 400 million enteric neurons, but human sampling is thin, so the range is four to twenty-eight million, best figure twelve million or three percent, at low to moderate confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These are S neurons, firing when driven with none of the seconds-long slump of the sensory AH class, resting between minus 58 and minus 76 millivolts, and the intestinofugal members fire tonically, meaning steadily, at a rate climbing with pressure inside the bowel.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The fourteen short filaments deliver roughly equal weight, making this a fair-minded counter rather than a distance-weighted computer, and intestinofugal output excites sympathetic neurons that send noradrenaline back to slow the gut.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

One unmyelinated axon, often forking soon after it leaves, running at 0.1 to 0.5 metres per second, and in intestinofugal members crossing several centimetres of mesenteric nerve, so an ileal signal can take a full second to arrive.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine is primary and these cells are reliably immunoreactive for choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), the enzyme that builds it, while many also store peptides such as vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and enkephalin, and none makes nitric oxide.

MYELINATION:

None, which matters because part of the axon leaves the gut, where a mesenteric nerve carries it in a Remak bundle, a trough in a non-myelinating Schwann cell holding many bare axons, so the fibre is escorted but never insulated.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low for the small cell body, which lives on diffusion because enteric ganglia hold no capillaries, but high for the intestinofugal axon, which keeps centimetres of bare membrane charged during tonic firing.

PLASTICITY:

Chronic distension and partial obstruction change the activity and chemistry of these neurons, fitting for a cell whose job is to report load, so the peptide cargo should be modelled as adjustable.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Enteric glia sheathe the cell body and all fourteen filaments, carrying glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), the protein S100B and the factor Sox10, but up to eighty percent of glia outside ganglia lack those markers and the mesenteric custodian is a Schwann cell, so no other enteric neuron passes between three glial regimes.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this class and the gut loses its outbound voice, so the bowel becomes a set of independent segments acting on local news instead of an organ that coordinates over half a metre without troubling the brain.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell is an integrator in the engineering sense, summing distension over seconds and holding a rate that encodes accumulated load rather than single events.

Its peptide release from varicosities is volume transmission, lifting prevertebral excitability for tens of seconds inside a ganglion that also receives spinal input, making that ganglion a site of peripheral integration.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: fast nicotinic events, 3.5 to 16.5 millivolts, on up to 14 filaments of equal weight; distension as pressure, 0 to 40 millimetres of mercury.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine plus peptides onto the coeliac, superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric ganglia, at 0.5 to 20 hertz.

• STATE: count of active filaments, running pressure estimate, voltage, tonic output rate.

• PARAMETERS: filament count 14 over a range of 8 to 20, filament length up to 50 micrometres, rest minus 58 to minus 76 millivolts, extramural axon 2 to 15 centimetres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 milliseconds, fast event 7 to 52 milliseconds, pressure integration 1 to 10 seconds, extramural delay 40 to 1500 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: losing this signal abolishes the reflex by which a distended loop inhibits its neighbours, and in Hirschsprung's disease no such cell exists in the affected bowel.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert gut wall stretch, sampled by fourteen thin filaments, into the tonic rate an intestinofugal neuron sends out of the bowel to a sympathetic ganglion.
Create a number variable called active with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called pressure with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called rate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called reports with initial value empty list.
For each report in reports, perform the following operations.
    If report is greater than 0 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set active to the sum of active and 1.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
If active is greater than 14 is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set active to 14.
End the conditional block.
Set rate to the quotient of active divided by 14.
Set rate to the product of rate and the quotient of pressure divided by the sum of pressure and 12.
Set rate to the product of rate and 19.5.
Set rate to the sum of rate and 0.5.
Display rate to the console.
Return rate to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python was chosen because the model is pure arithmetic with no libraries, so the reader can run it unchanged.

FILAMENTS = 14         # measured average number of fine processes
REST_HZ = 0.5          # model parameter: background chatter
MAX_HZ = 20.0          # model parameter: ceiling rate
HALF_MMHG = 12.0       # model parameter: pressure giving half drive

def rate(pressure_mmhg, active_filaments):
    """Tonic rate sent out of the gut to a prevertebral ganglion."""
    active = max(0, min(active_filaments, FILAMENTS))  # cannot exceed 14
    # Saturating: doubling a small load matters, doubling a big one does not.
    saturating = pressure_mmhg / (pressure_mmhg + HALF_MMHG)
    return REST_HZ + (MAX_HZ - REST_HZ) * (active / FILAMENTS) * saturating

for mmhg, active in ((0, 0), (6, 4), (12, 9), (30, 14)):
    print("{:>2} mmHg {:>2}/14 -> {:5.2f} Hz".format(mmhg, active, rate(mmhg, active)))

#  0 mmHg  0/14 ->  0.50 Hz
#  6 mmHg  4/14 ->  2.36 Hz
# 12 mmHg  9/14 ->  6.77 Hz
# 30 mmHg 14/14 -> 14.43 Hz

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

About fourteen hair-thin filaments radiating like a dandelion clock, none flattened and none tapering, which rules out types I and III, while the single axon rules out type II, and its intestinofugal members carry the gut's own signal out to the sympathetic ganglia in front of the spine.

CHAPTER 280. DENDRITIC TYPE II NEURONS (Many-Axon Tufted Gut Neuron) (NON-COG)

This is the cell that lets your intestine feel itself, and this version of it grew a beard.

Type II is a numbered slot in a hundred-year-old catalogue and teaches nothing, so the number goes and the two verified structural facts become the name.

Many-Axon names what defines the type II family, several processes that all look like axons and all conduct action potentials, rather than one axon and many receiving branches.

Tufted names the feature that separates this variant from the plain adendritic form, namely the extra true dendrites it carries alongside those axons.

Gut Neuron fixes it to the intestinal wall, and the name stops there on purpose, because although a sensory role has been proposed by analogy with guinea pig work, these cells are only occasionally found in the human small intestinal myenteric plexus and their human function remains unknown.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The Dogiel type II neuron is the sensing cell of the enteric nervous system (ENS), the nerve net in the gut wall that runs digestion without the brain, and it is an intrinsic primary afferent neuron (IPAN), a sensory cell sitting inside the organ it senses.

Its long processes are all axons, meaning output fibres, so the classic form has no true dendrites, but the dendritic variant, found by Hans-Joachim Stach in pig and later in human small intestine, adds short dendrites on the cell body and projects centimetres anally.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The largest cell body in the plexus, smooth and oval, with several long axons leaving at widely spaced points, a beard of short dendrites, and one axon crossing the circular muscle to end beneath the gut lining.

SIZE:

Human Dogiel type II cell bodies average 904 plus or minus 210 square micrometres in cross-section, twice the 449 plus or minus 110 of the human type V neuron, which as a circle gives a diameter of about 34 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• The beard: non-dendritic type II cells, the common form, versus dendritic type II cells with short somatic dendrites.

• Projection: circumferential in the majority, versus the long anal projection of the dendritic variant.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell body sits in the myenteric plexus, also called Auerbach's plexus, between the two muscle coats, reported for this variant in human duodenum, jejunum and ileum, while type II cells generally also occupy the submucosal plexus, also called Meissner's plexus.

The critical interface: one process crosses the circular muscle and submucosa to end in the lamina propria, the tissue under the cell layer lining the bowel, so the neuron spans the whole gut wall.

NUMBER:

Type II cells are about ten percent of human small intestinal myenteric neurons and under one percent in the stomach, and this variant is only occasionally identified, giving perhaps one to four million cells within this section's budget of about 400 million, a quarter of one percent to one percent of the enteric nervous system, at low confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Type II cells are the classic AH neurons, whose broad 2.9 millisecond action potential is humped on its falling phase by calcium that opens calcium-activated potassium channels, producing a slow slump below the minus 58 to minus 76 millivolt resting level that averages seven seconds, ranges from two to ten, and forbids firing throughout.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They synapse onto one another in self-reinforcing assemblies, their mucosal endings are excited by serotonin from enterochromaffin cells in the lining, and a slow synaptic event shuts the slump down and turns a cell firing once every seven seconds into one firing steadily.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Several axons, typically three to ten, all unmyelinated, which is the clearest structural break from every other enteric class, one probing the mucosa, others circumferential, and in this variant at least one running centimetres anally at 0.1 to 0.5 metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Acetylcholine is the main transmitter, carried with choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) in nearly all type II cells, alongside tachykinins such as substance P, and over eighty percent of guinea pig type II cells contain the marker protein calbindin, while this variant makes no nitric oxide.

MYELINATION:

None on any process, because the gut wall has no oligodendrocytes and no myelinating cells inside its ganglia, a real cost for a sensory cell and one reason urgent pain is delegated to myelinated spinal fibres outside the gut.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The highest of the three types here, since the largest cell body in the plexus feeds several long bare axons, every spike admits calcium that must be pumped out, and the long slump pumps potassium back with no capillary inside the ganglion to help.

PLASTICITY:

After gut infection these sensory cells become hyperexcitable as the slump shrinks or vanishes, a change that outlasts the inflammation and is a leading account of post-infectious irritable bowel syndrome, driven partly by mediators from resident mast cells.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Enteric glia wrap this cell more completely than any other in the plexus, because a large body with a seconds-long potassium efflux floods a tiny space with no capillary to drain it, and those glia answer its firing with calcium waves and release adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which acts back on neurons as a transmitter.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the intestine goes numb to itself: muscle would still contract, driven by pacemaker cells and motor neurons, but nothing would know that food had arrived, so peristalsis becomes a blind fixed rhythm instead of a response.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The slow slump is an analogue memory whose depth encodes how recently and how often the cell fired, while a slow synaptic event is a longer memory in which a peptide activates protein kinase C and closes those same potassium channels for minutes.

These cells are coupled into assemblies that excite one another, so the functional unit is a group, and they use volume transmission, receive nitric oxide from neighbours, drive glial calcium waves and are sensitised by mast cell mediators.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: serotonin at mucosal endings, 0.1 to 10 micromolar; stretch as pressure, 0 to 40 millimetres of mercury; slow tachykinin events as a 0.1 to 1.0 multiplier on slump conductance.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine and tachykinins onto interneurons, motor neurons and other type II cells, at 0.1 to 20 hertz.

• STATE: voltage, slump conductance, intracellular calcium, slow-input gain, delay buffer for the anal axon.

• PARAMETERS: cell body 904 plus or minus 210 square micrometres, axon count 3 to 10, rest minus 58 to minus 76, threshold minus 40, reset minus 75 millivolts.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 20 milliseconds, spike half-width 2.9 milliseconds, slump about 7 seconds over a 2 to 10 range, slow event 10 to 300 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: gut infection leaves the cell hyperexcitable; losing it removes the peristaltic trigger, contributing to chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction; in Parkinson's disease it accumulates misfolded alpha-synuclein years before tremor.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run one millisecond of a dendritic Dogiel type two sensory neuron, in which a slow afterhyperpolarisation silences the cell for seconds unless a slow excitatory input releases that brake.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called brake with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called change with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called slow_input with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called spike with initial value false.
If slow_input is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set gain to 0.15.
End the conditional block.
Set change to the difference of 30 and the product of brake and gain.
Set change to the sum of change and the difference of -65 and voltage.
Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the quotient of change divided by 20.
Set brake to the difference of brake and the quotient of brake divided by 7000.
If voltage is greater than or equal to -40 is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set spike to true.
    Set voltage to -75.
    Set brake to the sum of brake and 12.
End the conditional block.
Return spike to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python was chosen because the seven-second slump only shows itself over twenty thousand time steps, which Python runs with no libraries.

DT_MS, TAU_M_MS, TAU_AHP_MS = 1.0, 20.0, 7000.0   # AHP measured at about 7 s
V_REST, V_THRESH, V_RESET = -65.0, -40.0, -75.0
AHP_STEP_MV = 12.0      # hyperpolarising drive added by one spike
SLOW_GAIN = 0.15        # a slow synaptic event shuts the AHP down

def run(drive_mv, slow_on, duration_ms=20000):
    """Count spikes of one AH-type gut sensory neuron."""
    v, ahp, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, 0
    for _ in range(int(duration_ms / DT_MS)):
        gate = SLOW_GAIN if slow_on else 1.0
        effective = drive_mv - ahp * gate    # the brake, possibly released
        v += DT_MS * ((V_REST - v) + effective) / TAU_M_MS
        ahp -= DT_MS * ahp / TAU_AHP_MS      # brake bleeds away over seconds
        if v >= V_THRESH:
            v, spikes, ahp = V_RESET, spikes + 1, ahp + AHP_STEP_MV
    return spikes

for label, slow_on in (("brake on ", False), ("brake off", True)):
    print("{}: {:>3} spikes in 20 s".format(label, run(30.0, slow_on)))

# brake on :   3 spikes in 20 s
# brake off:  12 spikes in 20 s
# Same drive, four times the output: that is the slow synaptic switch.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A large smooth cell body of about 900 square micrometres whose several long processes are all axons, plus a fringe of short dendrites the ordinary type II cell lacks, and a broad 2.9 millisecond spike humped on its falling edge followed by a seven second slump during which nothing will make it fire.


PART EIGHTEEN: OTHER PERIPHERAL AND SPECIAL NEURONS

CHAPTER 281. CAROTID BODY AND AORTIC BODY GLOMUS CELL-ASSOCIATED AFFERENTS (Oxygen-Shortage Breath-Driving Neuron) (NON-COG)

Hold your breath and something in your neck starts shouting long before you feel the urge to breathe.

The existing label is an address plus a committee minute, naming two arterial locations and a partner cell without saying what the wire does.

Oxygen-Shortage names the stimulus it owns, since when arterial oxygen tension falls the partner glomus cell shuts its oxygen-sensitive potassium channels, depolarises, and floods this nerve ending with adenosine triphosphate (ATP) acting on P2X receptors.

Breath-Driving names the consequence, because the signal travels the glossopharyngeal nerve from the carotid body and the vagus nerve from the aortic body straight into the brainstem breathing centres and raises ventilation within seconds.

Neuron marks it as an afferent whose urgency is built into the anatomy, since the carotid body takes roughly one thousand to two thousand millilitres of blood per hundred grams of tissue per minute, the highest perfusion of any organ, so it samples arterial blood almost unchanged.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This fibre carries one message to the brainstem: the blood is running out of oxygen.

The sensing is done by neighbouring glomus cells, so this neuron reports rather than deliberates, which makes it non-cognitive.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is pseudounipolar, meaning one stalk leaves the round cell body and splits into two long branches like a letter T.

The far branch sheds its insulation and wraps four to twenty glomus cells in cup-shaped endings.

SIZE:

The cell body is 20 to 45 micrometres across, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre.

Its fibres run 1.3 to 7.5 micrometres thick when insulated and 0.17 to 1.7 when bare.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Large units, one insulated A fibre serving up to about thirty glomus cells, strongly sensitive to falling oxygen.

• Small units, one bare C fibre serving a handful of cells and responding less sensitively.

Aortic body afferents are the same design carried in the vagus nerve.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Carotid body afferent cell bodies sit in the petrosal ganglion of the ninth cranial nerve at the jugular foramen, reaching the carotid fork by the carotid sinus nerve.

Aortic afferents sit in the nodose ganglion of the vagus and end on the aortic arch, pulmonary trunk and subclavian arteries.

All end centrally in the commissural and caudal medial nucleus of the solitary tract.

The defining interface is this: the far ending lies outside the blood-brain barrier in raw arterial blood, the near ending deep inside the protected brain.

NUMBER:

No reliable human count exists.

In the rat, Laidler and Kay found 15,920 to 30,770 glomus cells across both carotid bodies, over 95 per cent of the organ's fibres are afferent, and one fibre serves up to thirty glomus cells.

A defensible bound is 2,000 to 20,000 such neurons per person, low confidence in the value and high in the order.

That is about one neuron in ten million, or 0.00001 per cent of the nervous system, inside this section's budget.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Each fibre ticks at a few impulses per second in room air.

Firing then climbs along a hyperbola as oxygen falls, turning steeply below about 60 millimetres of mercury, and it barely adapts because this is an alarm.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Its far ending is postsynaptic, receiving adenosine triphosphate (ATP) at P2X2 and P2X3 receptors and acetylcholine at nicotinic receptors.

Centrally it releases glutamate onto solitary tract neurons driving the pre-Botzinger complex, the rostral ventrolateral medulla and the paraventricular nucleus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Insulated fibres conduct at 3 to 30 metres per second and bare ones below 2.

The axon branches heavily inside the organ and ships mitochondria outward to keep its distant ending alive.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glutamate centrally.

Many also release substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) from the peripheral ending back onto glomus cells and vessels, making the contact two-way.

MYELINATION:

Insulated fibres carry myelin, a fatty spiral laid down by Schwann cells that lets the signal leap between gaps.

It stops short of the ending, because a bare membrane is needed to receive transmitter.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The carotid body has the highest blood flow per gram of any tissue in the body, around 2,000 millilitres per 100 grams per minute.

This ending is therefore never short of fuel even when the body is.

PLASTICITY:

Sustained low oxygen grows the organ several fold through the oxygen-sensing factor HIF-2 alpha, encoded by the gene EPAS1.

The repeated brief drops of sleep apnoea sensitise the pathway, leaving the sympathetic system hot all day.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Type II sustentacular cells here are unlike glia elsewhere.

They carry glial fibrillary acidic protein like astrocytes but also pannexin-1 channels releasing their own amplifying ATP, and they double as stem cells building new glomus cells in chronic hypoxia.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and breathing continues on carbon dioxide alone.

But altitude provokes no extra breathing, breath-hold loses its urgency, and the gasp ending an apnoea is delayed, so the region keeps its metronome and loses its siren.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The ending is presynaptic and postsynaptic to the same glomus cell.

Its peptides widen local vessels, so the sensor helps set the conditions it measures, nitric oxide damps it by volume transmission, and denervation makes the glomus cells shrink away.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: arterial oxygen pressure in millimetres of mercury, 20 to 110; carbon dioxide pressure, 20 to 80; pH, 7.0 to 7.6; cleft ATP and acetylcholine from named source glomus cells.

• OUTPUTS: an impulse train to named target neurons of the solitary tract nucleus, plus substance P and CGRP onto glomus cells and arterioles.

• STATE: ending membrane potential, receptor occupancy, refractory countdown, and a slow term tracking recent hypoxia.

• PARAMETERS: half-maximal oxygen pressure near 40 millimetres of mercury; Hill exponent near 2; tonic rate 1 to 4 impulses per second; ceiling 60 to 100.

• TIME CONSTANTS: synaptic delay a few milliseconds; whole reflex 1 to 3 seconds; sensitisation over hours; organ growth over weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: overactivity drives sympathetic overdrive in sleep apnoea, resistant hypertension and heart failure, and removing one carotid body cut systolic pressure by about 26 millimetres of mercury in eight of fifteen resistant hypertensives, while paragangliomas here grow about 0.83 millimetres a year.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn arterial oxygen and carbon dioxide pressures into a firing rate in a carotid body afferent fibre.
Create a number variable called oxygenPressure with initial value 100.
Create a number variable called carbonDioxidePressure with initial value 40.
Create a number variable called oxygenSquared with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called potassiumOpen with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called releaseDrive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firingRate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called firingHistory with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 20 times.
    Set oxygenSquared to the product of oxygenPressure and oxygenPressure.
    Set potassiumOpen to the quotient of oxygenSquared divided by the sum of oxygenSquared and 1600.
    Set releaseDrive to the difference of 1 and potassiumOpen.
    Set releaseDrive to the product of releaseDrive and releaseDrive.
    Set releaseDrive to the product of releaseDrive and releaseDrive.
    Set releaseDrive to the sum of releaseDrive and the product of 0.01 and the difference of carbonDioxidePressure and 40.
    Set firingRate to the sum of 1.5 and the product of releaseDrive and 90.
    Add firingRate to the end of firingHistory.
    Display firingRate to the console.
    Set oxygenPressure to the difference of oxygenPressure and 4.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the model is a short chain of continuous equations that the standard library alone will run anywhere.

import math

# Oxygen closes background potassium channels in the glomus cell, the cell
# depolarises, calcium enters, transmitter is released, the afferent fires.

HALF = 40.0        # mmHg giving half closure
CA_HALF = 0.5      # calcium for half maximal release

def afferent_rate(pao2, paco2=40.0, ph=7.40):
    open_k = pao2 ** 2 / (pao2 ** 2 + HALF ** 2)
    acid = (7.40 - ph) * 40.0 + (paco2 - 40.0) * 0.35
    vm = -55.0 + 35.0 * (1.0 - open_k) + acid       # glomus cell millivolts
    calcium = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(vm + 30.0) / 4.0))
    drive = calcium / (calcium + CA_HALF)
    return 1.5 + 88.5 * drive                       # impulses per second

if __name__ == "__main__":
    for po2 in (100, 80, 60, 45, 35, 25):
        print(po2, "mmHg ->", round(afferent_rate(po2), 1), "impulses per second")
    print("hypoxia plus hypercapnia:", round(afferent_rate(45, 55, 7.30), 1))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

This is the only sensory neuron whose receptive field is a drop of arterial blood, and the only common one that does not own its transducer.

Find a neck fibre silent about touch and screaming about oxygen, and you have found it.

CHAPTER 282. MERKEL CELLS (NON-COG)

Run a fingertip across a page of Braille and the dots are read, one by one, by cells that are not nerve cells at all.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A Merkel cell is a small pale oval cell in the deepest layer of the epidermis, and it must be flagged as not a neuron but a skin cell, drawing nothing from this section's neuron budget.

It senses touch and releases messengers onto a nerve ending at its base, and that partnership is the slowly adapting type I mechanoreceptor, written SA1, which resolves edges, corners and curvature.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell is oval and clear with a lobed nucleus, riveted to its neighbours by desmosomes and spiked on top with microvilli, so any skin deformation tugs its membrane.

Below, it is flattened against a disc-shaped nerve ending, backed by dense-core granules 80 to 120 nanometres across.

SIZE:

Merkel cells are 10 to 15 micrometres across, slightly larger than the skin cells around them.

The partner fibre is a thick insulated A-beta axon 6 to 12 micrometres in diameter.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Glabrous skin Merkel cells, clustered at the tips of the epidermal ridges that make fingerprints.

• Hairy skin Merkel cells, gathered into raised touch domes, one of which was found to hold 137 cells.

• Follicle-associated Merkel cells in collars round hair shafts, and mucosal cells of mouth and gum.

A second split separates innervated cells from non-innervated ones, which appear to signal only to local skin and immune cells.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Merkel cells live in the stratum basale, the deepest epidermal layer, densest in fingertips, palms, soles, lips and tongue tip, in touch domes throughout hairy skin, around hair follicles and in oral mucosa.

The critical interface is the dermal-epidermal junction, the basement membrane below which the nerve runs and through which it must pass, shedding myelin and Schwann cell, so this synapse sits in tissue with no blood supply.

NUMBER:

Merkel cells are not neurons and draw nothing from the neuron budget, which must not be misread as an omission.

Published fingertip densities differ fivefold, at about 2,000 per square centimetre in one histological series and about 10,000 in a widely cited review.

Their nerve partners are far fewer, at roughly 70 to 100 SA1 fibres per square centimetre at the fingertip, and one hand carries about 17,000 tactile afferent units of which SA1 units are commonly given as 13 to 25 per cent.

No whole-body count is published, and scaling over sparser skin gives a low-confidence bound of tens of millions.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Merkel cells are electrically excitable, which is startling for a skin cell.

Their trigger is PIEZO2, a ring-shaped protein whose pore opens on stretch, found in about 80 per cent of identified human Merkel cells and inactivating in about ten milliseconds, so the SA1 discharge bursts near 100 impulses per second during the press and settles to 10 to 40.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Each cell synapses onto one flattened A-beta ending whose fibre collects from a cluster a few millimetres wide.

That fibre runs unbroken to the cuneate or gracile nucleus, then crosses to the ventral posterolateral thalamus and on to area 3b of somatosensory cortex.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Not applicable to the Merkel cell, which has no axon and cannot conduct an impulse any distance, an absence that is definitional rather than an oversight.

The axon belongs to its partner neuron in a dorsal root or trigeminal ganglion, conducting at 35 to 75 metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Serotonin, also called 5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT, is the transmitter released onto the nerve ending.

Work published in 2016 showed touch triggers its release onto fast 5-HT3A and slower metabotropic receptors, and that blockade degrades both electrical and behavioural responses to touch.

MYELINATION:

The Merkel cell has none, since it is not a neuron.

Its partner axon is myelinated throughout the dermis, which is why touch beats pain to the spinal cord, and both myelin and Schwann cell stop at the basement membrane.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The epidermis contains no blood vessels, so the cell lives on oxygen and glucose diffusing up from dermal capillaries.

That caps its metabolic rate and explains why it sits in the layer nearest the supply.

PLASTICITY:

The population is rebuilt from local progenitors over weeks to months.

The nerve must therefore keep forming synapses with new partners while the fibre itself persists, a structural plasticity with no central equivalent.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

There are no astrocytes, oligodendrocytes or microglia here at all, which is a real difference rather than missing data.

The support cells are keratinocytes, ordinary skin cells that anchor the Merkel cell, transmit force to it, and release ATP that can excite the afferent independently.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete Merkel cells and the fingertip still feels motion, vibration and stretch.

What it loses is form: the steady high-resolution image of a shape pressed into skin, and with it Braille, the milled edge of a coin, and curvature judged in the dark.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The cell is receptosecretory, sensing and secreting at once.

The complex splits its computation across two cells and two genomes, PIEZO2 in the Merkel cell timing the onset while PIEZO2 in the nerve ending sustains the response, with desmosomes coupling neighbours mechanically.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: indentation depth in millimetres, 0 to about 2; indentation velocity in millimetres per second; local curvature and strain; temperature, since cooling raises firing.

• OUTPUTS: serotonin into the cleft onto the named target A-beta slowly adapting type I afferent, plus CGRP and other peptides onto vessels and immune cells.

• STATE: PIEZO2 inactivation level, intracellular calcium, releasable serotonin pool fraction, membrane potential.

• PARAMETERS: threshold near 10 micrometres of indentation; dynamic gain near 20 impulses per second per millimetre per second; static gain near 25 per millimetre; receptive field 2 to 4 millimetres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: PIEZO2 inactivation about 10 milliseconds; synaptic delay 1 to 3 milliseconds; slow adaptation over 1 to 10 seconds; cell replacement over weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of PIEZO2 function in humans causes profound loss of touch and limb position sense while pain survives, and malignant change gives Merkel cell carcinoma at about 0.68 to 0.7 cases per 100,000 people yearly in the United States, from Merkel cell polyomavirus or ultraviolet damage.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert an indentation of the skin into the slowly adapting impulse train of a Merkel cell and its afferent fibre.
Create a number variable called stepCount with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called indentation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called previousIndentation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called indentationRate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called fastComponent with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called staticDrive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called serotoninPool with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called firingRate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called impulseRecord with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 300 times.
    Set stepCount to the sum of stepCount and 1.
    If stepCount is less than or equal to 100, then perform the following actions.
        Set indentation to the sum of indentation and 0.005.
    End the conditional block.
    Set indentationRate to the quotient of the difference of indentation and previousIndentation divided by 0.001.
    Set previousIndentation to indentation.
    Set fastComponent to the sum of fastComponent and the product of 0.1 and the difference of indentationRate and fastComponent.
    Set staticDrive to the difference of indentation and 0.01.
    If staticDrive is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set staticDrive to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set firingRate to the sum of the product of 20 and fastComponent and the product of 25 and the product of staticDrive and serotoninPool.
    Set serotoninPool to the difference of serotoninPool and the product of 0.00002 and firingRate.
    Set serotoninPool to the sum of serotoninPool and the product of 0.0007 and the difference of 1 and serotoninPool.
    Add firingRate to the end of impulseRecord.
End the loop.
Display firingRate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because this model is the natural firmware for a prosthetic fingertip, running in a small microcontroller with fixed timing and no libraries.

#include <stdio.h>

/* Merkel cell to afferent model, two stages. Build with cc -std=c99 */
int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.001, tau_fast = 0.010, tau_pool = 1.500;
    double indent = 0.0, prev = 0.0, fast = 0.0, pool = 1.0;
    int step;
    for (step = 0; step < 3000; step++) {
        double t = step * dt, rate, drive, firing;
        indent = (t < 0.100) ? (0.5 * t / 0.100) : 0.5;  /* ramp then hold 0.5 mm */
        rate = (indent - prev) / dt;
        prev = indent;
        if (rate < 0.0) rate = 0.0;
        fast += dt * (rate - fast) / tau_fast;           /* PIEZO2, 10 ms decay */
        drive = indent - 0.010;                          /* 10 micrometre threshold */
        if (drive < 0.0) drive = 0.0;
        firing = 20.0 * fast + 25.0 * drive * pool;      /* impulses per second */
        pool += dt * (1.0 - pool) / tau_pool;            /* serotonin refill */
        pool -= dt * firing * 0.02;                      /* serotonin use */
        if (pool < 0.05) pool = 0.05;
        if (step % 300 == 0)
            printf("t=%5.3f s  indent=%5.3f mm  firing=%6.1f Hz\n", t, indent, firing);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is a skin cell behaving like a nerve cell, holding a synapse above the basement membrane where no neuron can go.

Look for cytokeratin 20 as a dot beside its nucleus and a flattened nerve disc pressed against its base.

CHAPTER 283. PINEALOCYTES (Night-Length Reporting Cell) (NON-COG)

Deep in the middle of your skull a pinecone-shaped gland spends every night turning darkness into a hormone.

The old name is pure address, telling you only that the cell sits in the pine-cone-shaped gland.

Night-Length names the quantity it actually measures, because the cell is silent in light and secretes melatonin only in darkness, so the length of its nightly secretory episode tracks the length of the night and thereby the season.

Reporting names the job, since the cell does not decide anything but publishes the measurement into the bloodstream for the whole body to read.

Cell rather than Neuron is the honest head noun, and it is the gland's dominant voice, making up about ninety-five percent of the gland's cells, its output switched on by noradrenaline from the superior cervical ganglion.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A pinealocyte makes melatonin, the chemical announcement of biological night, and must be flagged as not a neuron, drawing nothing from this section's neuron budget.

It descends from a light-sensitive nerve cell that in fish and birds still sees light through the skull, and its work now is arithmetic on time: it turns the length of a nerve signal switched on only in darkness into a nightly pulse of melatonin.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is round or pear-shaped with a large pale nucleus and sends club-shaped processes ending in swellings against capillary walls.

Its signature is the synaptic ribbon, a dense rod built around the protein RIBEYE, the organelle of retinal photoreceptors, here in a cell with no postsynaptic partner.

SIZE:

Pinealocytes are 7 to 11 micrometres across, the dark type reaching about 11.2.

The gland's median volume by magnetic resonance imaging is 88.5 cubic millimetres, range 12.3 to 411, with means near 99 to 104.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Type 1, the light pinealocytes, pale and mitochondria-rich, more numerous than type 2 in both children and adults.

• Type 2, the dark pinealocytes, with a deeply infolded nuclear envelope, abundant rough endoplasmic reticulum and numerous cilia.

Single-cell sequencing has since confirmed two molecularly distinct populations with different daily gene expression.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Pinealocytes exist only in the pineal gland, or epiphysis cerebri, hanging from the roof of the third ventricle on the pineal stalk, in the quadrigeminal cistern above the superior colliculi and behind the habenular and posterior commissures.

Two interfaces define it: the gland lies outside the blood-brain barrier with windowed, fenestrated capillaries, making it a circumventricular organ open to the general circulation, and the pineal recess opens into the third ventricle, so its processes also face cerebrospinal fluid.

NUMBER:

No published stereological count of human pinealocytes exists, and that gap must be stated rather than papered over.

About 95 per cent of human pineal cells are pinealocytes, the rest fibrous astrocytes.

In sheep, counting gave 3.24 million per gland before puberty rising to 7.38 million after, so a defensible human bound is a few million to perhaps twenty million, with moderate confidence and none of the neuron budget.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Mammalian pinealocytes are not spiking cells, which is the honest headline.

Their real signal is cyclic adenosine monophosphate, or cyclic AMP, an internal messenger whose rise switches on the melatonin factory, so output is graded and measured in picograms per millilitre rather than impulses per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The cell is postsynaptic to sympathetic endings and presynaptic to nobody.

The chain runs from light-sensitive retinal ganglion cells along the retinohypothalamic tract to the suprachiasmatic nucleus, then the paraventricular nucleus, the intermediolateral cell column of the upper thoracic cord, and the superior cervical ganglion, whose fibres climb back as the nervi conarii.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Not applicable, because a pinealocyte has no axon: its processes are short secretory extensions on capillaries that conduct no impulse, an absence that is definitional rather than unknown.

The axons inside the gland belong to unmyelinated sympathetic neurons.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Its product is melatonin, made from tryptophan through serotonin to N-acetylserotonin by arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT), the rate-limiting step and the clock's actual lever, then to melatonin by acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase (ASMT).

The transmitter it receives is noradrenaline at beta-1 adrenoceptors, which raises cyclic AMP, activates protein kinase A and switches on the AANAT gene.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable, since there is no axon to insulate.

The sympathetic fibres reaching it are unmyelinated, which is why the nightly signal arrives as a slow chemical tide rather than a fast volley.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

For its size the pineal is one of the most richly perfused structures in the head.

Synthesis consumes the essential amino acid tryptophan and requires S-adenosylmethionine as methyl donor, with energy use rising steeply at night.

PLASTICITY:

The plasticity is transcriptional and dramatic: AANAT protein rises many-fold at night and is destroyed by the proteasome within minutes of light, so one bright light at two in the morning collapses production.

Season is encoded by the duration of the pulse rather than its height.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Pineal interstitial cells are fibrous astrocytes that, unlike astrocytes elsewhere, maintain no blood-brain barrier, because the capillaries are deliberately leaky.

Recent transcriptomic work implicates the local microglia in actively building the calcified grains of brain sand, which microglia do nowhere else.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take pinealocytes out and sleep still occurs, driven by the hypothalamus.

But its timing drifts, seasonal physiology flattens, and the nightly dip in body temperature loses its anchor, so the region keeps its geography and loses its calendar.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The computation here is gene transcription plus regulated protein destruction, over minutes to hours.

The output is volume transmission in its purest form, since melatonin is fat-soluble, is never stored in vesicles, and diffuses straight through the membrane into blood and cerebrospinal fluid, feeding back onto the cell's own receptors.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: noradrenaline from named source sympathetic terminals of the superior cervical ganglion, gated by the suprachiasmatic nucleus; retinal light in lux, 0 to 100,000; circulating tryptophan.

• OUTPUTS: melatonin into capillary blood and cerebrospinal fluid, with nocturnal plasma peaks near 60 to 80 picograms per millilitre in young and middle-aged adults, and three-in-the-morning reference limits of 18.3 to 134 picograms per millilitre in men and 19.0 to 197 in women.

• STATE: cyclic AMP concentration, AANAT protein level, serotonin pool size, intracellular calcium, accumulated melatonin.

• PARAMETERS: beta-1 adrenoceptor density; half-suppressing light of the order of tens of lux; maximum synthesis rate; proteasomal degradation constant for AANAT.

• TIME CONSTANTS: cyclic AMP rise and fall in 5 to 15 minutes; AANAT destruction in minutes after light; melatonin half-life 30 to 50 minutes; the nightly pulse 8 to 10 hours.

• FAILURE MODE: gland loss or sympathetic denervation as in Horner syndrome abolishes the rhythm, while pineocytoma, pineoblastoma and germ cell tumours compress the midbrain tectum causing Parinaud syndrome, a paralysis of upward gaze, and can cause hydrocephalus.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert the length of the night into a nightly pulse of melatonin from a pinealocyte.
Create a number variable called clockHour with initial value 18.
Create a number variable called sympatheticDrive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called cyclicAmp with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called acetylTransferase with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called synthesis with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called breakdown with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called melatonin with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called melatoninTrace with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 96 times.
    Set sympatheticDrive to 0.
    If either clockHour is greater than or equal to 21 or clockHour is less than 7 is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set sympatheticDrive to 0.9.
    End the conditional block.
    Set cyclicAmp to the sum of cyclicAmp and the product of 3 and sympatheticDrive.
    Set cyclicAmp to the difference of cyclicAmp and the product of 1.67 and cyclicAmp.
    Set synthesis to the quotient of the product of 5 and cyclicAmp divided by the sum of cyclicAmp and 1.
    Set breakdown to the product of acetylTransferase and the sum of 0.1 and the difference of 1.5 and the product of 1.5 and sympatheticDrive.
    Set acetylTransferase to the sum of acetylTransferase and the difference of synthesis and breakdown.
    Set melatonin to the sum of melatonin and the difference of the product of 0.75 and acetylTransferase and the product of 0.42 and melatonin.
    Add melatonin to the end of melatoninTrace.
    Display melatonin to the console.
    Set clockHour to the remainder of the sum of clockHour and 0.25 divided by 24.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because this is a slow chemical model where readability matters more than speed, and clock arithmetic over hours reads cleanly in floating point.

# A night window opens the sympathetic gate, light closes it within minutes,
# cyclic AMP drives AANAT, and AANAT makes melatonin.

DT, CAMP_TAU, MEL_TAU, SCALE = 0.25, 0.15, 0.60, 5.0   # hours, and a pg/mL scale

def run(pulse=None):
    hour, camp, aanat, mel, trace = 18.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, {}
    for _ in range(int(24 / DT)):
        night = 1.0 if (hour >= 21.0 or hour < 7.0) else 0.0
        lux = 300.0 if (pulse and pulse[0] <= hour < pulse[1]) else (1.0 if night else 500.0)
        drive = night * 900.0 / (900.0 + lux * lux)     # half suppression near 30 lux
        camp += DT * (12.0 * drive - camp / CAMP_TAU)
        aanat += DT * (5.0 * camp / (camp + 1.0) - aanat * (0.4 + 6.0 * (1.0 - drive)))
        mel += DT * (3.0 * aanat - mel / MEL_TAU)
        trace[round(hour, 2)] = round(mel * SCALE, 1)
        hour = (hour + DT) % 24.0
    return trace

if __name__ == "__main__":
    normal, pulsed = run(), run(pulse=(2.0, 3.0))
    for h in (22.0, 0.0, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 4.0, 6.0):
        print(h, "h  normal", normal[h], "pg/mL   light pulse", pulsed[h], "pg/mL")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell in the body keeping the synaptic ribbon of a photoreceptor while having nothing to see and nobody to talk to.

It holds more serotonin than any other tissue on earth, and an enzyme that appears at dusk and is shredded by light within minutes.

CHAPTER 284. PARANEURONS (Sense-And-Secrete Cell) (NON-COG)

There is a whole secret nervous system in your body made of cells that were never invited to call themselves neurons.

Paraneuron is a committee term built from a Greek prefix meaning beside, and it teaches a student nothing about what the cells do.

Sense names the first half of the definition, that these cells detect an adequate stimulus such as light, stretch, a chemical, or a taste.

Secrete names the second half, that they answer that stimulus by releasing the contents of neurotransmitter-like or neurosecretion-like granules onto a nearby nerve ending or into the blood.

Cell is the honest head noun, since this is a category rather than a single cell type, and the original three criteria, such granules, transmitter-like contents, and stimulus-triggered release, are exactly what the new name records with no invented function added.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Paraneuron names a family, coined by the Japanese histologist Tsuneo Fujita in 1977 for scattered cells of the gut, lung, tongue, skin and adrenal gland that do what a neuron does but lack an axon.

His definition has three tests: the cell holds granules like synaptic vesicles, it makes substances identical or close to neurotransmitters, and it recognises a stimulus and answers by releasing them.

None is a neuron and none draws on this section's neuron budget, yet they are the body's interoceptive front end, and Fujita concluded there is no distinct boundary between neurons and paraneurons.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The shared design is a polarised bottle-shaped cell whose outward end faces gut lumen, airway, mouth or blood and carries the sensor.

The inward end holds dense-core granules 80 to 300 nanometres across and often a true presynaptic active zone.

SIZE:

Cell bodies run about 5 to 30 micrometres: Merkel cells 10 to 15, pinealocytes 7 to 11, glomus cells roughly 10 to 15, enteroendocrine cells 10 to 20 tall, taste receptor cells 40 to 70 long and slender.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Open type, reaching the lumen with a tuft of microvilli and tasting its contents, as most enteroendocrine cells and all taste cells do.

• Closed type, with no luminal contact, answering stretch, blood chemistry or nerve input, as glomus and chromaffin cells do.

• Wired, forming a true synapse onto a sensory nerve ending and delivering in milliseconds, as Merkel, glomus, taste and neuropod cells do.

• Volume-transmitting, releasing into blood over seconds to hours, as hormone-secreting gut cells and pinealocytes do.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Paraneurons occupy every interface between the body and what is not the body.

• Gastrointestinal epithelium from stomach to rectum, as enterochromaffin, L, K, I, D and G cells, including the neuropod subset.

• Airway epithelium, as pulmonary neuroendocrine cells and their clusters, the neuroepithelial bodies at airway branch points.

• Taste buds of the fungiform, foliate and circumvallate papillae, plus palate, epiglottis and upper oesophagus.

• Carotid bodies at the carotid bifurcation, aortic bodies on the aortic arch, adrenal medulla and paraganglia including the organ of Zuckerkandl.

• Sympathetic ganglia as small intensely fluorescent cells, basal epidermis as Merkel cells, pineal gland as pinealocytes, urethra and nose as brush cells.

NUMBER:

Enteroendocrine cells are about 1 per cent of the intestinal epithelium, making the gut lining the largest endocrine organ in the body, with roughly 100 million shed and replaced daily.

Taste receptor cells number roughly 100,000 to 800,000 across 2,000 to 8,000 taste buds of 50 to 100 cells each, pulmonary neuroendocrine cells are about 0.5 per cent of airway epithelium, and rat carotid bodies hold about 8,700 to 11,500 glomus cells each.

The class reaches hundreds of millions of cells, yet contributes exactly zero to the neuron budget.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Many are genuinely excitable, with enteroendocrine and taste cells firing sodium action potentials, glomus and Merkel cells firing calcium spikes, and chromaffin cells firing like sympathetic neurons.

Pinealocytes never spike, and the shared currency across the class is intracellular calcium.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Wired paraneurons synapse onto primary sensory neurons and are effectively the true first cell of those pathways.

Neuropod cells synapse onto vagal neurons of the nodose ganglion and transduce a sugar stimulus in milliseconds using glutamate, while taste type II cells release ATP through CALHM1 channels onto geniculate afferents.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Not applicable in the strict sense, because by definition a paraneuron has no axon, and that single absence kept the class out of neuroscience for a century.

The nearest approach is the neuropod, a basal process a few tens of micrometres long packed with presynaptic proteins.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The list reads like a textbook, which was Fujita's point.

Serotonin from enterochromaffin, Merkel and taste type III cells; glutamate from neuropod cells; adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from taste type II and glomus cells; adrenaline from chromaffin cells; melatonin from pinealocytes; plus cholecystokinin, glucagon-like peptide 1, somatostatin and ghrelin.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable, because no paraneuron has an axon to myelinate.

The nerve fibres they speak to are frequently myelinated up to the point of contact and bare thereafter, a consistent rule across the class.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

These are secretory factories whose costs lie in synthesis and packaging rather than ion pumping, and enteroendocrine cells live only days to weeks.

Glomus cells by contrast sit in the most richly perfused tissue in the body, around 2,000 millilitres per 100 grams per minute.

PLASTICITY:

Here they differ most sharply from neurons, because they are replaceable.

Gut cells regenerate from intestinal stem cells, taste cells every one to three weeks, Merkel cells over months, and glomus cells from resident stem cells under a HIF-2 alpha programme that can enlarge the organ several fold.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Several partners are unlike glia anywhere else: carotid body type II sustentacular cells look glial yet double as stem cells and release their own ATP through pannexin-1 channels.

Taste bud type I cells are the tongue's glia, mopping up transmitter and buffering potassium exactly as an astrocyte does.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the paraneurons and every surface goes numb to chemistry.

Food is swallowed without taste and without the hormones that release insulin and end a meal, the airway does not know it has been irritated, and the blood is never checked for oxygen.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

These cells compute with secretion, and can do it two ways at once, a neuropod cell firing a glutamate synapse in milliseconds while releasing a peptide hormone that acts minutes later.

Because they are born and die throughout life, a simulation must model birth and death of sensors, not only their state.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: a subtype-specific stimulus with named units, being luminal glucose in millimoles per litre for gut cells, arterial oxygen pressure in millimetres of mercury for glomus cells, indentation in millimetres for Merkel cells, and noradrenaline for pinealocytes.

• OUTPUTS: a named transmitter or hormone sent either across a synapse to a named afferent neuron or into the bloodstream, the two routes modelled separately because their latencies differ by four orders of magnitude.

• STATE: intracellular calcium, membrane potential where excitable, readily releasable vesicle pool, reserve granule pool, and cell age since differentiation.

• PARAMETERS: stimulus threshold and half-maximal concentration; maximum release rate; vesicle pool sizes; cell lifetime, days for gut cells, weeks for taste cells, months for Merkel cells, years for glomus cells.

• TIME CONSTANTS: synaptic release in 1 to 10 milliseconds for wired subtypes; hormone action in seconds to minutes; transcription in tens of minutes; turnover in days to months.

• FAILURE MODE: uncontrolled proliferation gives neuroendocrine tumours including carcinoid tumours, phaeochromocytoma, carotid body paraganglioma and Merkel cell carcinoma, while losing enteroendocrine signalling wrecks appetite, glucose control and gut motility.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to test whether a candidate cell is a paraneuron and to classify how fast its message reaches the nervous system.
Create a boolean variable called hasSecretoryGranules with initial value true.
Create a boolean variable called makesNeuralMessenger with initial value true.
Create a boolean variable called releasesOnStimulus with initial value true.
Create a boolean variable called makesSynapseOnAfferent with initial value true.
Create a boolean variable called passesFujitaTest with initial value false.
Create a number variable called totalDelay with initial value 17.
Create a text variable called routeName with initial value volume transmission.
Create a text variable called speedClass with initial value not a paraneuron.
If both hasSecretoryGranules and makesNeuralMessenger are true, then perform the following actions.
    If releasesOnStimulus is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set passesFujitaTest to true.
    End the conditional block.
End the conditional block.
If passesFujitaTest is true, then perform the following actions.
    If makesSynapseOnAfferent is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set routeName to wired transmission.
    End the conditional block.
    If totalDelay is less than 100, then perform the following actions.
        Set speedClass to reflex speed.
    Else if totalDelay is less than 60000, then perform the following actions.
        Set speedClass to behavioural speed.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set speedClass to endocrine speed.
    End the conditional block.
End the conditional block.
Display routeName to the console.
Display speedClass to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python with dataclasses is chosen because this type is a taxonomy rather than one cell, and a small typed catalogue with a classifier is the honest computational shape of a taxonomy.

from dataclasses import dataclass

# Paraneurons ranked by how long their message takes to reach the nervous
# system. Latencies are order of magnitude figures, in milliseconds.

@dataclass
class Paraneuron:
    name: str
    wired: bool
    release_ms: float
    transit_ms: float

CATALOGUE = [
    Paraneuron("neuropod enteroendocrine cell", True, 1.0, 60.0),
    Paraneuron("carotid body glomus cell", True, 5.0, 20.0),
    Paraneuron("Merkel cell", True, 2.0, 15.0),
    Paraneuron("taste receptor cell type II", True, 10.0, 10.0),
    Paraneuron("enteroendocrine L cell", False, 1000.0, 120000.0),
    Paraneuron("pinealocyte", False, 600000.0, 1800000.0),
]

def delay_ms(p):
    return p.release_ms + p.transit_ms

def speed_class(p):
    d = delay_ms(p)
    if d < 100.0:
        return "reflex speed"
    return "behavioural speed" if d < 60000.0 else "endocrine speed"

if __name__ == "__main__":
    for p in sorted(CATALOGUE, key=delay_ms):
        route = "wired" if p.wired else "volume"
        print(f"{p.name:30s} {delay_ms(p):9.0f} ms  {route:6s} {speed_class(p)}")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A paraneuron is recognised not by where it sits but by three tests: granules like a neuron's, messengers like a neuron's, and release triggered by a specific stimulus.

Under a microscope the signature is a small epithelial-looking cell staining for chromogranin A and synaptophysin, sitting in a sheet of cells that stain for neither.


PART NINETEEN: NEURONS NAMED FOR WHAT THEY ENCODE

CHAPTER 285. PLACE CELLS (COG)

In 1971 a rat crossed a small platform and one cell in its brain fired in exactly one corner and nowhere else, and the map inside the head stopped being a metaphor.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A place cell is an ordinary excitatory pyramidal cell of the hippocampus, the curled sheet buried in each temporal lobe, that fires only when the body sits in one small patch of a room, its place field.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It has a triangular body, one thick apical dendrite reaching up, shorter basal dendrites below, and about 30,000 spines, the knobs that receive excitatory contacts.

SIZE:

The body is 15 to 30 micrometres across in the human, a micrometre being a thousandth of a millimetre, with a dendritic tree of one to two millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Superficial CA1 cells hold steadier fields than deep ones, CA3 cells carry giant thorny spines fed by mossy fibres, and granule, subicular and splitter cells qualify too.

WHERE IT LIVES:

CA1, CA2, CA3, the dentate gyrus and the subiculum, along the hippocampus from dorsal to ventral pole.

The key interface is stratum lacunosum-moleculare of CA1, where entorhinal layer III axons meet hippocampal dendrites directly.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, because place cell is a functional label on hippocampal pyramidal and granule cells already counted in Part 12.

One human hippocampal formation holds roughly 40 million neurons, 14 million of them CA1 pyramidal cells, a stereological figure of moderate confidence.

Estimates of the fraction with a field in any one room run from 20 to over 90 percent, and the whole formation is 0.05 percent of the body's 86 billion neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Outside the field it fires below 0.1 spikes per second and inside reaches 5 to 20 in bursts at 150 to 200 hertz, precessing to ever earlier theta phases.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation comes from CA3 Schaffer collaterals onto the middle dendrites and entorhinal layer III onto the tuft, while parvalbumin and somatostatin cells inhibit both.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon runs in the alveus to subiculum, entorhinal layer V, prefrontal cortex, septum and amygdala, while local collaterals conduct at 0.3 to 0.5 metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the main excitatory chemical messenger, acting on fast AMPA receptors and on NMDA receptors, which open only when the target is already active.

MYELINATION:

Myelin is a fatty insulating wrap that speeds conduction, and here the axon start is bare, collaterals patchy, the fornix output wrapped.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The hippocampus loses glucose uptake early in disease, yet each place cell is thrifty because it is almost always silent, a deliberate saving.

PLASTICITY:

A field can be built in one trial by behavioural timescale synaptic plasticity, a dendritic plateau of a few hundred milliseconds strengthening every input active within two seconds.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

One hippocampal astrocyte wraps some 100,000 synapses and supplies D-serine, a molecule the NMDA receptor needs before it opens, making these support cells gatekeepers of plasticity.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove place cells and the hippocampus becomes an associative network with no index, so memories would form but nothing would tag them with a where.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Dendrites compute locally, spikes travel backwards up them to report the output to the inputs, proteins are made inside the dendrite, and genes such as Arc switch on.

During rest, sequences replay inside 100 millisecond sharp wave ripples at up to twenty times real speed.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: entorhinal layer III drive 0 to 40 hertz; CA3 recurrence 0 to 30 hertz; septal theta 6 to 12 hertz; inhibition 0 to 100 hertz.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate spikes to subiculum, entorhinal layer V, prefrontal cortex and amygdala, 0 to 20 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage; dendritic calcium; plasticity eligibility trace; field centre and width; adaptation current.

• PARAMETERS: peak rate 5 to 20 hertz; field width 0.2 to 1 metre dorsally, 10 metres ventrally; background below 0.1 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 30 milliseconds; theta 125 milliseconds; plateau 100 to 300 milliseconds; eligibility 1 to 2 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: in Alzheimer's disease entorhinal input degrades and fields drift; in temporal lobe epilepsy synchronous discharge scrambles the code.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a place cell fires now.
Create a number variable called field centre with initial value 1.2.
Create a number variable called field width with initial value 0.18.
Create a number variable called peak rate with initial value 12.
Create a list variable called spike times with initial value empty list.
For each time step in the walk, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of current position and field centre.
    Set offset to the result.
    Calculate the product of peak rate and a bell curve of offset over field width.
    Set firing rate to the result.
    Set preferred phase to 360 degrees reduced in proportion to offset.
    Check if both theta phase is near preferred phase and a random number is below firing rate times step duration are true.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the current time to the end of spike times.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in spike times to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python, the working language of computational neuroscience, reads like the English above.

import math, random
CENTRE, SIGMA, PEAK, THETA, BASE = 1.20, 0.18, 12.0, 8.0, 0.05   # m, m, Hz, Hz, Hz
rng, spikes, dt, speed = random.Random(7), [], 0.001, 0.30
for k in range(8000):                              # eight seconds of walking
    t = k * dt
    d = speed * t - CENTRE                         # offset from field centre
    rate = BASE + PEAK * math.exp(-(d * d) / (2.0 * SIGMA ** 2))
    frac = min(max((d + 2.0 * SIGMA) / (4.0 * SIGMA), 0.0), 1.0)
    pref = 360.0 * (1.0 - frac)                    # preferred phase precesses
    theta = (360.0 * THETA * t) % 360.0            # ongoing theta phase
    off = ((theta - pref + 180.0) % 360.0) - 180.0
    gate = math.exp(-(off * off) / (2.0 * 45.0 ** 2)) / 0.313
    if rng.random() < rate * gate * dt:            # fire near preferred phase
        spikes.append((t, speed * t, theta))
print("spikes fired:", len(spikes))
print("first: t=%.3f s pos=%.2f m phase=%.0f deg" % spikes[0])
print("last : t=%.3f s pos=%.2f m phase=%.0f deg" % spikes[-1])

It prints 21 spikes, the first at theta phase 346 degrees and the last at 6 degrees.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else is both almost silent and, in one small patch of the world, reliably loud.

CHAPTER 286. GRID CELLS (COG)

Lay a sheet of graph paper made of triangles over the whole floor of a room and imagine one neuron firing at every single vertex: that is a grid cell, the closest thing the brain has to a ruler.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A grid cell is a principal neuron of the medial entorhinal cortex, the gateway in front of the hippocampus, whose firing places form a triangular lattice, so it reports a phase in a repeating pattern rather than a place.

Several such lattices at different scales fix location exactly, which is path integration: tracking position by summing your own movements.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Most layer II grid cells are stellate cells, star-shaped neurons with many thick dendrites radiating outward, connected to each other through shared inhibition rather than direct excitation.

SIZE:

Stellate bodies are 20 to 25 micrometres across, larger than most cortical neurons, with dendrites spreading 400 to 600 micrometres inside entorhinal islands.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Pure grid cells sit in layer II and conjunctive grid by head direction cells in layers III, V and VI, all belonging to modules whose neighbouring scales differ by a ratio near 1.42.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The core population sits in medial entorhinal cortex, densest in layer II, with more in the para-subiculum.

The decisive interface is the entorhinal to hippocampal boundary, crossed by the perforant path from layer II and the temporoammonic path from layer III.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since grid cell labels entorhinal principal cells already counted in Part 12.

The human entorhinal cortex holds roughly 7 million neurons per hemisphere, 650,000 of them in layer II.

Since 10 to 30 percent of rodent layer II cells show clean grids, a human population near 100,000 per hemisphere is plausible but uncertain.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Stellate cells sag, an injected negative current making the voltage droop then rebound through HCN channels, giving a 4 to 10 hertz resonance.

In-field rates reach 5 to 20 spikes per second, and they phase precess.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input arrives from pre-subiculum and para-subiculum carrying head direction, the septum carrying theta and speed cells velocity, with parvalbumin interneurons inhibiting.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Layer II axons reach dentate gyrus and CA3, layer III reaches CA1 and subiculum, and layer V projects back to neocortex.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, modulated by acetylcholine from the medial septum, a chemical signalling novelty, and blocking it flattens the grid.

MYELINATION:

The perforant path is myelinated, because the entorhinal to hippocampal delay must stay short and constant for phase coding, while local collaterals are bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Entorhinal layer II neurons are the first in the brain to accumulate tangles of the protein tau, their demand driven by theta firing and a large HCN leak.

PLASTICITY:

The lattice is rigid, appearing days after a rat pup first explores and surviving a change of room, while its anchoring rotates to follow the walls.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in layer II tile the same island and ocean pattern as the neurons, and microglia here react to tau earliest in the cortex.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete grid cells and the entorhinal cortex still passes on smells and objects but supplies no metric structure, so the map loses its ruler.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Grid firing comes from an attractor, a pattern of activity the connections hold in place and that movement signals push across the sheet.

Cells add resonance, dendritic nonlinearity and gap junctions.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: head direction 0 to 360 degrees; speed 0 to 1.5 metres per second; septal theta 6 to 12 hertz; boundary reset.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate spikes to dentate gyrus, CA3, CA1 and neocortex, 0 to 20 hertz.

• STATE: bump phase on the attractor sheet; membrane voltage; HCN activation; module orientation and offset.

• PARAMETERS: spacing 30 centimetres dorsally to past 3 metres ventrally; module ratio about 1.42; field width one third of spacing.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; HCN 20 to 200; theta 125; prospective bias 50 to 80 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: layer II neurons die by about 60 percent even in very mild Alzheimer's disease, and young APOE epsilon 4 carriers show weak grid-like signals.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the rate of one grid cell by adding three tilted waves.
Create a number variable called spacing with initial value 0.45.
Create a number variable called orientation with initial value 18.
Create a number variable called peak rate with initial value 9.
Create a number variable called wave sum with initial value 0.
Set wave number to four times pi divided by the product of the square root of three and spacing.
Repeat the following steps exactly 3 times.
    Set wave angle to orientation increased by a further 60 degrees on each repeat.
    Set projected distance to the position measured along wave angle.
    Calculate the product of wave number and projected distance.
    Set wave contribution to the cosine of the result.
    Calculate the sum of wave sum and wave contribution.
    Set wave sum to the result.
End the loop.
Calculate the sum of wave sum and 1.5.
Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 4.5.
Set normalised value to the result.
Calculate the product of peak rate and normalised value raised to the power 1.5.
Display the result to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python again, because the three-cosine formula is exact.

import math
SPACING, ORIENT, PEAK = 0.45, 18.0, 9.0              # m, deg, Hz

def grid_rate(x, y, spacing=SPACING, orient=ORIENT, peak=PEAK):
    """Firing rate of one grid cell at position (x, y), in metres."""
    k = 4.0 * math.pi / (math.sqrt(3.0) * spacing)   # wave number for this spacing
    total = 0.0
    for n in range(3):                               # three waves, 60 deg apart
        th = math.radians(orient) + n * math.pi / 3.0
        total += math.cos(k * (x * math.cos(th) + y * math.sin(th)))
    g = (total + 1.5) / 4.5                          # rescale into 0..1
    return peak * max(0.0, g) ** 1.5                 # sharpen the fields

print("origin: %.2f Hz" % grid_rate(0.0, 0.0))
for n in range(6):                                   # six neighbours
    phi = math.radians(ORIENT + 30.0 + 60.0 * n)
    print("neighbour %d at %5.1f deg: %.2f Hz" % (n + 1, math.degrees(phi) % 360.0,
          grid_rate(SPACING * math.cos(phi), SPACING * math.sin(phi))))   # all equal
mid = math.radians(ORIENT + 30.0)
print("halfway: %.2f Hz"
      % grid_rate(0.5 * SPACING * math.cos(mid), 0.5 * SPACING * math.sin(mid)))

It gives 9.00 hertz at the origin and at all six neighbours 45 centimetres off, 0.33 halfway between.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other cell fires on the vertices of a perfect triangular lattice across an unfamiliar floor.

CHAPTER 287. HEAD DIRECTION CELLS (COG)

Spin a person slowly in a dark room and something keeps count, a needle of activity swinging around a ring of cells like a compass that has never sensed a magnetic field.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A head direction cell fires whenever the head points one particular way in the room, whatever the body is doing, so it is a compass needle zeroed by landmarks rather than magnetism.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

They are small densely packed relay neurons in the anterodorsal thalamus, layer III pyramidal cells in the post-subiculum, and multipolar cells in the tegmental and mammillary nuclei.

SIZE:

Thalamic bodies are 10 to 20 micrometres across with dendrites of 200 to 400 micrometres, while post-subicular cells reach 25 and 500.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Classic cells report direction only, angular head velocity cells how fast the head turns, conjunctive cells add position, and anticipatory cells report the next heading.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The signal is generated in the loop between the dorsal tegmental nucleus of Gudden and the lateral mammillary nucleus, ascends through the anterodorsal thalamus, and reaches post-subiculum, retrosplenial cortex and medial entorhinal cortex.

The crucial interface is in the brainstem, where the medial vestibular nucleus feeds balance signals into that loop.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, because head direction labels thalamic, brainstem and cortical cells already counted in Part 12.

In the rat anterodorsal nucleus half to sixty percent of recorded cells qualify.

Human counts do not exist, and the anterior thalamic complex is small, plausibly of order one million neurons, which is a bound.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The cell is nearly silent facing the wrong way and reaches 20 to 100 spikes per second at its preferred direction, with a tuning curve 90 degrees wide.

Thalamic cells anticipate the future heading by about 25 milliseconds, ranging from 0 to 50.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Glutamate runs from the lateral mammillary nucleus to the anterodorsal thalamus and on to cortex, GABA from the tegmental nucleus closes the loop, and pre-subicular cells need both inputs to coincide.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The mammillothalamic tract is compact, fast and visible to the naked eye in a human brain slice.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate ascending, GABA descending and local, with acetylcholine and noradrenaline setting the gain.

MYELINATION:

The mammillothalamic tract and thalamic projections to cortex are well myelinated, because a compass lagging behind the head is useless.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The population fires whenever the animal is awake, and since the same number of spikes leaves it whichever way the head points, demand is steady.

PLASTICITY:

A preferred direction is anchored to landmarks and rotates wholesale when one cue card is turned, so plasticity acts on the anchor, not the ring.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing dramatically special has been described for the glia here, except that these nuclei are unusually sensitive to thiamine, a vitamin astrocytes help transport, so glial failure here causes amnesia quickly.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and grid cells lose the direction signal they integrate, so a person could recognise a place yet not know which way to set off.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is the clearest mammalian example of a continuous attractor, a ring whose connections hold one bump of activity that a velocity signal pushes around.

The bump persists in darkness and sleep, so these cells maintain a state rather than report a stimulus.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: angular head velocity from vestibular nuclei, minus 500 to plus 500 degrees per second; landmark bearing; efference copy; optic flow.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate spikes to post-subiculum, retrosplenial cortex and medial entorhinal cortex, 0 to 100 hertz.

• STATE: angular position of the bump, 0 to 360 degrees; membrane voltage; bump width; landmark anchor offset.

• PARAMETERS: tuning width 60 to 100 degrees; peak rate 20 to 100 hertz; anticipation 0 to 50 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; synaptic 5 to 20; anticipation 25; re-anchoring 1 second.

• FAILURE MODE: retrosplenial stroke causes heading disorientation, the patient knowing every landmark yet unable to face the right way; Korsakoff syndrome adds amnesia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to move an activity bump around a ring of head direction cells as the head turns.
Create a number variable called turning rate with initial value 90.
Create a number variable called bump centre with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step duration with initial value 0.001.
Create a list variable called activity with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called activity total with initial value 0.
For each cell in the ring, perform the following operations.
    Add a bell curve of its angle from bump centre to the end of activity.
End the loop.
Repeat the following steps exactly 1000 times.
    Calculate the product of turning rate and step duration.
    Calculate the sum of bump centre and the result.
    Set bump centre to the remainder of the result divided by 360.
    For each cell in activity, perform the following operations.
        Set this cell to neighbour excitation minus global inhibition plus a turning push.
    End the loop.
    Set activity total to 0.
    For each cell in activity, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the sum of activity total and this cell.
        Set activity total to the result.
    End the loop.
    For each cell in activity, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the quotient of this cell divided by activity total.
        Set this cell to the result.
    End the loop.
End the loop.
Set decoded direction to the angle of the activity weighted vector sum.
Display decoded direction to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python with NumPy, because a ring attractor is one matrix multiplication.

import numpy as np
N, DT, TAU = 60, 0.001, 0.020                    # cells, 1 ms step, 20 ms time constant
pref = 2 * np.pi * np.arange(N) / N              # preferred direction of each cell
d = (pref[:, None] - pref[None, :] + np.pi) % (2 * np.pi) - np.pi
bump = np.exp(-d * d / 0.5)                      # local excitation between neighbours

def run(omega, steps=1000):                      # omega is head turning, radians per second
    Wm = bump - 0.30 + 0.156 * omega * d * bump  # minus inhibition, plus velocity shift
    u = np.exp(-((pref + np.pi) % (2 * np.pi) - np.pi) ** 2 / 0.32)   # bump starts at 0 deg
    for _ in range(steps):
        drive = np.maximum(Wm @ u / N * 6.0, 0.0)
        u = u + (DT / TAU) * (drive - u)
        u = u * (10.0 / u.sum())                 # keep the bump one size
    return np.degrees(np.arctan2((u * np.sin(pref)).sum(), (u * np.cos(pref)).sum()))

for turn in (90.0, -90.0):                       # degrees per second
    print("turning %+6.1f deg/s -> heading %+6.1f deg after 1 s"
          % (turn, run(np.radians(turn))))

It prints plus 90.1 degrees for a rightward turn and minus 90.1 for a leftward one.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell whose firing depends on which way the head points and nothing else, and one cue card shifts every such cell in lockstep.

CHAPTER 288. BORDER CELLS AND BOUNDARY VECTOR CELLS (COG)

Walk along a wall with your eyes shut and your hand trailing the plaster, and somewhere in your brain a small set of cells is firing for exactly that, and only that.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A border cell fires when the animal is alongside a boundary such as a wall or a drop, and a boundary vector cell fires at a preferred distance in a preferred direction.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

They are stellate in entorhinal layer II and pyramidal deeper, and in the subiculum pyramidal cells that often burst, one stimulus drawing a packet of spikes.

SIZE:

Subicular bodies are 15 to 25 micrometres across with dendrites of 500 to 800, and entorhinal border cells match their grid cell neighbours.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Border cells proper hug a wall within 10 centimetres, boundary vector cells prefer distances up to half a metre with fields broadening as that distance grows.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Border cells occur in all layers of medial entorhinal cortex and para-subiculum, while boundary vector cells fill the dorsal subiculum.

The key interface is the subiculum to entorhinal boundary, crossed in both directions.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since both labels apply to cells already counted in Part 12.

Border cells are fewer than one in ten entorhinal cells, and the 2008 report called even that an upper limit.

The founding 2009 study identified 36 subicular boundary vector cells, and the human subiculum holds 4 to 5 million neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Peak rates are 5 to 15 spikes per second in the band along the wall against silence elsewhere, with bursts at 100 to 200 hertz.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input comes from visual and somatosensory cortex through the post-rhinal and peri-rhinal cortices, and whiskers alone drive them in darkness.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Subicular cells send long axons to entorhinal cortex, mammillary bodies and retrosplenial cortex, while border axons take the perforant path into the hippocampus.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, with local GABA interneurons sharpening the band of firing against the wall.

MYELINATION:

The subicular output runs in the fornix, one of the most heavily myelinated bundles in the human brain, while local collaterals are bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

These cells are quiet through the long stretches spent mid-room, so average demand is low.

PLASTICITY:

Firing follows the geometry rather than the memory of it, so a new wall grows a second band within minutes and without training.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

No specialised glia have been described here, and the astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia around a border cell are ordinary residents.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the map loses its pins, so the grid slides and place fields stop tracking the room's shape.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The computation is a true vector one, a distance and a direction in a frame fixed to the world, which needs head direction to rotate that frame first.

Subicular bursts arise from dendritic calcium spikes, and their reset of grid cells is tied to theta phase.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: bearing and distance to each boundary from vision, whiskers and self-motion, 0 to 360 degrees and 0 to 1 metre; head direction; theta.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate spikes to grid cells, place cells and retrosplenial cortex, 0 to 15 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage; dendritic calcium; burst state; distance and bearing to the nearest boundary.

• PARAMETERS: preferred distance 0 to 0.6 metres; distance tuning 5 to 20 centimetres; angular tuning 20 to 40 degrees; peak rate 5 to 15 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; burst 10 to 30; a new wall grows a field within minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: subicular damage and early Alzheimer's pathology weaken the anchor, so a patient loses track of which end of a corridor they entered.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the rate of one boundary vector cell by looking out in every direction and asking how far the nearest wall is.
Create a number variable called preferred distance with initial value 0.10.
Create a number variable called preferred bearing with initial value 180.
Create a number variable called total response with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called ray count with initial value 0.
While ray count is less than 360, repeat the following steps.
    Set wall distance to the distance from here to the first wall met along ray count degrees.
    Calculate the difference of wall distance and preferred distance.
    Set distance match to a bell curve of the result over 0.055.
    Calculate the difference of ray count and preferred bearing.
    Set bearing match to a bell curve of the result over 22 degrees.
    Calculate the product of distance match and bearing match.
    Calculate the sum of total response and the result.
    Set total response to the result.
    Calculate the sum of ray count and 1.
    Set ray count to the result.
End the loop.
Display total response to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python, because casting 360 rays is clearer than it is fast.

import math
W = H = 1.0                                   # one metre square arena
D_PREF, SIG_D = 0.10, 0.055                   # preferred distance and tolerance, metres
TH_PREF, SIG_TH = math.pi, math.radians(22.0) # this cell prefers a wall due west

def wall_distance(x, y, th):                  # first wall met along bearing th
    best = float("inf")
    for v, lo, hi in ((math.cos(th), x, W), (math.sin(th), y, H)):
        if abs(v) > 1e-12:
            t = ((hi - lo) if v > 0 else -lo) / v
            if 0.0 < t < best: best = t
    return best

def bvc(x, y, nray=360):                      # response summed over all bearings
    tot = 0.0
    for i in range(nray):
        th = 2.0 * math.pi * i / nray
        d = wall_distance(x, y, th)
        off = ((th - TH_PREF + math.pi) % (2.0 * math.pi)) - math.pi
        tot += math.exp(-((d - D_PREF) ** 2) / (2 * SIG_D ** 2) - off * off / (2 * SIG_TH ** 2))
    return tot

f = [[bvc(ix * 0.05, iy * 0.05) for ix in range(21)] for iy in range(21)]
pk = max(max(r) for r in f)
for iy in range(20, -1, -1):                  # print the arena, north at the top
    print("".join("#" if f[iy][ix] > 0.4 * pk else "." for ix in range(21)))

The printed map is one vertical stripe hugging the western wall, exactly what a cell tuned to 10 centimetres due west should give.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Move a wall and the band moves with it at once, without learning, and in any room shape the cell hugs an edge at the same distance and bearing.

CHAPTER 289. SPEED CELLS (COG)

Behind your eyes is a speedometer made of nerve cells, and like any honest speedometer its needle rises in a straight line as you go faster, no matter what road you are on.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A speed cell is a medial entorhinal neuron whose rate rises in proportion to how fast the body moves, giving the same rate for the same speed in any room, lit or dark.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Some are principal stellate and pyramidal cells of layers II and III, but many of the strongest are fast-spiking interneurons, small inhibitory cells with smooth dendrites and almost no spines.

SIZE:

Fast-spiking interneurons have compact bodies of 10 to 18 micrometres with dendrites of 200 to 400, and principal speed cells match their grid cell neighbours.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Linear speed cells rise as a straight line, saturating ones flatten at high speed, negative ones fall, and grid and head direction cells are often speed modulated too.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The described population sits in medial entorhinal layers II, III and V, with speed firing also in hippocampus, septum and para-subiculum.

The critical interface is entorhinal cortex to hippocampus, because these fast-spiking cells project straight in, which inhibitory neurons rarely do.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since speed cell labels entorhinal principal cells and interneurons already counted in Part 12.

The 2015 report put them at roughly 15 percent of medial entorhinal neurons, which for 7 million human neurons per hemisphere is of order one million.

That rat to human extrapolation is an order of magnitude only.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Tuning takes two numbers, an intercept of 2 to 15 spikes per second at rest and a slope of 5 to 20 more per metre per second, and it leads actual speed by 50 to 80 milliseconds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input comes from the medial septum, from vestibular and proprioceptive pathways, from optic flow and from efference copy, and these cells inhibit stellate and hippocampal neurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Local axons ramify within a few hundred micrometres, while the projecting subset reaches millimetres into the hippocampus.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA, the main inhibitory messenger, from the interneurons, most of which carry parvalbumin, a calcium-binding protein that lets them fire fast without tiring.

MYELINATION:

Parvalbumin axons are among the few inhibitory axons that are myelinated, in patches, because a speedometer reading that arrives late is a wrong reading.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Fast-spiking parvalbumin cells are the most expensive neurons in the cortex, which is why they fail early under oxidative stress.

PLASTICITY:

The code is deliberately stable, since a ruler that changed length with experience would be useless, though its slope shifts with arousal.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The perineuronal net around these cells, a lattice of sugar and protein built with astrocyte help, is genuinely specialised, and local astrocytes clear potassium unusually fast.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete speed cells and the entorhinal cortex keeps its map and compass and loses its odometer, so the grid bump stops tracking the animal.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The forward bias means the cell predicts rather than measures, so the circuit holds a body model.

Gap junctions, direct electrical pores between these interneurons, synchronise them and generate gamma rhythms at 30 to 100 hertz.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: vestibular and proprioceptive self-motion, 0 to 1.5 metres per second walking; optic flow; efference copy; septal drive.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto entorhinal stellate cells and hippocampal neurons, or glutamate for the principal subtype, 0 to 100 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage; a buffer holding speed 50 to 80 milliseconds ahead; short-term depression at the output synapse.

• PARAMETERS: intercept 2 to 15 hertz; slope 5 to 20 hertz per metre per second; saturation constant near 0.5 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 5 to 10 milliseconds, unusually fast; synaptic 2 to 5; prospective lead 50 to 80.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of parvalbumin function in schizophrenia and ageing degrades the speed code and gamma, and the grid loses its lock on movement.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn running speed into the firing rate of a speed cell, looking slightly into the future as the real cell does.
Create a number variable called intercept with initial value 5.
Create a number variable called slope with initial value 12.
Create a number variable called look ahead with initial value 14.
Create a list variable called rates with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called step index with initial value 0.
While step index is less than the total number of items in speed record, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the sum of step index and look ahead.
    Set future index to the smaller of the result and the last position in speed record.
    Access the item at position future index in speed record.
    Calculate the product of slope and the result.
    Calculate the sum of intercept and the result.
    Set firing rate to the result.
    Add firing rate to the end of rates.
    Calculate the sum of step index and 1.
    Set step index to the result.
End the loop.
Display the total number of items in rates to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python with NumPy, because the point is the statistics that recover the slope and the lead.

import numpy as np
DT, INTERCEPT, SLOPE, LEAD = 0.005, 5.0, 12.0, 0.070   # s, Hz, Hz per m/s, forward bias
SAT = 0.50                                             # saturation constant, metres per second
t = np.arange(0.0, 120.0, DT)                          # two minutes of running
speed = 0.02 + 0.40 * (1 - np.cos(2 * np.pi * t / 5.0)) + 0.10 * np.sin(2 * np.pi * t / 1.3)
lag = int(round(LEAD / DT))
future = np.roll(speed, -lag)                          # the cell reports future speed
linear = INTERCEPT + SLOPE * future
saturating = INTERCEPT + SLOPE * SAT * (1 - np.exp(-future / SAT))
for name, rate in (("linear", linear), ("saturating", saturating)):
    slope, inter = np.polyfit(speed[:-lag], rate[:-lag], 1)
    print("%-11s fitted slope %5.2f Hz per m/s, intercept %.2f Hz" % (name, slope, inter))
n, m = len(linear), 40                                 # search for the best time shift
best = max(range(-m, m + 1),
           key=lambda L: np.corrcoef(speed[m:n - m], linear[m + L:n - m + L])[0, 1])
print("the rate leads the speed by %.0f ms" % (-best * DT * 1000.0))

It recovers a slope of 11.91 hertz per metre per second, an intercept of 5.04 hertz and a 70 millisecond lead, and shows the saturating variant reading only 5.63.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell here that says nothing about where you are and everything about how fast you are going, holding its line in a new room.

CHAPTER 290. TIME CELLS (COG)

Hold still for ten seconds and a relay race runs through your hippocampus, each runner carrying the baton for a fraction of a second, and the position in the race is the time elapsed.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A time cell is a hippocampal or entorhinal neuron that fires at one particular moment of a delay, and since different cells own different moments the population tiles the interval and gives a memory its when, as place cells give it its where.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Time cells are the very same pyramidal cells that act as place cells, with a triangular body, an apical dendrite in the entorhinal input layers and basal dendrites below.

SIZE:

The same as hippocampal pyramidal cells, a body of 15 to 30 micrometres in the human with a dendritic tree of one to two millimetres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Time cells proper have one narrow field, while ramping cells rise or fall steadily across the interval, and both have been recorded in humans.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Hippocampal fields CA1, CA2 and CA3 and the entorhinal cortex, in the same layers as place cells.

The essential interface is the CA2 to CA1 projection, since silencing CA2 disorganises the CA1 sequence and damages memory.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, because time cell labels cells already counted in Part 12, often the very cells called place cells earlier.

In rodent CA1 during a fixed delay about a quarter of active pyramidal cells show a time field, published values running from ten percent to over half.

No human population count exists, so the honest bound is the 40 million neurons of one hippocampal formation.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

In-field rates are 5 to 15 spikes per second against near silence outside, and fields grow wider the later they occur, so the timeline is compressed and close to logarithmic.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input arrives from CA3 through the Schaffer collaterals, from CA2 and from entorhinal cortex, while interneurons impose the theta rhythm that carves the sequence into steps.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Identical to place cells, since they are the same axons: bare collaterals inside CA1 and long-range fibres in the fornix.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate on AMPA and NMDA receptors, with septal acetylcholine and local GABA setting the timing framework.

MYELINATION:

As for place cells, a bare axon start, patchy local myelin and a properly myelinated long-range output.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Each cell is active for only a slice of the interval, so the sequence spreads its load, though theta runs throughout the delay.

PLASTICITY:

Time fields form rapidly on a new interval and rescale rather than run out when a delay is stretched.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes supply D-serine as for place cells, but their own calcium signals run over seconds to tens of seconds, the span a sequence covers, so they plausibly feed the slow drift the code needs.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove time cells and the hippocampus says where an event happened but not when, so you recall the kitchen, the argument and the phone call but not their order.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The sequence is internally generated in an animal standing still in the dark, proof that the hippocampus makes its own trajectories rather than reporting the senses.

It rests on drifting entorhinal states, dendritic plateaus and short-term depression acting as a clock, and the same sequences replay in ripples at up to twenty times speed.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: cue onset; drifting context from lateral entorhinal cortex; CA3 and CA2 drive; theta 6 to 12 hertz.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate spikes to subiculum, entorhinal layer V and prefrontal cortex, 0 to 15 hertz.

• STATE: elapsed time since the cue; membrane voltage; short-term depression; which cell is active.

• PARAMETERS: peak time 0.1 to 30 seconds after the cue; field width proportional to peak time, Weber fraction 0.2 to 0.35.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 30 milliseconds; theta 125; field width 200 milliseconds early to seconds late; sequence 1 to 30 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: silencing CA2 scrambles the sequence, septal inactivation abolishes the code, and in Alzheimer's and Korsakoff syndrome the ordering of memories fails first.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to read elapsed time out of time cells whose fields widen the later they fire.
Create a number variable called log width with initial value 0.28.
Create a list variable called peak times with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called peak index with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called weighted total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called rate total with initial value 0.
Set peak ratio to 40 raised to the power of one divided by 23.
While peak index is less than 24, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the product of 0.25 and peak ratio raised to the power peak index.
    Add the result to the end of peak times.
    Calculate the sum of peak index and 1.
    Set peak index to the result.
End the loop.
For each peak in peak times, perform the following operations.
    Set log gap to the logarithm of elapsed time minus the logarithm of peak.
    Calculate the quotient of log gap divided by log width.
    Set this rate to a bell curve of the result.
    Calculate the product of this rate and the logarithm of peak.
    Calculate the sum of weighted total and the result.
    Set weighted total to the result.
    Calculate the sum of rate total and this rate.
    Set rate total to the result.
End the loop.
Calculate the quotient of weighted total divided by rate total.
Display the exponential of the result to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python, because the point is a population read-out.

import math
N, DELAY, T0 = 24, 10.0, 0.25            # cells, interval, first peak time
PEAK_HZ, SIG = 14.0, 0.28                # peak rate, log-time width (Weber fraction)
RATIO = (DELAY / T0) ** (1.0 / (N - 1))  # geometric tiling
PEAKS = [T0 * RATIO ** i for i in range(N)]

def rate(i, t):                          # Gaussian in log time, so fields widen
    if t <= 0.0: return 0.0
    z = (math.log(t) - math.log(PEAKS[i])) / SIG
    return PEAK_HZ * math.exp(-0.5 * z * z)

def width(i):                            # width at half maximum, seconds
    return PEAKS[i] * (math.exp(1.1774 * SIG) - math.exp(-1.1774 * SIG))

def decode(t):                           # population estimate of elapsed time
    num = den = 0.0
    for i in range(N):
        r = rate(i, t); num += r * math.log(PEAKS[i]); den += r
    return math.exp(num / den) if den else float("nan")

for i in (0, N - 1):
    print("cell %2d: peak %.2f s, width %.2f s" % (i + 1, PEAKS[i], width(i)))
for t in (0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 8.0):
    print("elapsed %5.2f s -> estimate %5.2f s" % (t, decode(t)))

The first cell peaks at 0.25 seconds with a field 0.17 wide, the last at 10 seconds with a field 6.71 wide, and elapsed time decodes almost exactly mid-range.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only representation known to fire in a fixed order while the animal is still and nothing is happening, its fields blurring in proportion to how late they come.

CHAPTER 291. OBJECT VECTOR CELLS (COG)

Put a mug on the floor of an empty room and one cell fires every time you stand twenty-five centimetres north-east of it, and it does the same for a chair.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A vector is an arrow, having only a length and a direction.

An object vector cell fires whenever the animal stands at one particular arrow from any freestanding object, whatever that object is and wherever it sits.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A job description, not a shape: most are stellate cells of medial entorhinal layer two, star-shaped neurons whose thick input branches, called dendrites, radiate outward like a sea urchin.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are fifteen to twenty-five micrometres across, a quarter the width of a human hair, and the firing field they paint on the floor is ten to forty centimetres wide.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Near-tuned cells fire within ten centimetres of an object, far-tuned cells up to a metre away.

• Bearing subtypes tile the compass, each preferring one allocentric direction, meaning a direction fixed to the room rather than to the body.

• Relatives include border cells, boundary vector cells of the subiculum, and object-trace cells of the lateral entorhinal cortex.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The medial entorhinal cortex, a strip of ancient cortex on the inner face of the temporal lobe, in layers two, three and five, plus the neighbouring parasubiculum.

That region is the interface where the outer cortex speaks to the hippocampus, the memory organ, along the perforant path into the dentate gyrus and areas CA3 and CA1.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since this is a functional label on medial entorhinal cells already counted.

Measured fractions are 14.7 percent of cells in the founding 2019 mouse study by Hoydal and colleagues and 13.6 percent, 67 of 492 cells, in the 2021 follow-up.

The human entorhinal cortex holds about seven million neurons per hemisphere, so a similar fraction implies a few hundred thousand per side, a low-confidence bound because none has yet been recorded in a human, and against 86 billion neurons overall the addition is exactly zero percent.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Stellate cells sag, drooping slowly in voltage through pores called hyperpolarisation-activated cyclic-nucleotide-gated channels, or HCN1, which tunes them to ring at four to twelve cycles per second, and they fire under one spike per second outside the field and five to twenty inside it.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs bring objects and scenes from postrhinal and lateral entorhinal cortex, head direction from the presubiculum, and rhythm from the medial septum.

Strikingly, these cells barely contact one another, talking through inhibitory interneurons that use the calming transmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid, abbreviated GABA.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The output cable is thin, 0.5 to 1.5 micrometres, conducts at one to several metres per second and branches across millimetres of hippocampus, while layer five axons run back to the neocortex.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the standard excitatory messenger, acting on fast AMPA receptors and learning-related NMDA receptors, with acetylcholine from the medial septum switching the region between encoding and retrieval.

MYELINATION:

Lightly and patchily myelinated, meaning the fatty insulating sheath comes in stretches with bare gaps, so perforant path transmission takes several milliseconds.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High and dangerously so, because entorhinal layer two is the first place neurons die in Alzheimer's disease, losing about 60 percent of its cells in the mildest dementia.

PLASTICITY:

Almost no learning is needed, since these fields appear on the first pass around a newly placed object, so the vector code is pre-built even though the objects change constantly.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here are broadly ordinary and it is honest to say so.

Two things differ: these neurons secrete reelin, a protein instructing their own scaffold, and microglia, the brain's immune cells, turn abnormally active in this exact layer very early in Alzheimer's disease.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the map keeps its positions and walls but loses all its furniture, so every object becomes invisible to navigation and the lost flavour is "relative to that thing over there".

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

HCN1 channels make the membrane a band-pass filter, so spike timing against the theta rhythm carries meaning that rate alone does not, and regenerative NMDA spikes let one dendritic branch act as its own processor.

Vision alone suffices, since a flat patch of contrast on a wall drives the cell as well as a solid object, and the cell also raises local blood flow and makes new proteins inside the dendrite.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: allocentric object bearing 0 to 360 degrees and distance 0 to 150 centimetres from postrhinal and lateral entorhinal cortex.

◦ Head direction 0 to 360 degrees, theta phase 4 to 12 hertz, running speed 0 to 100 centimetres per second.

• OUTPUTS: spike train 0 to 25 hertz to dentate gyrus, CA3, CA1 and entorhinal layer five.

• STATE: membrane voltage, HCN1 activation, best current vector match, adaptation, theta phase.

• PARAMETERS: preferred distance 5 to 100 centimetres, preferred bearing 0 to 360 degrees, distance width 5 to 20 centimetres, bearing width 20 to 60 degrees.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 30 milliseconds, theta cycle 80 to 250 milliseconds, field formation under one second.

• FAILURE MODE: Alzheimer's disease kills about 60 percent of layer two neurons at the mildest stage of dementia, and patients lose the ability to orient by landmarks.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the firing rate of an object vector cell from its distance and bearing to each object.
Create a number variable called preferred distance with initial value 25.
Create a number variable called preferred bearing with initial value 45.
Create a number variable called best drive with initial value 0.
For each object in object list, perform the following operations.
    Set distance gap to the difference of the distance to object and preferred distance.
    If distance gap is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set distance gap to the product of distance gap and negative one.
    End the conditional block.
    Set bearing gap to the difference of the bearing to object and preferred bearing.
    If bearing gap is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set bearing gap to the product of bearing gap and negative one.
    End the conditional block.
    Set drive to the product of the difference of 1 and the quotient of distance gap divided by 8 and the difference of 1 and the quotient of bearing gap divided by 30.
    If drive is greater than best drive, then perform the following actions.
        Set best drive to drive.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Set firing rate to the sum of 0.8 and the product of best drive and 18.
Display firing rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the geometry reads at a glance and needs no library.

import math

PREF_DIST, PREF_BEAR = 25.0, 45.0   # centimetres, degrees anticlockwise from east
DIST_SIGMA, KAPPA = 8.0, 6.0        # widths of distance and bearing tuning
PEAK_HZ, BASE_HZ = 18.0, 0.8

def ov_rate(x, y, objects):
    """Spikes per second at position (x, y), in centimetres."""
    best = 0.0
    for (ox, oy) in objects:        # every object votes, the strongest wins
        dist = math.hypot(x - ox, y - oy)
        bearing = math.atan2(y - oy, x - ox)
        d = math.exp(-((dist - PREF_DIST) ** 2) / (2 * DIST_SIGMA ** 2))
        b = math.exp(KAPPA * (math.cos(bearing - math.radians(PREF_BEAR)) - 1.0))
        best = max(best, d * b)
    return BASE_HZ + (PEAK_HZ - BASE_HZ) * best

objs = [(0.0, 0.0), (100.0, 100.0)]                 # two identical objects
px, py = 25.0 * math.cos(math.pi / 4), 25.0 * math.sin(math.pi / 4)
print(round(ov_rate(px, py, objs), 2))              # 18.0, the tuned corner
print(round(ov_rate(px + 100, py + 100, objs), 2))  # 18.0, same vector, other object
print(round(ov_rate(-25.0, 0.0, objs), 2))          # 0.8, right distance, wrong bearing

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Move the object and the field moves with it, and take the object away and the field vanishes, unlike a grid cell's, which survives an empty room.

CHAPTER 292. CONCEPT CELLS, SOMETIMES POPULARLY CALLED "JENNIFER ANISTON NEURONS" (COG)

In 2005 a team recording from a hospital patient found one cell that fired for photographs of the actress Jennifer Aniston, for her name in letters, and for her name spoken aloud.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A concept cell responds to the meaning of a thing rather than its look, firing alike for a person seen from the front, in profile, as a cartoon or as a written name.

Show it a hundred other people and it stays silent, which gives each idea a tiny, stable tag that memory can link to others in an instant.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Again a job, not a body plan: these are pyramidal neurons of hippocampal areas CA1 and CA3, with a pyramid-shaped body and one thick apical dendrite climbing towards the brain surface, plus dentate granule cells.

SIZE:

Human hippocampal pyramidal cell bodies are fifteen to thirty micrometres across with dendritic trees spanning over a millimetre, while granule cells are about ten micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Single-concept cells respond to one person, place or object and nothing else in the test set.

• Multi-concept cells respond to two or three personally linked concepts, thought to be the physical trace of an association.

• Multimodal cells respond to picture, written name and spoken name alike, while relational cells, reported in 2021, signal abstract relations between concepts.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Four human structures: the hippocampus including dentate gyrus, CA3 and CA1; the amygdala; the entorhinal cortex; and the parahippocampal cortex.

The entorhinal cortex is the crucial interface, the doorway between the sensory cortex that recognises a face and the hippocampus that remembers meeting it.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since this is a functional label on medial temporal principal cells already counted.

The parent populations are about 40 million neurons per human hippocampus, including 15 million dentate granule cells and 16 million in CA1, plus 10 to 15 million in the amygdala and about 7 million in the entorhinal cortex.

Modelling by Waydo and colleagues in 2006 put the chance that any medial temporal neuron responds to any given familiar image at roughly 0.1 percent, about a million cells out of a billion and called an upper bound, and against 86 billion neurons overall the addition is exactly zero percent.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Baseline firing is often well under one spike per second, which is why the silence is so striking, and a response is a burst of ten to thirty spikes per second arriving late, about 204 milliseconds in the hippocampus and 220 in the amygdala.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Identity arrives from anterior temporal visual areas through perirhinal and entorhinal cortex already stripped of viewpoint, while names arrive through lateral temporal language cortex.

Area CA3 is heavily recurrent, meaning its cells contact each other, the classic architecture for rebuilding a whole memory from a fragment.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, one micrometre or less, conducting at about one metre per second, and the granule cell axons called mossy fibres make only fifteen contacts each onto CA3 cells, every one so large it can fire its target single-handedly.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for output, received by AMPA and NMDA receptors, while GABA from parvalbumin basket cells enforces sparseness by silencing every cell that is merely nearly right.

MYELINATION:

Sparse and patchy along hippocampal axons, though the fornix, the great cable leaving the hippocampus, is well insulated, so signals leave faster than they travel inside.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest at rest given the low firing rate, but area CA1 dies first after cardiac arrest, which shows how tight its oxygen margin really is.

PLASTICITY:

This is the plastic cell type par excellence, with recordings catching cells acquiring responses to newly learned associations within a single session, through the lasting strengthening of connections called long-term potentiation.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Hippocampal astrocytes, the star-shaped support cells, do what astrocytes elsewhere do not: they release D-serine, a molecule required as a partner for NMDA receptors, so local glia are part of the learning switch.

They also hand lactate to neurons during memory formation, and blocking that transfer blocks long-term memory in animals.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take them away and the medial temporal lobe still registers places and emotional tone, but nothing has a name, there is no compact handle for "my mother", and the flavour lost is meaning itself.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Dendritic branches fire local NMDA and calcium spikes that perform small logical operations before anything reaches the cell body, and back-propagating action potentials, spikes travelling backwards into the dendrites, report that the cell has just fired.

In rest and sleep these cells replay in compressed sequence inside sharp-wave ripples at 80 to 200 hertz, which is how memories consolidate.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: a high-level identity vector from anterior temporal and perirhinal cortex, typically 100 to 1000 dimensions normalised to unit length.

◦ Auditory and written-word vectors in the same space, emotional gain 0 to 1 from the amygdala, theta phase 4 to 8 hertz, ripples 80 to 200 hertz.

• OUTPUTS: a sparse burst 0 to 30 hertz to dentate gyrus, CA3, CA1, subiculum and back to entorhinal cortex.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation current, stored prototype vector, association weights, plasticity tag.

• PARAMETERS: match threshold 0.5 to 0.8 cosine similarity, baseline 0.05 to 1 hertz, peak 10 to 30 hertz, sparseness 0.1 percent of the population per stimulus.

• TIME CONSTANTS: latency 200 to 400 milliseconds, burst 300 to 800 milliseconds, membrane 15 to 30 milliseconds, new concepts within hours.

• FAILURE MODE: hippocampal sclerosis in temporal lobe epilepsy destroys CA1 and CA3 cells and leaves patients unable to form new memories, while Alzheimer's disease severs the entorhinal input first.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a concept cell fires for the stimulus now presented, no matter which sense it arrives through.
Create a number variable called match score with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value 0.62.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
While index is less than the total number of items in prototype list, repeat the following steps.
    Set feature weight to the item at position index in prototype list.
    Set feature strength to the item at position index in stimulus list.
    Set match score to the sum of match score and the product of feature weight and feature strength.
    Set index to the sum of index and 1.
End the loop.
If match score is less than threshold, then perform the following actions.
    Set firing rate to 0.15.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set gain to the quotient of the difference of match score and threshold divided by the difference of 1 and threshold.
    Set firing rate to the sum of 0.15 and the product of gain and 22.
    Display 300 to the console.
End the conditional block.
Display firing rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because a dictionary makes one cell holding one concept across many senses immediately visible.

import math

# One cell, one prototype, in a meaning space shared by sight, reading and hearing.
PROTOTYPE = {"actress": 1.0, "friends_tv": 0.9, "blonde": 0.4, "eiffel": 0.0}
BASE_HZ, PEAK_HZ, THRESHOLD = 0.15, 22.0, 0.62   # a high threshold keeps it sparse

def cosine(a, b):
    dot = sum(a.get(k, 0.0) * b.get(k, 0.0) for k in set(a) | set(b))
    na = math.sqrt(sum(v * v for v in a.values()))
    nb = math.sqrt(sum(v * v for v in b.values()))
    return 0.0 if na == 0.0 or nb == 0.0 else dot / (na * nb)

def concept_cell(stimulus):
    """Return firing rate in spikes per second and latency in milliseconds."""
    m = cosine(stimulus, PROTOTYPE)
    if m < THRESHOLD:
        return BASE_HZ, None                  # silence, the usual outcome
    return BASE_HZ + PEAK_HZ * (m - THRESHOLD) / (1.0 - THRESHOLD), 300.0

for label, s in (("photo", {"actress": 1.0, "friends_tv": 0.8, "blonde": 0.5}),
                 ("written name", {"actress": 0.9, "friends_tv": 1.0}),
                 ("tower", {"eiffel": 1.0, "landmark": 1.0})):
    rate, lat = concept_cell(s)
    print(label, round(rate, 2), "Hz", lat)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Total silence for ninety-nine pictures, a hard burst for the hundredth, and the same burst for the photograph, the written name and the spoken name alike.

CHAPTER 293. MIRROR NEURONS (COG)

In a Parma laboratory a monkey sat perfectly still while a researcher reached for a peanut, and the monkey's motor cortex crackled as though the monkey itself had reached.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A mirror neuron fires both when you perform a goal-directed action and when you watch someone else perform it.

The goal is what matters, since these cells ignore a hand that merely moves and care about grasping, tearing or holding a thing.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Ordinary pyramidal neurons of layers three and five, triangular-bodied, with one thick apical dendrite reaching the cortical surface, and some are corticospinal cells whose output cable runs to the spinal cord to command muscles directly.

SIZE:

Layer five pyramidal cell bodies in premotor cortex are twenty to fifty micrometres across, among the largest in the cortex, with an apical dendrite up to two millimetres long.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Strictly congruent cells fire for exactly the same action executed and observed, such as a precision grip in both cases.

• Broadly congruent cells fire for a related action, such as precision grip executed and any grasp observed, and outnumber the strict kind.

• Anti-mirror cells rise during execution and fall below baseline during observation, and the eleven found in humans may be what stops you copying what you watch.

WHERE IT LIVES:

In the macaque, area F5 of ventral premotor cortex, area PFG of the inferior parietal lobule, and primary motor cortex; in humans, by direct recording, the supplementary motor area plus hippocampus, entorhinal cortex and parahippocampal gyrus.

Area F5 is the interface itself, sitting where the parietal cortex that computes what an object affords meets the motor system that acts on it, fed by the superior temporal sulcus, which analyses biological motion but has no motor cells of its own.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since this is a functional label on premotor, parietal, motor and medial temporal pyramidal cells already counted.

Gallese, Fadiga, Fogassi and Rizzolatti recorded 532 neurons in monkey area F5 and found 92 with mirror properties, about 17 percent.

Mukamel and colleagues recorded 1,177 human cells and found 68 matching ones, about 5.8 percent, of which 33 rose during both observation and execution, 21 fell during both and 14 moved oppositely, and against 86 billion neurons overall the addition is exactly zero percent.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These cells fire in bursts driven by calcium spikes in the apical dendrite, reaching fifty to one hundred spikes per second during a grasp and roughly half that during observation, and unusually they do not adapt to watching the same action again and again.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Descriptions of action arrive from the superior temporal sulcus by way of the inferior parietal lobule, and object graspability from the anterior intraparietal area.

Outputs run to primary motor cortex, to the spinal cord for corticospinal cells, and back to parietal cortex, each cell carrying ten to thirty thousand excitatory contacts.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Premotor corticospinal axons are among the thickest in the body, one to ten micrometres including the sheath, conducting at ten to seventy metres per second, with side branches spreading millimetres across the cortex.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for output, while local GABA-releasing interneurons supply the inhibition that stops observation turning into imitation, and midbrain dopamine drives learning of new links between action and outcome.

MYELINATION:

Heavily myelinated on the corticospinal side, forming one of the most conspicuous white matter bundles in the human body, while local branches inside the cortex are insulated only in patches.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high, because a corticospinal cell must keep an axon up to a metre long supplied with proteins by continuous transport, day and night, on top of an enormous dendritic membrane.

PLASTICITY:

The associative account, argued by Heyes and Catmur, holds that mirroring is learned, because you see your own hand whenever you act, and brief training pairing an observed action with an incompatible executed one can reverse mirror responses, which a hard-wired system should not permit.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing distinctive is known about glia around mirror neurons specifically, and that should be said plainly rather than invented.

What is distinctive belongs to the host cells, since oligodendrocytes maintain sheaths up to a metre from their own body and feed lactate straight into the axon, and motor myelination is activity-dependent, so practice changes the insulation on the very cable that carries the action.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Strip mirror properties from the premotor cortex and it still plans and executes movement, but it loses its resonance, so watching someone lift a cup no longer primes your own lifting machinery and "I see what you are doing" becomes slow inference instead of an instant.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Layer five cells are two-compartment computers, bursting only when top-down context reaching the apical tuft coincides with a back-propagating spike from the body, and they instruct their own myelination by maturing oligodendrocyte precursors when used.

They remodel dendritic spines within hours of motor learning, drive local blood flow, and are actively suppressed during observation, which is a mechanical solution to the problem of watching without moving.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: an observed action code from the superior temporal sulcus by way of the inferior parietal lobule, categorical, with confidence 0 to 1.

◦ Object affordance from the anterior intraparietal area, motor intention from prefrontal and supplementary motor areas, proprioceptive feedback from one's own limb.

• OUTPUTS: spike train 0 to 100 hertz to primary motor cortex, spinal motor circuits and parietal cortex.

• STATE: membrane voltage, apical calcium compartment, learned visual-to-motor weights, execution versus observation gain, inhibitory brake level.

• PARAMETERS: execution gain 1.0, observation gain 0.3 to 0.7, congruence breadth strict to broad, baseline 1 to 5 hertz, peak 40 to 100 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS: visual-to-motor latency 100 to 200 milliseconds, burst 50 to 200 milliseconds, membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, retraining within tens of minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: the broken mirror hypothesis of autism is not supported in its pure form, since meta-analyses find no general mirror abnormality and one large analysis found the right inferior frontal gyrus more active during complex social tasks, whereas the well-established failures strike the parent cells, in corticospinal degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and in premotor stroke causing apraxia, the loss of skilled purposeful movement.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the firing rate of a mirror neuron during both self-produced action and observed action.
Create a number variable called observation gain with initial value 0.55.
Create a number variable called goal match with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
If current goal is equal to preferred goal, then perform the following actions.
    Set goal match to 1.
Else if current goal is equal to related goal, then perform the following actions.
    Set goal match to 0.45.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set goal match to 0.
End the conditional block.
If object is present is not true, then perform the following actions.
    Set goal match to 0.
End the conditional block.
If mode is equal to execute, then perform the following actions.
    Set drive to goal match.
Else if mode is equal to observe, then perform the following actions.
    Set drive to the product of observation gain and goal match.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set drive to 0.
End the conditional block.
Set firing rate to the sum of 2 and the product of drive and 43.
Display firing rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the two-channel congruence test reads almost exactly like the original experiment.

GOAL_TUNING = "precision_grip"   # the goal this particular cell cares about
EXEC_GAIN, OBS_GAIN = 1.0, 0.55  # observing drives the cell less than doing
BASE_HZ, PEAK_HZ = 2.0, 45.0
# Broadly congruent: full match for its own goal, partial match for a cousin.
CONGRUENCE = {"precision_grip": 1.0, "whole_hand_grip": 0.45}

def mirror_rate(goal, mode, visible):
    """mode is 'execute' or 'observe'; visible is True if the act can be seen."""
    match = CONGRUENCE.get(goal, 0.0)     # a mime with no object scores zero
    if mode == "execute":
        drive = EXEC_GAIN * match
    elif mode == "observe":
        # F5 cells keep firing when a screen hides the final grasp, provided
        # the observer knows an object is behind it.
        drive = OBS_GAIN * match if (visible or goal == GOAL_TUNING) else 0.0
    else:
        drive = 0.0
    return BASE_HZ + (PEAK_HZ - BASE_HZ) * drive

for goal, mode, visible in [("precision_grip", "execute", True),
                            ("precision_grip", "observe", True),
                            ("precision_grip", "observe", False),  # grasp hidden
                            ("whole_hand_grip", "observe", True),
                            ("mime_no_object", "observe", True)]:  # no object
    print(goal, mode, visible, round(mirror_rate(goal, mode, visible), 1))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

One cell, two utterly different situations, the same burst, and it keeps firing when a screen hides the final moment of the grasp provided the observer knows something is behind it.

CHAPTER 294. FACE CELLS (COG)

There is a patch of cortex about the size of a lentil in which ninety-seven of every hundred cells you can find are interested in faces and in nothing else.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A face cell responds far more strongly to a face than to any other object, and these cells cluster into small, sharply bounded patches.

Each measures the face along one axis of a shared multi-dimensional face space, so a face's identity is simply the list of those measurements.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Pyramidal neurons of the inferior temporal cortex in layers two, three and five, and the patches are histo-architectonically distinct, meaning their layering and cell packing differ measurably from the cortex immediately around them.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are fifteen to thirty-five micrometres across, and the receptive field, the part of the visual world that can excite the cell, is huge at ten to thirty degrees, which is why a face cell fires wherever in view the face appears.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Posterior lateral and middle lateral cells are view-specific, treating a left profile, a right profile and a frontal view as three different things.

• Anterior lateral cells are mirror-symmetric, treating left and right profiles as the same, a halfway step towards identity.

• Anterior medial cells are view-invariant, responding to a person from any angle, and are the closest thing in the monkey brain to a concept cell.

WHERE IT LIVES:

In the macaque, six patches along and inside the superior temporal sulcus, named posterior lateral, middle lateral, middle fundal, anterior lateral, anterior fundal and anterior medial, with more in prefrontal cortex.

In humans the equivalents are the occipital face area, the fusiform face area on the ventral temporal lobe and a region in the posterior superior temporal sulcus, with the right hemisphere dominant, and the fusiform gyrus is the interface where visual analysis behind it meets the memory structures in front of it.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since this is a functional label on inferior temporal and fusiform pyramidal neurons already counted.

Tsao and colleagues found 97 percent of visually responsive cells in the middle lateral and middle fundal patches responded at least twice as strongly to faces as to other objects.

About 205 cells, 106 from one patch and 99 from another, sufficed to reconstruct an arbitrary unseen face from neural activity alone, and against 86 billion neurons overall the addition is exactly zero percent.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Baseline firing is one to five spikes per second and a preferred face drives fifty to over a hundred, arriving in 80 to 130 milliseconds, and the response is a straight ramp, rising with the face's position along this cell's own axis and flat along every other.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from area V4 and posterior inferior temporal cortex carrying shape and colour fragments, and the patches are wired posterior to anterior in a hierarchy that converts view-specificity into identity.

Outputs go to perirhinal and entorhinal cortex and on to the amygdala, hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, the exact route by which a face becomes a memory and a feeling.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Long-range axons run several centimetres through temporal white matter at one to two micrometres thick, while a faster subcortical route through superior colliculus and pulvinar delivers crude face information in 30 to 50 milliseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for output and GABA for local inhibition from parvalbumin and somatostatin interneurons, with acetylcholine setting attentional gain and oxytocin modulating how strongly faces are attended.

MYELINATION:

The long links between patches and to the amygdala are well myelinated within the inferior longitudinal fasciculus, a major temporal highway, and damage to that bundle can cause face blindness even when the patches survive.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High during waking vision, since face patches are among the most reliably and strongly driven regions of the primate brain, firing in sustained rather than sparse bursts.

PLASTICITY:

Face patches must be built by experience, because monkeys raised without ever seeing a face do not develop them, one of the cleanest demonstrations anywhere that a cortical module is grown rather than delivered ready-made.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing exotic is known about glia inside face patches specifically, and it should be said plainly.

What is distinctive is the vascular supply, since these patches are among the most reliably identifiable regions in brain imaging precisely because their neurovascular coupling, the local rise in blood flow when neurons work, is unusually strong and crisp.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take face cells out and the inferior temporal cortex still recognises cups, cars and trees, but every human being becomes a generic person rather than a person you know, a loss best weighed by imagining a family photograph in which nobody has an identity.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The face cell is linear algebra done by biology, computing a dot product between the incoming face vector and its own preferred axis, which is why a face can be rebuilt from about two hundred cells, and it divides its response by its neighbours' pooled activity to stay stable across contrast and clutter.

Stimulating the human fusiform face area distorts the face a patient is looking at, and stimulating the right anterior fusiform causes a transient inability to recognise faces, so this is causal machinery rather than a correlate.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: a shape and appearance vector from area V4 and posterior inferior temporal cortex, about 50 dimensions split into roughly 25 shape and 25 appearance axes, each about minus 3 to plus 3 standard deviations.

◦ Attention gain 0.8 to 1.5 from frontal eye fields, plus a fast crude face signal from superior colliculus and pulvinar at 30 to 50 milliseconds.

• OUTPUTS: spike train 0 to 120 hertz to other face patches, perirhinal cortex, amygdala, hippocampus and prefrontal cortex.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation level, normalisation pool, current projection on the preferred axis.

• PARAMETERS: preferred axis as a unit vector in face space, baseline 1 to 5 hertz, gain 5 to 20 hertz per standard deviation, receptive field 10 to 30 degrees.

• TIME CONSTANTS: onset 80 to 130 milliseconds, response 100 to 300 milliseconds, adaptation 200 milliseconds to seconds, patch formation over the first months of life.

• FAILURE MODE: prosopagnosia, or face blindness, in which a patient sees a face perfectly well but cannot say whose it is, after damage to the right fusiform region or its white matter, developmentally without any lesion, or transiently under electrical stimulation.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the firing rate of a face cell as a projection of the seen face onto the single axis this cell measures.
Create a number variable called projection with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called face is present with initial value false.
If the total number of items in face feature list is greater than 0, then perform the following actions.
    Set face is present to true.
End the conditional block.
If face is present is not true, then perform the following actions.
    Set firing rate to 5.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    While index is less than the total number of items in face feature list, repeat the following steps.
        Set axis weight to the item at position index in preferred axis list.
        Set feature value to the item at position index in face feature list.
        Set projection to the sum of projection and the product of axis weight and feature value.
        Set index to the sum of index and 1.
    End the loop.
    Set firing rate to the sum of 5 and the product of 12 and projection.
    If firing rate is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
End the conditional block.
Display firing rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because plain lists show the axis projection and the linear read-out with no library hiding the mathematics.

import math

# A tiny four-dimensional face space; the real macaque code needs about 50 axes.
# These four axes are orthonormal, so decoding is simply the transpose.
AXES = [[0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5],
        [0.5, -0.5, 0.5, -0.5],
        [0.5, 0.5, -0.5, -0.5],
        [0.5, -0.5, -0.5, 0.5]]
BASE_HZ, GAIN_HZ = 5.0, 12.0   # baseline high enough that no cell is driven silent

def dot(a, b):
    return sum(x * y for x, y in zip(a, b))

def face_cell_rates(face):
    """Each cell projects the face onto its own axis and ignores every other."""
    return [max(0.0, BASE_HZ + GAIN_HZ * dot(axis, face)) for axis in AXES]

def decode(rates):
    """Linear read-out: undo the gain, then add the axes weighted by the rates."""
    coeffs = [(r - BASE_HZ) / GAIN_HZ for r in rates]
    return [sum(c * AXES[i][j] for i, c in enumerate(coeffs)) for j in range(4)]

face = [1.2, -0.4, 0.9, 0.3]   # an arbitrary new face, never seen before
rates = face_cell_rates(face)
back = decode(rates)
print("rates:", [round(r, 2) for r in rates])
print("decoded:", [round(v, 2) for v in back])
print("error:", round(math.sqrt(sum((a - b) ** 2 for a, b in zip(face, back))), 4))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Its rate climbs along a straight line as a face slides along one axis of face space and does not budge along any other, and a couple of hundred such cells can rebuild a face nobody has seen before.

CHAPTER 295. ORIENTATION-SELECTIVE AND DIRECTION-SELECTIVE CELLS (COG)

In 1958 two researchers slid a glass slide into a projector, the edge of the slide swept across the screen, and a cell in a cat's brain that had been silent all day began to machine-gun.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An orientation-selective cell fires for an edge tilted one way and falls silent for the same edge turned ninety degrees, while a direction-selective cell fires for motion one way and not the other.

Together they convert a smear of brightness into the two facts that matter most: where the edges are and which way things are going.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

In the cortex these are compact spiny stellate cells of the input layer and pyramidal cells above and below, while in the retina they are direction-selective ganglion cells whose flat branches align precisely with the starburst amacrine cell, a neuron whose dendrites radiate like a firework and which does the actual computing.

SIZE:

Cortical spiny stellate bodies are ten to fifteen micrometres across, and near the fovea one cell may cover less than a tenth of a degree, about a full stop at arm's length.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Orientation subtypes tile all 180 degrees of possible edge angles and are arranged in the cortex as smooth pinwheels around singular points.

• Sharpness subtypes run from crisply tuned cells to cells with almost no preference, the broadest sitting in the input layer and sharpening above and below it.

• Retinal ON-OFF direction-selective ganglion cells come in four types preferring up, down, left and right, matched to the axes of the eye muscles, and an ON type has now been found in the primate retina.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Orientation selectivity first appears in the primary visual cortex, area V1, in the calcarine sulcus of the occipital lobe, across layers 4C alpha, 4C beta, 4B, 2/3, 5 and 6.

Direction selectivity begins earlier, in the inner plexiform layer of the retina where amacrine and ganglion dendrites meet, and returns in V1 layer 4B, where 66 percent of cells are directional and 59 percent of those almost perfectly unidirectional, and layer 4B is the interface, since it alone projects to motion area MT.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since these are functional labels on cells already counted: about 1 million retinal ganglion cells per human eye and about 140 million V1 neurons per hemisphere.

Most V1 cells show some orientation preference though sharpness varies enormously, so the defensible claim is that most of those 140 million are orientation-biased and a minority sharply tuned.

Direction-selective ganglion cells are a small minority in primates, only recently demonstrated, so their human count is unknown beyond the bound that they are far fewer than the midget and parasol cells, and against 86 billion neurons overall the addition is exactly zero percent.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

V1 cells fire under two spikes per second in the dark and twenty to eighty for an optimal edge, with orientation bandwidth at half height spread broadly from about twenty degrees to essentially untuned, and direction preference scored as an index running from 0 for none to 1 for absolute.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Classically a row of thalamic relay cells with centre-surround fields, aligned along a line, converge on one cortical cell, and that line is the orientation it prefers, though local inhibition and recurrent excitation are needed to sharpen it.

In the retina the whole computation is one asymmetric wiring trick, since a starburst amacrine cell inhibits the ganglion cell only on the side matching the null direction, so wrong-way motion arrives already vetoed.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Cortical axons are thin, 0.3 to 1.5 micrometres, and branch to distant patches sharing the same orientation, a pattern called like-to-like horizontal connectivity, while retinal ganglion axons form the optic nerve and conduct at up to twenty metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for excitation and GABA for cortical inhibition, and remarkably the starburst amacrine cell releases both GABA, which inhibits, and acetylcholine, which excites, from the same cell, the asymmetry of that GABA release being the physical basis of direction selectivity.

MYELINATION:

Cortical local axons are patchily myelinated while the layer 4B projection to area MT is well insulated because motion signals must arrive fast, and in the retina the whole computation happens in unmyelinated dendrites with no action potentials at all.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high, since V1 has the highest neuron density of any human cortical area and is so rich in cytochrome oxidase, an enzyme of energy metabolism, that the enzyme is used as a stain to reveal V1's internal structure.

PLASTICITY:

Orientation tuning exists roughly at birth and is refined during a critical period, a window in early life when the cortex is unusually mouldable, whereas retinal direction selectivity develops correctly even when GABA, acetylcholine and action potentials are all blocked, so it is essentially hard-wired.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

V1 astrocytes are packed at exceptionally high density to serve the exceptionally high neuron density and clear the transmitter glutamate fast enough to stop neighbouring orientation columns bleeding into one another.

In the retina the Muller cell, a giant glial cell spanning the whole retinal thickness, acts as a living optical fibre guiding light to the photoreceptors, a job no glial cell elsewhere performs.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove orientation selectivity and vision collapses into a fog of brightness with no contours, so you could tell light from dark but not see a shape.

Remove direction selectivity and the world keeps its shapes but stops flowing, objects appearing at a series of positions without ever seeming to travel, so the flavour lost is form in the first case and time in the second.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The retinal detector is the cleanest case of dendritic computation without spikes anywhere, since each branch of a starburst amacrine cell computes outward motion independently and releases transmitter locally without the cell ever firing.

In the cortex, tuning is sharpened by divisive normalisation, dividing the response by the neighbourhood's pooled activity, which gives contrast invariance, and the cells adapt over seconds, synchronise in the gamma band with like-tuned neighbours and control local blood flow directly.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: for cortical cells, a spatially arranged array of lateral geniculate nucleus centre-surround responses at 0 to 200 spikes per second each.

◦ For retinal cells, bipolar excitation plus asymmetric starburst inhibition as graded voltage, plus a local inhibitory pool for normalisation and feedback gain 0.8 to 1.5 from V2 and MT.

• OUTPUTS: spike train 0 to 100 hertz to V1 layers 2/3 and 5, to area V2, and from layer 4B to area MT.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation level, normalisation pool, spatiotemporal filter history over the last 100 milliseconds.

• PARAMETERS: preferred orientation 0 to 180 degrees, bandwidth 15 to 90 degrees at half height, preferred direction 0 to 360 degrees, direction index 0 to 1, spatial frequency 0.5 to 8 cycles per degree.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, V1 latency 40 to 70 milliseconds, integration 20 to 100 milliseconds, contrast adaptation 1 to 10 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: bilateral damage to area V5/MT causes akinetopsia, or motion blindness, first described in patient LM, who saw the world as still frames and could not judge liquid rising in a cup, while failure of orientation tuning during the critical period causes amblyopia, in which the eye is optically sound but the cortex never learns to see sharply through it.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the firing rate of an orientation-selective and direction-selective cell for a moving edge.
Create a number variable called preferred orientation with initial value 90.
Create a number variable called orientation bandwidth with initial value 25.
Create a number variable called direction index with initial value 0.8.
Set orientation gap to the difference of stimulus orientation and preferred orientation.
If orientation gap is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
    Set orientation gap to the product of orientation gap and negative one.
End the conditional block.
If orientation gap is greater than 90, then perform the following actions.
    Set orientation gap to the difference of 180 and orientation gap.
End the conditional block.
Set orientation factor to the difference of 1 and the quotient of orientation gap divided by orientation bandwidth.
If orientation factor is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
    Set orientation factor to 0.
End the conditional block.
If stimulus direction is equal to preferred direction, then perform the following actions.
    Set direction factor to 1.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set direction factor to the difference of 1 and direction index.
End the conditional block.
Set firing rate to the sum of 1 and the product of 40 and the product of orientation factor and direction factor.
Display firing rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because a space-by-time loop makes visible the single idea that motion is orientation in the space-time plane.

import math

SF, TF = 0.05, 2.0      # spatial cycles per unit space, temporal cycles per unit time
SIG_X, SIG_T = 8.0, 0.25
XS = [i * 0.5 for i in range(-64, 65)]
TS = [j * 0.01 for j in range(-50, 51)]

def window(x, t):
    return math.exp(-x * x / (2 * SIG_X ** 2)) * math.exp(-t * t / (2 * SIG_T ** 2))

def filt(x, t, phase):
    # A filter tilted in space and time, so it prefers one direction of drift.
    return window(x, t) * math.cos(2 * math.pi * (SF * x - TF * t) + phase)

def energy(direction):
    """direction is +1 for a rightward drifting grating, -1 for leftward."""
    even = odd = 0.0
    for x in XS:
        for t in TS:
            s = math.cos(2 * math.pi * (SF * x - direction * TF * t))
            even += s * filt(x, t, 0.0)
            odd += s * filt(x, t, -math.pi / 2)   # the quadrature partner
    return even * even + odd * odd                # energy, so phase does not matter

pref, null = energy(+1), energy(-1)
print("preferred energy:", round(pref, 1))
print("null energy:", round(null, 1))
print("direction index:", round((pref - null) / (pref + null), 3))   # close to 1.0

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Sweep a bar one way and the cell shouts, sweep the identical bar back and it says nothing, even though every photon in the stimulus is the same.

CHAPTER 296. SIMPLE CELLS (Fixed-Edge Neuron) (COG)

This cell will tell you an edge is present only if the edge is in exactly the right place; move it half a stripe and the cell falls silent.

The word simple is a committee's shorthand from the 1960s and teaches nothing about what the cell in the primary visual cortex actually does.

Fixed names the defining property, that the position of the edge within the receptive field matters absolutely, because the on and off zones of that field never overlap.

Edge names the stimulus, an oriented border of light against dark, since the cell fires best for a bar or grating at one preferred angle and falls almost silent when that bar is turned ninety degrees.

Neuron marks it as a cortical cell, and the name is built to be read against the Roaming-Edge Neuron so the one dimension separating the pair, whether position matters, is visible in both names.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This cell has a receptive field made of neat parallel stripes, some switched on by light and some switched on by dark, and those stripes never overlap.

Because of that clean separation its response follows plain addition, so shifting the edge half a stripe turns the cell off.

The consequence is a measuring instrument: the cell reports not only that an edge of a given tilt is present, but exactly where it lies.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Typically a spiny stellate or small pyramidal cell of layers 4C and 6.

The correspondence is loose, however, and you cannot tell this cell from its roaming counterpart by looking at it, which is why the classification is functional rather than anatomical.

SIZE:

Layer 4C spiny stellate bodies are ten to fifteen micrometres across with dendritic branches spanning two to four hundred micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Even-symmetric cells, which prefer a bar centred on the field.

• Odd-symmetric cells, which prefer an edge, meaning a step from dark to light.

• Quadrature pairs, an even and an odd cell sharing orientation and spatial frequency but offset by a quarter cycle.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The primary visual cortex, area V1, in and around the calcarine sulcus of the occipital lobe, and continuing into area V2 and beyond.

Layer 4C is the interface at which thalamic input becomes cortical processing, and within it this cell and its roaming counterpart occur in roughly equal proportion, which corrects the tidy textbook story that layer 4 is purely simple.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since this is a functional label on V1 cells already counted, roughly 140 million per human hemisphere over a V1 surface that varies two- to threefold between healthy people.

This type is the minority overall, because the layers it dominates hold fewer neurons than those dominated by its counterpart.

Any precise split deserves caution, since the classifying measure shifts with contrast and surround.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The defining measurement is the modulation ratio.

Drift a sinusoidal grating across the field, take the mean firing rate and the amplitude of firing at the grating's own frequency, and divide the second by the first.

A ratio above one marks this cell, whose firing rises and falls with each passing stripe.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It gets its stripes from a row of aligned thalamic relay cells, with on-centre cells feeding the on-stripes and off-centre cells feeding the off-stripes.

Inhibition arrives in antiphase with excitation, stripe by stripe, which sharpens the separation between the zones.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Layer 4C axons climb vertically into layers 2/3, delivering the measured result to the cells that will generalise it.

Layer 6 axons feed back to the thalamus in a loop numerically larger than the forward path.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for excitation and gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) for inhibition, the latter being no mere brake here but an active shaping force arriving out of phase with excitation.

MYELINATION:

Layer 4C axons are largely bare over their short vertical course, while the layer 6 feedback to thalamus is fast and fully insulated.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Among the highest in the brain, since V1 is the most metabolically active cortical area in an awake seeing human and layer 4C is so rich in cytochrome oxidase that the layer can be picked out by eye in a stained section.

PLASTICITY:

Shaped during the critical period by patterned vision, so depriving one eye shifts cortical territory to the other.

In adults, perceptual learning sharpens tuning for trained orientations and adaptation reshapes tuning curves for minutes after prolonged viewing.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

V1 astrocytes sit at unusually high density, each tiling a domain about a hundred micrometres wide and controlling the blood vessels inside it, so the astrocyte network effectively maps orientation columns onto the blood supply.

That coupling is why functional brain imaging can read orientation-related activity out of V1 at all.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and V1 loses its ruler.

Nothing would measure where an edge is, and fine acuity and stereoscopic depth would go with it, since both depend on knowing position to a fraction of a receptive field.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

It obeys divisive normalisation, dividing its response by a pooled measure of local activity, which is what gives it contrast invariance and surround suppression.

Its dendrites fire local NMDA spikes, so a cluster of inputs on one branch counts for more than the same number scattered across the tree.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: an array of aligned on-centre and off-centre thalamic responses at 0 to 200 spikes per second each, plus antiphase inhibition and a normalisation pool summing local activity.

• OUTPUTS: spike train 0 to 100 hertz to V1 layers 2/3 and to the thalamic feedback loop.

• STATE: membrane voltage, per-stripe excitatory and inhibitory conductances, normalisation pool level, adaptation variable.

• PARAMETERS: preferred orientation, preferred spatial frequency, stripe phase, modulation ratio above 1, normalisation exponent about 2.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, synaptic 2 to 10 milliseconds, adaptation seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of antiphase inhibition merges the on and off stripes, collapsing the modulation ratio and converting the measuring instrument into a detector that no longer reports position.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the response of a cell whose on and off zones do not overlap, so that the position of an edge determines whether it fires.
Create a number variable called response with initial value zero.
Create a list variable called on zone samples with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called off zone samples with initial value empty list.
For each position in the receptive field, perform the following operations.
    If the position lies inside an on zone, then perform the following actions.
        Add the light level at that position to the end of on zone samples.
    Else if the position lies inside an off zone, then perform the following actions.
        Add the light level at that position to the end of off zone samples.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Set on total to the sum of all items in on zone samples.
Set off total to the sum of all items in off zone samples.
Set raw response to the difference of on total and off total.
If raw response is less than zero, then perform the following actions.
    Set raw response to zero.
End the conditional block.
Set response to the quotient of raw response divided by the sum of one and the normalisation pool level.
Display response to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because a Gabor receptive field and a dot product show the whole idea in a few lines.
import math

def gabor(x, phase, sf=0.1, sigma=8.0):
    return math.exp(-(x * x) / (2 * sigma * sigma)) * math.cos(2 * math.pi * sf * x + phase)

def fixed_edge_response(edge_pos, phase=0.0, width=40):
    xs = range(-width, width + 1)
    stim = [1.0 if x >= edge_pos else -1.0 for x in xs]      # a step edge
    r = sum(gabor(x, phase) * s for x, s in zip(xs, stim))
    return max(0.0, r)                                        # rectify

for pos in (-8, -4, 0, 4, 8):
    print("edge at", pos, "-> response", round(fixed_edge_response(pos), 2))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It beats in time with the stripes.

Drift a grating across its field and it fires one burst per stripe, so its spike train carries the rhythm of the moving pattern, and that single measurement has separated it from its counterpart for over thirty years.

CHAPTER 297. COMPLEX CELLS (Roaming-Edge Neuron) (COG)

This cell prefers exactly the same tilted edge as its neighbour, but it does not care in the least where that edge sits, which is the first step in the brain towards recognising a thing regardless of where it happens to be.

The word complex is a committee's shorthand and says only that the cell was harder to explain than the other one.

Roaming names the defining property, that the edge can slide anywhere within the receptive field and still drive the cell, because its on and off zones overlap.

Edge names the stimulus, the same oriented border of light against dark that its fixed counterpart prefers, since both fall almost silent when the bar is turned ninety degrees.

Neuron marks it as a cortical cell, and the shared word Edge keeps the pair legible as one family differing on one axis.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This cell prefers one tilt, like its neighbour, but its light and dark zones sit on top of each other rather than side by side.

The consequence is that it fires for that orientation anywhere within its window.

Between the two types, the cortex first measures precisely and then generalises, which is the beginning of recognising a shape independently of where it falls on the retina.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Typically a pyramidal cell of layers 2/3, 4B and 5.

As with its counterpart the correspondence is loose, and the two cannot be told apart by appearance alone.

SIZE:

Receptive fields are typically two to three times larger in area than the fixed fields feeding them, which is the direct consequence of pooling several of those fields together.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Standard complex cells, which pool across phase at one orientation.

• End-stopped complex cells, sometimes called special complex cells, which go quiet when a bar is made too long and so become detectors of corners and line endings.

• Direction-selective complex cells, which additionally prefer one direction of motion along the axis perpendicular to their preferred orientation.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The primary visual cortex, area V1, and onward into area V2 and beyond.

This type dominates layers 2/3, 4B and 5, though it is also present in layer 4C in roughly equal proportion with its counterpart, which corrects the tidy story that layer 4 is purely simple.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since this is a functional label on V1 cells already counted.

This type outnumbers its counterpart overall, because the layers it dominates hold more neurons than layer 4C alone.

Any precise split deserves caution, since the classifying measure shifts with contrast and surround.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The same modulation ratio that identifies its counterpart identifies this cell by falling below one, because its firing holds steady rather than rising and falling as each stripe passes.

Skottun and colleagues showed in 1991 that this ratio falls into two humps across V1, which is what makes it the standard test.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It pools several fixed-edge cells sharing one orientation but differing in stripe position.

It also takes direct thalamic drive, so the neat hierarchy from simple to complex is an approximation rather than a law.

Inhibition arrives as a sustained pooled signal rather than in antiphase.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Layer 2/3 axons run horizontally for millimetres, linking columns that share a preferred orientation, which is how the cortex stitches an extended contour together.

Layer 5 axons carry the result out of V1 towards subcortical targets.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for excitation and gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) for inhibition, the inhibition here being sustained and pooled rather than phase-locked.

MYELINATION:

Layer 2/3 horizontal axons are patchily myelinated, with insulated segments separated by bare stretches, an arrangement thought to tune conduction delay across the millimetres they span.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Among the highest in the brain, shared with the rest of V1, the most metabolically active cortical area in an awake seeing human.

PLASTICITY:

Shaped during the critical period by patterned vision, and in adults subject to perceptual learning and to adaptation that reshapes tuning curves for minutes after prolonged viewing.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Shares V1's unusually dense astrocyte population, each astrocyte tiling a domain about a hundred micrometres wide and controlling the blood vessels within it.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and V1 keeps its precision but loses its tolerance.

An edge would have to be exactly placed to be seen at all, and every small tremor of the eye would rewrite the image, so the flavour lost is stability.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is the clearest nonlinear computation in the brain.

Squaring and summing a quadrature pair, meaning two fixed-edge cells offset by a quarter cycle, yields orientation energy that is blind to stripe position, and no linear device can do this.

Like its counterpart it obeys divisive normalisation and fires local NMDA spikes in its dendrites, so clustered inputs count for more than scattered ones.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: the rectified outputs of two or more fixed-edge cells at matched orientation and spatial frequency but differing phase, plus direct thalamic drive, a normalisation pool, and feedback gain 0.8 to 1.5.

• OUTPUTS: spike train 0 to 100 hertz to V1 layers 2/3 and 5, to area V2, and to subcortical targets.

• STATE: membrane voltage, squared subunit outputs, normalisation pool level, adaptation variable.

• PARAMETERS: preferred orientation, preferred spatial frequency, number of pooled subunits typically 2 to 8, modulation ratio below 1, normalisation exponent about 2.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, synaptic 2 to 10 milliseconds, adaptation seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of pooling collapses the cell back to a position-sensitive detector, so the cortex loses translation tolerance and object recognition becomes dependent on precise fixation.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute a response to an oriented edge that does not depend on where within the receptive field that edge lies.
Create a list variable called subunit responses with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called energy with initial value zero.
For each subunit in the pooled set of fixed-edge cells, perform the following operations.
    Set subunit output to the response of that subunit to the current image.
    Set squared output to the product of subunit output and subunit output.
    Add squared output to the end of subunit responses.
End the loop.
For each item in subunit responses, perform the following operations.
    Set energy to the sum of energy and that item.
End the loop.
Set response to the quotient of energy divided by the sum of one and the normalisation pool level.
Display response to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the energy model is literally square-and-sum, which is three lines here.
import math

def gabor(x, phase, sf=0.1, sigma=8.0):
    return math.exp(-(x * x) / (2 * sigma * sigma)) * math.cos(2 * math.pi * sf * x + phase)

def subunit(edge_pos, phase, width=40):
    xs = range(-width, width + 1)
    stim = [1.0 if x >= edge_pos else -1.0 for x in xs]
    return sum(gabor(x, phase) * s for x, s in zip(xs, stim))

def roaming_edge_response(edge_pos):
    even = subunit(edge_pos, 0.0)              # quadrature pair:
    odd = subunit(edge_pos, math.pi / 2)       # phases 90 degrees apart
    return math.sqrt(even * even + odd * odd)  # orientation energy

for pos in (-8, -4, 0, 4, 8):
    print("edge at", pos, "-> response", round(roaming_edge_response(pos), 2))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It holds a steady tone for as long as the grating drifts.

Where its counterpart beats once per stripe, this cell fires at a constant rate no matter where the stripes happen to be, and that constancy is the whole point of it.

CHAPTER 298. COMMAND NEURONS (COG)

Startle a goldfish and one giant cell in its brainstem fires exactly once, throwing the whole animal sideways in five thousandths of a second.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A command neuron is defined by an experiment, not by a shape.

Silence it and the behaviour disappears, fire it in its natural pattern and the whole behaviour appears unprompted, the two halves of the test Irving Kupfermann and Klaudiusz Weiss set in 1978.

Almost no single mammalian cell passes both, so real examples are small groups that pass together.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Broad dendrites, the branching input antennae of a neuron, gather many sensory streams, while one very thick axon splits into collaterals reaching dozens of downstream pools.

SIZE:

Human giant reticulospinal cell bodies measure 40 to 70 micrometres, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre, and Betz cells, the cortical command elements for single muscles, reach 120.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Trigger commands fire once and release a fixed action, as in startle.

• Gating commands must keep firing throughout, as hypothalamic attack neurons do.

• Scaling commands grade the behaviour with their own rate, from approach to attack.

• Distributed command systems spread the job across a pool, the normal mammalian arrangement.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Human candidates sit in the gigantocellular reticular nucleus, the cuneiform and pedunculopontine nuclei of the midbrain locomotor region, the periaqueductal grey columns, the preBotzinger complex that triggers each breath, and the intermediate superior colliculus that triggers each flick of the eyes.

The decisive interface is the brainstem to spinal cord junction.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons.

Command neuron is a functional label on cells already counted as reticulospinal, periaqueductal, collicular and hypothalamic projection neurons.

Whether any human cell passes the test is unknown, since it needs single cell activation in a behaving person.

The best bound is the giant reticulospinal population, tens of thousands of cells, under one thousandth of one percent of the nervous system's roughly eighty six billion neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Most sit below threshold with little spontaneous firing and then deliver one spike or a brief burst, while plateau potentials, depolarisations that outlast their input, let a gating command hold steady for seconds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input is a funnel and output a fan, and on the Mauthner cell of fish a feedforward inhibitory collar ensures that only one command wins and that it fires only once.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Human reticulospinal axons reach 10 to 15 micrometres across and conduct at 60 to 120 metres per second, because a command that arrives late is not a command.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Most use glutamate, the brain's main excitatory chemical messenger, though some are inhibitory, like the glycine using omnipause neurons that command the eyes to hold still.

MYELINATION:

Heavily myelinated, myelin being the fatty insulation made by oligodendrocytes that lets a signal leap between gaps instead of crawling.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High peak demand and low average demand, because a large cell body with a very thick axon pumps many ions but fires rarely.

PLASTICITY:

The threshold is what learns, since repeated harmless stimuli strengthen the inhibitory collar, so a familiar bang stops making you flinch.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Glial processes form an axon cap around the Mauthner cell's output stalk, raising the resistance of the surrounding fluid so inhibitory cells can veto by field alone.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the command elements and the region becomes a committee that deliberates forever, so breathing loses its trigger and the eyes drift instead of jumping.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Ephaptic inhibition, a veto delivered by an extracellular electric field rather than a chemical, is the axon cap's trick, and gap junctions synchronise left and right partners so both cannot fire.

Corollary discharge, a copy of the command sent to sensory areas, marks the resulting sensations as self caused.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Sensory drive at 0 to 50 arbitrary units, minus a veto of 0 to 20.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ One all or none trigger to named follower pools, plus a corollary discharge copy.

• STATE.

◦ A drive accumulator and a lockout timer in milliseconds.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Threshold near 12 units, delay 3 to 15 milliseconds, fan out 20 to 200 pools.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Integration 10 milliseconds, lockout 200 to 400 milliseconds, gating seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Freezing of gait in Parkinson's disease, where the legs work but the start signal never comes.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether a command neuron fires its single trigger.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called lockout with initial value 0.
For each input in the sensory channels, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the sum of drive and the weight of this input.
    Set drive to the result.
End the loop.
Calculate the difference of drive and the veto.
Set drive to the result.
Check if lockout is greater than 0.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Return no command to the calling function.
End the conditional block.
Check if drive is greater than or equal to 12.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    For each pool in the follower pools, perform the following operations.
        Display the trigger for this pool to the console.
    End the loop.
    Set lockout to 300.
End the conditional block.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because its plain syntax reads almost like the procedure above.
THRESH, LOCK_MS, TAU, DT = 12.0, 300.0, 0.010, 0.001
pools = ["flexor", "extensor", "postural"]
v, lock = 0.0, 0.0
for ms in range(600):
    # integrate, run the lockout down, then decide
    drive = 40.0 if 100 <= ms < 140 else 0.0  # a looming object arrives
    veto = 5.0 if ms > 300 else 0.0           # later cortical suppression
    v += (-v + drive - veto) * (DT / TAU)
    lock = max(0.0, lock - DT * 1000.0)
    if v >= THRESH and lock <= 0.0:
        v, lock = 0.0, LOCK_MS                # fire once, then refuse
        for p in pools:
            print("t=%d ms  COMMAND to %s" % (ms, p))
# One command reaches all three pools, milliseconds after the stimulus starts.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other cell type is defined by an experiment rather than an appearance.

Switch one cell off and lose a behaviour, switch it on and conjure that behaviour from nowhere.

CHAPTER 299. SPARSE CODING NEURONS (Silent-Until-Recognized Neuron) (COG)

Somewhere in your memory system is a cell that has been silent all day and would fire hard at one particular face.

Sparse coding is a statistician's phrase about a population rather than a description a student can picture, so the new name describes what one such cell looks like on the electrode.

Silent names its resting condition, because in the human medial temporal lobe both lifetime and population sparseness are estimated at under two and a half percent, meaning any single cell says nothing at all to the overwhelming majority of pictures, names and sounds it is shown.

Until-Recognized names the moment it breaks that silence, which arrives only when one particular meaning is present.

Neuron marks it as a cell of recognition rather than raw sensation, because the same cell answers to a photograph of a person, to their written name, to their spoken name, and even to the person merely being recalled with nothing on the screen.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Sparse coding neurons carry meaning by staying quiet, since at any instant only a tiny fraction of the population is active and each active cell stands for something specific.

Population sparseness means few cells answer one thing, lifetime sparseness means one cell answers few things, and the payoff is huge storage with little interference.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Dentate granule cells have a small round cell body and one narrow cone of dendrites facing the incoming fibres, so each admits only a thin slice of the input.

SIZE:

Dentate granule cell bodies are about 10 micrometres across, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre, while nearby pyramidal cells run 15 to 25.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Pattern separating granule cells of the dentate gyrus.

• Concept cells of the human medial temporal lobe, answering one person across photographs and names.

• Silent majority cells, answering about one stimulus in a thousand.

• Sparse cortical pyramidal cells, most nearly mute and a few loud.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The dentate gyrus granule cell layer, hippocampal fields CA3 and CA1, the subiculum, entorhinal cortex, amygdala, perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices, and layer two of the piriform cortex.

The critical interface is the perforant path, where a dense cortical code is handed over and becomes a sparse hippocampal one.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons.

This is a functional label on cells already counted, chiefly the roughly fifteen million dentate granule cells and sixteen million CA1 pyramidal cells per human hippocampus.

Human recordings suggest one percent or fewer of medial temporal lobe neurons answer a given picture, and that groups for unrelated concepts share under one percent of their members.

Confidence is moderate, since those figures come from small samples biased toward active cells.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Dentate granule cells rest near minus 80 millivolts with low input resistance, so ordinary input does nothing, average rates stay far below one spike per second, and a cell that crosses threshold fires a vigorous burst.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Each granule cell needs many of its thousands of fibres to agree, basket cells then silence every neighbour, and the mossy fibre contact onto CA3 is a detonator that can drive its target with one spike.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Mossy fibres are bare and thin at about 0.2 micrometres, conducting at under one metre per second but compensating with giant swellings bearing dozens of release sites.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the transmitter, released alongside zinc, which modifies the receptors it lands on, and the opioid peptide dynorphin, which quietens the cell's own input.

MYELINATION:

Largely absent on mossy fibres, which is unusual for an output axon and reflects the very short distance travelled.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low, and that is the design goal, because spiking dominates the brain's energy bill and two cells active in a hundred is far cheaper than a dense code.

PLASTICITY:

Mossy fibre strengthening happens in the sending terminal without the NMDA receptor, and human concept cells can take on a new concept within a day.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The dentate gyrus holds a neurogenic niche, a pocket of stem like radial glia that can make new granule cells in adulthood at a rate still disputed in humans.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete the sparse coders and the hippocampus loses pattern separation, so today's parking space and yesterday's are written on the same cells and the second erases the first.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Competition through inhibition turns a graded input into a discrete choice of winners, and dendrites act as subunits, so inputs must share a branch to count.

Homeostatic threshold adjustment regulates a population statistic, not a single cell, so sparseness is actively defended.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Thousands of weighted cortical afferents at 0 to 1, plus one global inhibition value.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ An active or silent flag, and when active a burst of two to seven spikes.

• STATE.

◦ A per cell adaptive threshold, a recent activity trace, and the weight vector.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Target active fraction one to three percent, homeostatic rate near 0.01.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Competition settles in 5 to 20 milliseconds, threshold drift takes hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Lose sparseness and the dentate gyrus overexcites toward temporal lobe epilepsy.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to choose the few cells that will represent the current input.
Create a list variable called drives with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called target fraction with initial value 0.02.
Create a number variable called learning rate with initial value 0.01.
Create a number variable called input sum with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called best position with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called best drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called scan position with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called this drive with initial value 0.
For each cell in the population, perform the following operations.
    Set input sum to 0.
    For each input in the inputs of this cell, perform the following operations.
        Calculate the product of the weight of input and the value of input.
        Calculate the sum of input sum and the result.
        Set input sum to the result.
    End the loop.
    Calculate the difference of input sum and the threshold of this cell.
    Add the result to the end of drives.
End the loop.
Calculate the product of target fraction and the number of cells.
Set the quota to the result.
Repeat the following steps exactly quota times.
    Set best position to 1.
    Access the item at position 1 in drives.
    Set best drive to the result.
    Set scan position to 2.
    While scan position is less than or equal to the total number of items in drives, repeat the following steps.
        Access the item at position scan position in drives.
        Set this drive to the result.
        Check if this drive is greater than best drive.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set best drive to this drive.
            Set best position to scan position.
        End the conditional block.
        Calculate the sum of scan position and 1.
        Set scan position to the result.
    End the loop.
    Calculate the sum of the threshold of the cell at position best position and learning rate.
    Set the threshold of the cell at position best position to the result.
    Set the item at position best position in drives to the lowest possible value.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python without libraries, because the winner takes all rule is plain arithmetic.
import random
random.seed(7)
N, M, FRAC, RATE = 500, 40, 0.02, 0.01     # cells, inputs, sparseness, homeostasis
W = [[random.gauss(0.0, 1.0) for _ in range(M)] for _ in range(N)]
th = [0.0] * N                             # per cell adaptive threshold
x = [random.random() for _ in range(M)]    # the input pattern
for trial in range(5):
    drive = [sum(w * xi for w, xi in zip(row, x)) - t for row, t in zip(W, th)]
    quota = max(1, round(FRAC * N))
    ranked = sorted(range(N), key=lambda i: drive[i], reverse=True)
    winners = {i for i in ranked[:quota] if drive[i] > 0.0}
    for i in range(N):                     # homeostasis defends the target
        th[i] += RATE if i in winners else -RATE * FRAC
    print("trial %d: %d of %d cells active" % (trial, len(winners), N))
# Ten cells in five hundred carry the pattern.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Near total silence punctuated by an emphatic and highly specific burst.

A cell that ignores a hundred pictures then fires to seven photographs of one person is a sparse coder.

CHAPTER 300. ERROR AND REWARD PREDICTION ERROR NEURONS (Prediction-Gap Reporting Neuron) (COG)

These cells do not report what happened, they report how wrong you were, and when the world matches your expectation exactly they say nothing at all.

The old label is a committee minute stacking two research literatures, error monitoring and reward prediction error, into one unspeakable string when both describe the same underlying job.

Prediction-Gap names the quantity the cell actually computes, the difference between what was forecast and what arrived, which in midbrain dopamine cells appears as a burst lasting roughly one hundred to two hundred milliseconds when the outcome is better than predicted, no change at all when it exactly matches, and a brief dip below baseline when it is worse.

Reporting names the purpose, since the signal is broadcast for others to learn from.

Neuron marks it as a cell whose human counterpart appears first in the pre-supplementary motor area and about fifty milliseconds later in dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, where the response predicts how much the person slows down on the next trial.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A prediction error neuron computes the gap between what was expected and what arrived.

Midbrain dopamine cells burst when an outcome beats the prediction, sit at baseline when it matches, and pause when it falls short.

That is the learning signal of reinforcement learning, the branch of machine learning in which an agent improves by trial and error.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Midbrain dopamine neurons are medium sized and spindle shaped, with three to six sparse dendrites that can release transmitter themselves rather than via an axon.

SIZE:

Human dopaminergic cell bodies in the substantia nigra pars compacta run 20 to 35 micrometres and are stained dark by neuromelanin, visible as a black stripe in a fresh brain slice.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Reward prediction error dopamine neurons of the ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra.

• Negative signal neurons of the lateral habenula, excited by disappointment.

• Olivary teaching neurons, whose climbing fibres deliver a movement error to Purkinje cells.

• Performance monitoring error neurons of the pre supplementary motor area and cingulate cortex.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The substantia nigra pars compacta and ventral tegmental area, the lateral habenula, the rostromedial tegmental nucleus, the inferior olive, and the medial frontal cortex.

Two interfaces matter, the habenula to rostromedial tegmental junction that inverts a positive signal into a negative one, and the olive to cerebellum junction.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons.

These are labels on populations already counted, chiefly the roughly 400,000 to 500,000 dopaminergic neurons per side of the substantia nigra pars compacta.

The human olive count is not established, but with seven climbing fibres per olivary cell and fifteen million Purkinje cells, one to three million is a low confidence estimate.

Together they are under one hundredth of one percent of all human neurons, yet they gate learning brain wide.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The dopamine cell paces at three to five spikes per second, then bursts to 20 or 30 for some 200 milliseconds on an unexpected reward and falls to zero when one is omitted.

The code is asymmetric, since a burst rises 25 spikes per second above baseline but a pause falls only five.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation from the pedunculopontine nucleus supplies the burst, inhibition from the rostromedial tegmental nucleus supplies the pause, and striatal neurons feed back the prediction.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

One human dopamine neuron carries an estimated four metres of axon and one to two million release sites, reaching much of a nucleus.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Dopamine, a monoamine acting through slow receptors rather than fast channels, with glutamate or gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) released alongside it.

MYELINATION:

Dopamine axons are essentially bare, which is thought to be a major reason for their fragility.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Among the highest in the brain, because a bare four metre axon kept pacemaking by calcium entry carries a relentless oxidative load.

PLASTICITY:

These cells mostly cause plasticity elsewhere, the third factor telling a synapse whether a pairing was worth keeping.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The substantia nigra carries one of the highest microglial densities in the human brain, and these immune cells react to neuromelanin spilled by dying neurons.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the striatum still hears that something happened but never that it beat expectation, so habits freeze and the urge to move drains away.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Dopamine is largely a volume transmitter, released into the extracellular space to reach cells it never touched, and it leaves dendrites as well as axons.

Measurements in awake human patients show striatal dopamine carrying at once what did happen and what would have happened otherwise.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Actual outcome value 0 to 1, minus the predicted value from striatal afferents.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Firing rate with a floor of 0 and a ceiling near 30 spikes per second.

• STATE.

◦ A learned value estimate per cue and a running reward average.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Baseline 3 to 5 spikes per second, learning rate 0.1 to 0.5.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Burst and pause 100 to 400 milliseconds, reuptake 100 to 500 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Parkinson's disease, where motor signs appear after roughly 30 percent of these cells are lost and 50 to 80 percent by diagnosis.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a reward prediction error into a dopamine firing rate.
Create a number variable called predicted value with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called learning rate with initial value 0.3.
Create a number variable called positive gain with initial value 4.
Create a number variable called negative gain with initial value 1.5.
For each trial in the session, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of the delivered reward and predicted value.
    Set the error to the result.
    Check if the error is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of negative gain and the error.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the product of positive gain and the error.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the sum of 5 and that product.
    Display the result to the console.
    Calculate the product of learning rate and the error.
    Calculate the sum of predicted value and that product.
    Set predicted value to the result.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the temporal difference rule is plain arithmetic.
BASELINE, CEILING = 5.0, 30.0   # measured tonic rate and phasic burst peak, in Hz
GAIN_POS, GAIN_NEG = 4.0, 1.5   # negative errors are compressed by the 0 Hz floor

def rate(rpe):
    """Turn a signed prediction error into a rate in spikes per second."""
    if rpe >= 0.0:
        return min(CEILING, BASELINE + GAIN_POS * rpe)
    return max(0.0, BASELINE + GAIN_NEG * rpe)

value, alpha = 0.0, 0.3         # learned prediction, then learning rate
for t in range(1, 9):
    reward = 0.0 if t == 6 else 1.0        # reward omitted on trial 6
    rpe = reward - value
    print("trial %d  error %+.3f  rate %5.2f Hz" % (t, rpe, rate(rpe)))
    value += alpha * rpe
# The burst fades as the cue is learned.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

The silence on a correct prediction is the giveaway.

A cell that answers a reward at first, stops as it becomes predictable, then dips below baseline when it fails to arrive, is reporting an error.

CHAPTER 301. NOCICEPTIVE-SPECIFIC NEURONS (Injury-Only Warning Neuron) (COG)

This cell will ignore a stroking hand completely, and then erupt the moment the same skin is pinched hard enough to be damaged.

Nociceptive-specific is Latin-rooted jargon, built from a word meaning to injure, and it teaches nothing to a reader who does not already know the root.

Injury-Only names the threshold that defines the cell, since it stays quiet through brushing and warmth and speaks only when a stimulus reaches the range that threatens tissue.

Warning names the message, a report that damage is occurring and where, rather than a measurement of how much.

Neuron marks it as a dorsal horn cell, and the name is built to be read against the Touch-To-Damage Grading Neuron so the one dimension separating the pair, a threshold detector against a measuring instrument, is visible in both names.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is one of the two encoding classes of the spinal dorsal horn, the grey matter where body sensation first arrives.

It answers only stimuli strong enough to threaten tissue, and its job is to report danger and its location.

It is the alarm rather than the gauge, and its silence during ordinary contact is as important as its firing during injury.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Superficial cells of this class are spindle shaped, pyramidal or many sided, sitting in the topmost sheets of the dorsal horn.

Their dendritic trees stay largely within the superficial laminae where the thin damage-carrying fibres terminate.

SIZE:

Superficial projection neurons of this class are distinguished mainly by cell body size, above roughly 200 square micrometres in cross-section.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Projection neurons carrying the neurokinin 1 receptor, the docking site for substance P.

• Projection neurons lacking that receptor, which are larger and more densely excited.

• Marginal cells tuned narrowly to cooling, to warming or to itch.

• Silent neurons, recruited only after injury has already occurred.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Rexed lamina I, the marginal zone, and lamina II, the substantia gelatinosa, hold most cells of this class.

The same plan continues in the head as the spinal trigeminal nucleus caudalis, and the interface at which its inputs arrive is the dorsal root entry zone.

NUMBER:

Zero additional neurons, since this is a label on dorsal horn cells already counted among the anterolateral projection neurons and the far more numerous interneurons.

Human counts are not established, but in rat one mid-lumbar segment holds roughly 400 marginal zone projection neurons.

Scaling to a human is an order of magnitude guess, so the honest figure is tens of thousands of projection neurons carrying nearly all pain.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Marginal zone cells fall into tidy firing classes, described as tonic, phasic, delayed onset and single spike.

Unlike its grading counterpart this cell does not show wind up, the progressive escalation of response to repeated identical stimuli.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives only the thin A delta and bare C fibres that carry damage signals.

It does not receive the thick A beta fibres of touch, and that exclusion is precisely what makes it specific.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Projection axons cross the midline and climb the opposite anterolateral quadrant at 2 to 15 metres per second.

That range is why sharp and dull pain arrive at the brain separately rather than together.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the output transmitter.

Receptor equipment rather than transmitter distinguishes this class, especially the neurokinin 1 receptor and the mu opioid receptor, the latter being the reason opioid drugs quieten this line so effectively.

MYELINATION:

Ascending axons carry a thin sheath at best, the price of packing many thin fibres into a narrow tract.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest at rest and steep under sustained noxious input, when these cells fire for minutes and switch on immediate early genes such as c-Fos.

PLASTICITY:

Part of the most plastic sensory relay in the body.

The gravest change is disinhibition, in which the chloride pump KCC2 is lost and gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) begins to excite rather than inhibit, so that this alarm can be triggered by stimuli that should never reach it.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Dorsal horn microglia, the resident immune cells, drive nerve injury pain by releasing brain derived neurotrophic factor, the signal behind that loss of KCC2.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the dorsal horn loses its alarm.

Injury would still register as intensity through the grading cells, but without urgency, so the body would know it was being damaged without being compelled to do anything about it.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Descending control from the brainstem lets an expectation formed in the frontal lobe silence this cell's response to an unchanged stimulus, which is the machinery of placebo analgesia.

Its silent subpopulation is recruited only by inflammation, so the cell class physically grows in size after injury.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: A delta and C nociceptors at 0 to 30 spikes per second, plus descending modulation from the periaqueductal grey and rostral ventromedial medulla.

• OUTPUTS: spike count per stimulus from 0 to 60, to thalamus and parabrachial nucleus.

• STATE: membrane voltage, internal chloride concentration, descending gain factor.

• PARAMETERS: threshold set above the noxious range, no wind up accumulator, mu opioid receptor density high.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, descending modulation seconds, chloride shift hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of KCC2 lowers the threshold so that touch fibres gain access to the alarm line, which is the cellular basis of allodynia, pain produced by an innocuous stimulus.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire only when an incoming stimulus exceeds the threshold at which tissue is threatened, and to remain silent otherwise.
Create a number variable called stimulus intensity with initial value zero.
Create a number variable called noxious threshold with initial value seven.
Create a number variable called descending gain with initial value one.
Create a number variable called response with initial value zero.
For each stimulus in the sequence, perform the following operations.
    Set stimulus intensity to the measured intensity of that stimulus.
    If stimulus intensity is less than noxious threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Set response to zero.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set raw response to the difference of stimulus intensity and noxious threshold.
        Set response to the product of raw response and descending gain.
    End the conditional block.
    Display response to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because a threshold detector is one comparison, and the contrast with grading is the point.
THRESHOLD = 7.0          # arbitrary intensity units: below this, tissue is not threatened
def injury_only(intensity, descending_gain=1.0):
    if intensity < THRESHOLD:
        return 0.0
    return (intensity - THRESHOLD) * descending_gain

for stim, label in [(1.0, "brush"), (3.0, "warm"), (6.0, "firm press"),
                    (8.0, "pinch"), (10.0, "noxious heat")]:
    print(f"{label:14s} intensity {stim:4.1f} -> response {injury_only(stim):5.2f}")

print("with descending inhibition at 0.3 gain:")
print("  pinch ->", round(injury_only(8.0, 0.3), 2))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Test it with a soft brush and it says nothing at all.

Then pinch the same patch of skin and it erupts, and that flat silence followed by sudden eruption is the signature no grading cell can imitate.
