THE NEURONAL MANUSCRIPT

Every Type of Neuron in the Human Nervous System, Described, Explained, and Specified

VOLUME 4 OF 5

Chapters 180 to 239

D. R. Dison

Founder, Artificial Intelligence University (AIU)

ORCID: 0009-0001-9246-5758

Prepared 30 July 2026


ABOUT THIS VOLUME

This is volume 4 of five, and it continues the catalogue at Chapter 180.

The front matter and Part One, the general account of the neuron, are given in Volume 1 and are not repeated here.

The tags and flags used throughout are explained in Volume 1, and are summarised again in one line each below.

• (PUC) marks a Previously Unnamed Construct: a neuron type that is real, functionally necessary and relied upon in the literature, but which had no accepted proper name until this work gave it one.

• (COG) marks a type involved in cognition, and (NON-COG) marks a type that is not.


PART TEN: SPINAL CORD (CONTINUED FROM VOLUME 3)

CHAPTER 179. V1 (Pace-Quickening Damping Neuron) (NON-COG)

Lift your toes and the muscle at the back of your calf must fall silent at the exact instant the muscle on your shin pulls, and the cell that enforces that silence is a V1.

V1 is a birth-domain code.

Pace-Quickening corrects the intuition that inhibition must slow things down, since silencing these cells in the neonatal mouse cord slows the step cycle severalfold, meaning fast stepping depends on each phase being cut short on time.

Damping names the chemistry and the action, because every member of this lineage is inhibitory and it supplies the cord with its best known brakes, including the cells that damp motor neuron output through recurrent feedback and the cells that silence the opposing muscle at a joint.

Neuron marks it as the lineage supplying the well-timed inhibition that makes a quick step possible.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

V1 neurons are the spinal cord's professional interrupters: every one is inhibitory, every one keeps its axon on its own side, and all carry the embryonic mark of the gene engrailed 1.

The family contains the Renshaw cell, which feeds a copy of each motor command back as inhibition, and the Ia inhibitory interneuron, which silences a muscle's opponent whenever that muscle is told to pull.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Small compact multipolar cells with three to six dendrites confined largely to one lamina.

Renshaw cells sit in a thin band at the lamina VII and lamina IX border, close enough that motor axon branches reach them within a millimetre; Ia inhibitory interneurons sit slightly more dorsally.

SIZE:

Cell bodies 10 to 20 micrometres across, Renshaw cells at the larger end near 15 to 20.

Dendritic trees span 200 to 400 micrometres and axons are short, usually under a centimetre.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Renshaw cells, earliest born, marked by calbindin and MafB, about 9 percent of V1, the only spinal cells receiving a direct branch of a motor neuron's own output axon.

• Foxp2 V1 cells, late born, 59 to 66 percent of V1, tightly wired onto motor neurons and containing many Ia inhibitory interneurons, which are themselves about 13 percent of V1.

• Pou6f2 V1 cells, early born and only loosely connected to motor neurons.

• Sp8 V1 cells, late born and also weakly connected to motor neurons; across the clan roughly 19 transcription factors combine to give about 50 distinguishable subclasses.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Lamina VII at every level from cervical to sacral, concentrated in the two limb enlargements, with the Renshaw subgroup pressed against the ventral and medial edge of the lamina IX motor nuclei in the region called the Renshaw area.

The critical interface is the lamina VII to lamina IX border, where inhibitory interneuron territory abuts motor neuron territory and V1 axons cross it in enormous numbers.

NUMBER:

Two anchors disagree and both deserve stating.

The classical ratio of one Renshaw cell per five motor neurons gives about 40 thousand Renshaw cells in a human, and at 9 percent of V1 that implies only about 450 thousand V1 cells.

Scaling instead from the finding that V1 cells are over a third of all ventral inhibitory interneurons gives 1.5 to 3 million.

Confidence is low; the true figure is very likely between half a million and three million, or 0.25 to 1.5 percent of the roughly 200 million neurons in the human cord.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Renshaw cells are among the fastest firing spinal cells: one motor axon volley drives a burst at several hundred spikes per second that decays over 30 to 50 milliseconds.

Rest is near minus 60 millivolts, threshold near minus 45, and the membrane time constant is a short 5 to 15 milliseconds, which is what makes the burst so tight.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Renshaw cells receive motor axon collaterals releasing acetylcholine onto nicotinic receptors together with glutamate, and send inhibition back to the same and synergist motor pools, to other Renshaw cells, and to Ia inhibitory interneurons.

Ia inhibitory interneurons receive Ia afferents, the fast fibres reporting muscle stretch, and inhibit the antagonist muscle; both types receive corticospinal and reticulospinal input, so the brain presets reflex gain before a movement.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, 0.5 to 1.5 micrometres, conducting at 1 to 5 metres per second, but so short that the whole recurrent loop closes within 1 to 3 milliseconds.

Terminal arbors are dense, so one V1 cell contacts dozens of motor neurons.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glycine and GABA, frequently from the same vesicle.

Renshaw cells carry exceptionally large clusters of gephyrin, the scaffold protein that anchors receptors, holding glycine and GABA type A receptors side by side, and their inhibitory currents are larger than those of other spinal interneurons.

MYELINATION:

Minimal, because these are short grey matter axons that are usually bare or given only a few myelin turns.

Speed is not what V1 sells; proximity is.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High for their size during activity, since a burst at several hundred spikes per second is one of the most expensive things a small neuron can do, and low between bursts.

Mitochondria cluster at the motor collateral synapses where the sodium load is greatest.

PLASTICITY:

Renshaw inhibition onto motor neurons is set by activity in development and stays adjustable in adults, which is part of how training changes reflex gain.

In ALS models V1 synapses are lost first, then the engrailed 1 marker, then the cells, all before motor neurons and V2a cells die, making V1 an early warning system rather than a bystander.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

No glial cell is unique to V1, and that should be said plainly.

What is locally special is chemistry: ventral horn astrocytes run the glycine cycle, recapturing glycine and returning its raw material, and in ALS models microglia actively strip V1 terminals from motor neuron surfaces.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove V1 and the ventral horn keeps its power and loses its precision.

Opposing muscles co-contract, bursts stop terminating crisply so the locomotor rhythm slows, and flexor activity comes to dominate extensor activity.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Renshaw cells are electrically coupled to each other through connexin 36 gap junctions in early life, so a population can synchronise with no chemical synapse at all.

They co-release two inhibitory transmitters onto physically co-clustered receptors, getting a fast and a slower inhibition from one vesicle, and their input synapse is itself a hybrid of acetylcholine and glutamate.

Gephyrin scaffold size is regulated by how much excitation the cell receives, a structural feedback loop running over days.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: motor axon collateral rate, 0 to 100 spikes per second; Ia afferent rate, 0 to 200 spikes per second; corticospinal and reticulospinal drive, 0 to 1 normalised.

• OUTPUTS: inhibitory conductance onto homonymous and synergist motor neurons, 0 to 8 nanosiemens, reversal near minus 70 millivolts; inhibition onto other V1 cells.

• STATE: membrane voltage; burst adaptation; short term depression at the collateral input; gephyrin cluster size as a slow structural variable.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 60 millivolts; threshold minus 45 millivolts; membrane time constant 5 to 15 milliseconds; loop delay 1 to 3 milliseconds; recurrent gain 0.1 to 0.5.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 5 to 15 milliseconds; burst decay 30 to 50 milliseconds; depression 100 to 500 milliseconds; structural change days.

• FAILURE MODE: loss gives co-contraction, flexor bias and a slowed rhythm; in ALS terminals vanish before motor neurons die; failure of the glycine receptor at these synapses causes hyperekplexia, in which a small surprise stiffens the whole body.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to advance one time step of the Renshaw recurrent inhibition loop for a single motor pool.
Create a number variable called descendingDrive with initial value 40.
Create a number variable called motorRate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called renshawRate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called collateralGain with initial value 3.
Create a number variable called recurrentGain with initial value 0.35.
Create a number variable called delayedMotorRate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called delayLine with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called netMotorInput with initial value 0.
Add motorRate to the end of delayLine.
Check if the total number of items in delayLine is greater than 7.
If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set delayedMotorRate to the item at position 0 in delayLine.
    Remove the item at position 0 from delayLine.
End the conditional block.
Set netMotorInput to the difference of descendingDrive and the product of recurrentGain and renshawRate.
Check if netMotorInput is less than 0.
If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set netMotorInput to 0.
End the conditional block.
Set renshawRate to the sum of renshawRate and the product of 0.04 and the difference of the product of collateralGain and delayedMotorRate and renshawRate.
Set motorRate to the sum of motorRate and the product of 0.01 and the difference of netMotorInput and motorRate.
Display motorRate to the console.
Return motorRate to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C: a recurrent loop with a hard millisecond delay is exactly the tight fixed
   step inner loop C makes cheap. Compile: cc -std=c99 -O2 renshaw.c -lm */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#define DT 0.0002      /* 0.2 millisecond step, in seconds */
#define STEPS 25000    /* five seconds of simulated time   */
#define BUF 64

int main(void) {
    double mn = 0.0, rc = 0.0;   /* motor pool and Renshaw rates, per second */
    double drive = 40.0;         /* descending command, spikes per second    */
    double w_mn_rc = 3.0, w_rc_mn = 0.35;   /* forward and return gains      */
    double tau_mn = 0.020, tau_rc = 0.005;  /* Renshaw cells are the fast one */
    int dsteps = (int)(0.0015 / DT);        /* 1.5 millisecond loop delay    */
    double buf[BUF] = {0.0};
    int head = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < STEPS; i++) {
        double rc_in = w_mn_rc * buf[(head + BUF - dsteps) % BUF];
        double mn_in = drive - w_rc_mn * rc;
        if (mn_in < 0.0) mn_in = 0.0;       /* rates cannot go negative */
        rc += DT / tau_rc * (-rc + 200.0 * tanh(rc_in / 200.0));
        mn += DT / tau_mn * (-mn + mn_in);
        buf[head] = mn;
        head = (head + 1) % BUF;
        if (i % 5000 == 0)
            printf("t=%.3f s  motor=%6.1f Hz  renshaw=%6.1f Hz\n", i * DT, mn, rc);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A V1 is the only spinal neuron that is inhibitory, stays on its own side, and carries the engrailed 1 mark.

Find a small cell under a motor nucleus that answers a motor axon within two milliseconds with several hundred spikes per second and replies in glycine, and you have found a Renshaw cell, and therefore a V1.

CHAPTER 180. V2 (Step-Strength Steadying Neuron) (NON-COG)

The clock that sets the speed of your walking is not in your brain, and a large part of it is a column of V2 neurons running the length of your lower spinal cord.

V2 is another progenitor address.

Step-Strength names the excitatory half's contribution, which is the robustness and reliability of each burst of motor neuron firing, so that a step is delivered with full force rather than fading.

Steadying names the inhibitory half's contribution, holding bending and straightening muscles of the same limb in alternation so that the limb does not stiffen with both acting at once.

Neuron marks a lineage that splits almost evenly into an excitatory half and an inhibitory half, plus a small third group, the two halves working on the same problem from opposite directions.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The V2 family comes from the p2 progenitor stripe and, uniquely among the cardinal classes, splits immediately into excitatory and inhibitory siblings that both keep their axons on their own side.

The excitatory half, V2a, marked by the gene Chx10, is the ipsilateral engine of walking; the inhibitory half, V2b, marked by Gata3, works with V1 to make a joint's bending and straightening muscles take turns.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

V2a cells are chunky and multipolar, with dendrites reaching both towards the central canal and out to the white matter.

The axon leaves ventrally, joins the ventrolateral funiculus and runs up or down the cord, branching into motor nuclei several segments away; V2b cells are smaller and stay local.

SIZE:

V2a cell bodies are large for interneurons at 20 to 30 micrometres, V2b smaller at 10 to 18.

Dendritic fields span 250 to 500 micrometres, and long propriospinal V2a axons run from cervical to lumbar levels, 30 to 50 centimetres in an adult.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• V2a, excitatory and glutamatergic, Chx10 positive, about 35 percent of embryonic V2 cells, arranged in a positional gradient that maps onto forelimb versus hindlimb control.

• V2b, inhibitory, Gata3 positive, about 25 percent of embryonic V2 cells, releasing glycine and GABA.

• V2c, marked by Sox1 and lacking Gata3, a late arriving relative of V2b.

• V2d, marked by Shox2 and derived from V2a, part of the machinery that generates the rhythm rather than relaying it; a further Arid3c population has been reported with no function yet assigned.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Lamina VII, the intermediate grey, is the heartland, spilling into lamina VIII and the medial edge of lamina X, at every spinal level and also in the hindbrain, where V2a cells help drive breathing.

The consequential interface is the boundary between lamina VII grey and the ventrolateral funiculus, because that is where a local interneuron becomes a long distance one.

NUMBER:

Roughly 2 to 4 million V2 neurons in the human cord, of which perhaps 1 to 2 million are V2a, so about 1 to 2 percent of the cord's approximately 200 million neurons.

Confidence is low to moderate and no human count exists; the firm statement is that V2a cells outnumber alpha motor neurons by at least an order of magnitude, because each motor pool receives convergent input from many of them.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Adult V2a cells are unusually excitable and fire tonically for as long as they are depolarised.

They show serotonin dependent bistability: with brainstem serotonin present a V2a cell can latch into a self-sustaining plateau that outlasts its input and is switched off by a brief inhibition, supported by a persistent sodium current and L type calcium channels.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from reticulospinal fibres, from Shox2 rhythm cells, from proprioceptive afferents reporting muscle length and force, and from other V2a cells.

Outputs go to ipsilateral motor neurons, to commissural V0V cells, to inhibitory interneurons and back onto other V2a cells, and it is this recurrent excitation that lets a V2a population sustain a burst; V2b output lands on motor neurons and V2a cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

V2a axons are thick for interneurons at 1 to 3 micrometres, conducting at 5 to 25 metres per second, and one axon commonly innervates three to eight segments.

V2b axons are thinner and stay within a segment or two.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

V2a and V2d release glutamate onto AMPA and NMDA receptors; V2b and V2c release glycine and GABA.

Serotonin from the raphe nuclei acts on V2a cells through 5-HT2 receptors to enable the plateau, a case of a brainstem chemical changing what a spinal computation is able to do.

MYELINATION:

Long propriospinal V2a axons in the ventrolateral funiculus are properly myelinated, supporting up to about 25 metres per second, while local V2b axons in grey matter are essentially bare.

This is a family whose excitatory half is insulated for distance and whose inhibitory half is not.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High and sustained, because tonic firing is expensive and a held plateau is more expensive still, running the sodium and potassium pumps continuously.

Long propriospinal axons add a permanent bill for axonal transport, the motorised delivery of proteins and mitochondria down a fibre half a metre long.

PLASTICITY:

V2a cells are the great opportunists of spinal repair.

After a high cervical injury severs the direct pathway to the phrenic motor neurons that drive the diaphragm, Chx10 positive cells are recruited into the surviving circuit within two weeks in mice, and the same recruitment underlies much of the hand and arm recovery seen after incomplete injury.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing about V2 glia is anatomically exotic, and that is worth saying plainly.

What is locally distinctive is that ventrolateral funiculus oligodendrocytes maintain very long internodes and feed lactate to those axons through monocarboxylate transporters, a partnership that becomes limiting after injury, while lamina VII astrocytes clear glutamate fast through the transporter GLT-1, which is what stops recurrent V2a excitation running away.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove V2a and lamina VII stops being an engine and becomes a relay: the brain can still drive movement, but the cord loses its own ability to sustain and speed a rhythm, and left and right alternation collapses first at fast gaits.

Remove V2b and the same region loses the ability to make a joint's opposing muscles take turns.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The persistent sodium current is a genuine computational device, converting steady input into rhythmic output with no oscillator anywhere in the circuit.

Bistability means the cell holds a memory of recent input in its membrane rather than in its synapses, serotonin and noradrenaline reach these cells partly by volume transmission that retunes the whole population at once, and dendritic L type calcium channels let a single branch amplify its own inputs.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: reticulospinal drive, 0 to 1 normalised; recurrent V2a excitation, 0 to 1; proprioceptive rate, 0 to 200 spikes per second; V1 and V2b inhibition, 0 to 8 nanosiemens; ambient serotonin, 0 to 1 normalised.

• OUTPUTS: glutamatergic conductance onto ipsilateral motor neurons and V0V cells, 0 to 10 nanosiemens; V2b glycinergic conductance onto motor neurons, 0 to 8 nanosiemens.

• STATE: membrane voltage; persistent sodium inactivation, 0 to 1; plateau on or off; adaptation level.

• PARAMETERS: capacitance about 21 picofarad; persistent sodium conductance 2 to 6 nanosiemens; leak conductance 2 to 4 nanosiemens; sodium reversal 50 millivolts; leak reversal minus 62.5 millivolts.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 30 milliseconds; persistent sodium inactivation 1 to 6 seconds, which sets burst duration; step cycle 0.4 to 2 seconds; serotonergic modulation seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: loss leaves a cord unable to hold a fast alternating gait or to recruit alternative respiratory drive after injury; V2a cells degenerate after V1 and before motor neurons in ALS models; excess persistent sodium current after injury contributes to spasticity, which is why sodium channel blockers reduce spasms.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to advance one time step of a V2a rhythm generating unit driven by a persistent sodium current.
Create a number variable called membraneVoltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called slowInactivation with initial value 0.4.
Create a number variable called stepMilliseconds with initial value 0.05.
Create a number variable called capacitance with initial value 21.
Create a number variable called sodiumConductance with initial value 4.5.
Create a number variable called leakConductance with initial value 2.8.
Create a number variable called sodiumReversal with initial value 50.
Create a number variable called leakReversal with initial value -62.5.
Create a number variable called activation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called sodiumCurrent with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called leakCurrent with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called inactivationTarget with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called inactivationTimeConstant with initial value 1200.
Set activation to the steady state activation of persistent sodium at membraneVoltage.
Set sodiumCurrent to the product of sodiumConductance and the product of activation and the product of slowInactivation and the difference of membraneVoltage and sodiumReversal.
Set leakCurrent to the product of leakConductance and the difference of membraneVoltage and leakReversal.
Set membraneVoltage to the difference of membraneVoltage and the product of stepMilliseconds and the quotient of the sum of sodiumCurrent and leakCurrent divided by capacitance.
Set inactivationTarget to the steady state slow inactivation at membraneVoltage.
Set slowInactivation to the sum of slowInactivation and the product of stepMilliseconds and the quotient of the difference of inactivationTarget and slowInactivation divided by inactivationTimeConstant.
Check if membraneVoltage is greater than -45.
If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
    Display membraneVoltage to the console.
End the conditional block.
Return membraneVoltage to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: a two variable burster fits on one screen and the units stay auditable.
# millivolt, nanosiemens, picoamp, picofarad, millisecond.
import math

C, G_NAP, G_L, E_NA, E_L = 21.0, 4.5, 2.8, 50.0, -62.5

def m_inf(v):   # instantaneous persistent sodium activation
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(v + 40.0) / 6.0))

def h_inf(v):   # steady state of the slow inactivation gate
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 48.0) / 6.0))

def tau_h(v):   # slow inactivation time constant, milliseconds
    return 1200.0 / math.cosh((v + 48.0) / 12.0)

def run(i_app=0.0, ms=8000.0, dt=0.05):
    v, h = -60.0, 0.40
    for i in range(int(ms / dt)):
        i_nap = G_NAP * m_inf(v) * h * (v - E_NA)
        v += dt * ((-i_nap - G_L * (v - E_L) + i_app) / C)
        h += dt * ((h_inf(v) - h) / tau_h(v))
        if i % int(500.0 / dt) == 0:
            print("t=%5.1f s   V=%7.2f mV   h=%.3f" % (i * dt / 1000.0, v, h))

run()

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A V2a cell is the only spinal interneuron that combines a large intermediate grey cell body, a serotonin switchable plateau, a persistent sodium current strong enough to make a rhythm by itself, and an axon that carries that rhythm from neck to lower back without crossing the midline once.

CHAPTER 181. V3 (Two-Sided Rhythm Balancing Neuron) (NON-COG)

Take away a mouse's V3 neurons and it still alternates its legs, but the steps become uneven and the gait wobbles, because V3 cells are the shock absorber of walking.

V3 is a code.

Two-Sided names the anatomy, because this lineage is excitatory and largely crossing, spreading excitation from each half of the cord into the other half rather than keeping it local.

Rhythm Balancing names the measured effect, since silencing these cells leaves a mouse still able to step but with an irregular, unbalanced gait in which cycle durations vary and the two sides become unevenly driven.

Neuron marks the lineage that supplies the shared excitatory glue keeping a fast rhythm even, favouring simultaneous rather than alternating activity of the straightening muscles, which is what a fast bounding gait requires.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

V3 neurons come from the p3 stripe, the lowest ventral progenitor domain, carry the mark of the gene Sim1, release glutamate, and cross the midline in roughly 85 percent of cases.

Their job is not rhythm and not left and right alternation, both of which survive their removal; their job is robustness, making the rhythm regular, balanced between the two sides and hard to knock off course.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Born at the very bottom of the cord, they migrate outward and upward, so by birth they sit in scattered clusters rather than one band.

Cell bodies are round to oval with four to seven dendrites, and the axon crosses in the ventral commissure then branches widely across several segments on the far side.

SIZE:

Cell bodies 12 to 25 micrometres across, with the ventral cluster at the larger end.

Dendritic fields span 200 to 450 micrometres and crossed axons distribute over three to six segments, two to five centimetres in an adult lumbar cord.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Ventral V3 cells in lamina VIII, which fire tonically, have low rheobase, meaning very little current makes them fire, and receive strong excitatory drive.

• Dorsal V3 cells in the deep dorsal horn, laminae IV and V, which fire phasically and are placed to receive skin and deep tissue input.

• Ipsilateral V3 cells, about 15 percent of the class, whose axons never cross and which work locally.

• An intermediate group in medial lamina VII whose properties fall between the ventral and dorsal patterns.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Lamina VIII and medial lamina VII hold the main cluster, laminae IV and V of the deep dorsal horn hold a second, and both run from cervical to sacral levels, densest in the enlargements.

Two interfaces matter: the ventral commissure, where the axon crosses, and the deep dorsal horn, where sensory processing territory meets motor territory and the dorsal V3 group lets the state of the skin and joints reach the crossing motor circuit.

NUMBER:

Roughly 500 thousand to 1.5 million in the human cord, about 0.25 to 0.75 percent of its approximately 200 million neurons.

Confidence is low and no human count has been published, but the p3 domain is the thinnest ventral stripe, so V3 should be the smallest of the four cardinal classes, and that ordering is far more reliable than the absolute figure.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Ventral V3 cells fire tonically with low rheobase and little adaptation, translating sustained excitation into sustained output.

Dorsal V3 cells adapt quickly and often fire only at stimulus onset, a pattern usually produced by a fast-inactivating A type potassium current; rest is near minus 60 millivolts, threshold near minus 44, and locomotor firing rates fall between 5 and 50 spikes per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from ipsilateral excitatory rhythm circuitry, reticulospinal fibres, load-sensing proprioceptors and other V3 cells.

Outputs land on contralateral motor neurons directly and on contralateral V0, V2a and Renshaw cells, so one V3 population raises the excitability of the whole opposite half at once, and that broad non-selective excitation is exactly what makes it a stabiliser rather than a patterner.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Diameter 0.7 to 2 micrometres, conducting at 2 to 15 metres per second.

The signature feature is the branching: after crossing, the axon divides into ascending and descending limbs with many collaterals, giving a wide diffuse terminal field rather than a focused one.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate only, acting on AMPA receptors for the fast component and NMDA receptors for a slower one that summates across a step cycle.

A subset adds neuropeptides, and the complete absence of glycine and GABA is what separates V3 sharply from V0D and V1.

MYELINATION:

The crossing and funicular portions carry thin to moderate myelin while terminal branches in grey matter are bare.

The cell therefore gets its signal across the midline quickly and then loses speed as it spreads, which suits a stabilising rather than a timing role.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate to high, since tonic firing means a continuous pump load and a widely branched axon is a large membrane surface to maintain.

Broad excitatory terminal fields also carry a heavy glutamate synthesis cost, met partly by borrowing glutamine from astrocytes.

PLASTICITY:

V3 cells are central to what goes wrong after spinal cord injury.

In mice with a sacral injury, tail spasms with clonus, hypertonus and hyperreflexia appear weeks later, and optogenetic work shows V3 neurons initiate and coordinate them, so the circuit does not merely lose inhibition, a surviving excitatory commissural population takes over.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

There is no glial specialisation unique to V3, and that should be stated plainly rather than dressed up.

The relevant local point is that astrocytes surrounding these broadly branched glutamatergic terminals carry a heavy clearance burden through GLT-1 and supply the glutamine that refills the transmitter pool, and when that clearance fails after injury the same network that stabilises walking becomes the network that produces spasms.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Without V3 the ventral horn keeps its pattern and loses its poise.

Concretely, the rhythm still alternates but the duration of each cycle varies far more from step to step, the two sides become unequal in strength, and the animal wobbles and stumbles on uneven ground.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

V3 cells demonstrate something integrate and fire models miss entirely: recurrent excitation between two oscillators does not add signal, it removes variance.

NMDA receptors on their targets give a slow voltage dependent conductance lasting hundreds of milliseconds, letting the population average over several cycles; their broad fields make the code a field rather than a line; and their activity helps instruct myelination of their own crossing segment.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: ipsilateral rhythm drive, 0 to 1 normalised; reticulospinal drive, 0 to 1; load-sensing group Ib afferent rate, 0 to 150 spikes per second; recurrent V3 excitation from the opposite side, 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: broad glutamatergic conductance onto contralateral motor neurons and interneurons, 0 to 6 nanosiemens per target, delivered to tens of targets per cell.

• STATE: membrane voltage; A type potassium inactivation for the dorsal subtype; NMDA conductance history; the running estimate of contralateral activity the cell effectively averages.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 60 millivolts; threshold minus 44 millivolts; rheobase 10 to 40 picoamps for ventral cells; crossing delay 2 to 8 milliseconds; coupling gain 0 to 1.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 35 milliseconds; AMPA decay 2 to 5 milliseconds; NMDA decay 50 to 200 milliseconds; step cycle 0.4 to 2 seconds; post-injury reorganisation weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: loss gives unstable gait with high cycle to cycle variability and unbalanced sides; after injury the same cells drive spasms and clonus; unchecked recurrent excitation with failed glutamate clearance produces synchronous self-sustaining discharge.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to measure how much V3 commissural coupling reduces the step to step variability of a locomotor rhythm.
Create a number variable called nominalPeriod with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called currentPeriod with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called couplingGain with initial value 0.6.
Create a number variable called cycleCount with initial value 200.
Create a list variable called periodRecord with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called noise with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called runningTotal with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called meanPeriod with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called squaredError with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 200 times.
    Set noise to a random value from a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 0.18.
    Set currentPeriod to the sum of currentPeriod and the sum of noise and the product of couplingGain and the difference of nominalPeriod and currentPeriod.
    Check if currentPeriod is less than 0.25.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set currentPeriod to 0.25.
    End the conditional block.
    Add currentPeriod to the end of periodRecord.
    Set runningTotal to the sum of runningTotal and currentPeriod.
End the loop.
Set meanPeriod to the quotient of runningTotal divided by cycleCount.
For each recordedPeriod in periodRecord, perform the following operations.
    Set squaredError to the sum of squaredError and the product of the difference of recordedPeriod and meanPeriod and the difference of recordedPeriod and meanPeriod.
End the loop.
Display meanPeriod to the console.
Display squaredError to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the point is statistical, and the standard library gives reproducible
# random numbers with no dependencies at all.
import random
import math

def variability(v3_gain, cycles=200, seed=7):
    """V3 commissural excitation pulls each side's cycle period back towards
    the shared nominal period, turning a random walk into a tight process."""
    random.seed(seed)
    nominal, period, record = 1.0, 1.0, []      # period in seconds
    for _ in range(cycles):
        noise = random.gauss(0.0, 0.18)         # cycle to cycle jitter
        period += noise + v3_gain * (nominal - period)
        period = max(0.25, min(2.50, period))   # physiological limits
        record.append(period)
    mean = sum(record) / len(record)
    var = sum((p - mean) ** 2 for p in record) / len(record)
    return mean, math.sqrt(var) / mean

print("V3 gain   mean period (s)   coefficient of variation")
for gain in (0.0, 0.3, 0.6, 0.9):
    m, cv = variability(gain)
    print("  %.1f          %.3f              %.3f" % (gain, m, cv))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A V3 neuron is the excitatory cell that crosses the midline, a combination that rules out V0D, which crosses but inhibits, V1 and V2b, which inhibit and never cross, and V2a, which excites and never crosses.

Add the Sim1 mark, the scattered clusters left by its migration, and a terminal field that is deliberately broad rather than precise, and nothing else fits.

CHAPTER 182. LAMINA I PROJECTION NEURONS (Pain-Reporting Brain-Bound Neuron) (COG)

Somewhere between a hundred thousand and a few hundred thousand cells stand between a burn and the feeling of being burned, and if you destroy them the injury still happens but the suffering does not arrive.

The old label is an address, a numbered sheet of grey matter, and it says nothing about what the cell does.

Pain-Reporting names the message these cells carry, because they are the top of the dorsal horn and are driven by nociceptors, the nerve endings that signal tissue damage.

Brain-Bound names the destination, because unlike their interneuron neighbours these cells send a long axon out of the cord, most of them to the lateral parabrachial area of the brainstem.

Neuron marks it as a projection cell, and about seventy to eighty percent of them carry the neurokinin 1 receptor, the docking site for substance P, killing off that group abolishing the exaggerated pain of chronic injury, which is the clearest proof that this really is the pain report line.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Lamina I is a sheet only two or three cells thick draped over the top of the dorsal horn, and while most of its cells talk only to neighbours, a minority send an axon out of the spinal cord entirely.

These projection neurons are the second link in the chain carrying pain, temperature, itch, muscle ache, air hunger and the general state of the body into conscious experience, which is why they are flagged as cognitive: they are the point where a bodily event becomes something the brain can feel.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is flattened into the plane of lamina I, like a leaf lying on the surface of the dorsal horn.

Three shapes recur: fusiform, spindle-shaped with two long head to tail dendrites; pyramidal, triangular with three; and multipolar, which makes up about 58 percent of lumbar spinothalamic cells while fusiform cells dominate in the neck.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are large for the dorsal horn, 20 to 35 micrometres along the long axis, and soma size is in practice how you tell a projection neuron from a neighbouring interneuron carrying the same receptor.

Dendrites reach 200 to 400 micrometres head to tail but only 10 to 30 micrometres up and down, while the axon runs about 45 centimetres from sacral cord to thalamus in an adult.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Neurokinin 1 receptor positive cells, 75 to 80 percent of the population, responding to substance P, the peptide released by injury-signalling fibres.

• Two distinct neurokinin 1 receptor groups differing in AMPA receptor subunit composition and in how densely they are innervated.

• Neurokinin 1 receptor negative cells, 20 to 25 percent, selectively innervated by thinly myelinated A-delta nociceptors rather than peptide-releasing C fibres.

• Sorted by destination: spinoparabrachial cells, the large majority, spinothalamic cells, and cells reaching the periaqueductal grey, with heavy overlap because most branch to several targets.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Lamina I, the marginal zone, at every level from the first cervical segment to the coccygeal tip, continuing into the brainstem as the outer layer of the spinal trigeminal nucleus caudalis, which serves the face.

Axons cross in the anterior white commissure and ascend in the contralateral anterolateral system to the lateral parabrachial nucleus, the periaqueductal grey, the posterior ventral medial thalamic nucleus known as VMpo, the ventral posterolateral and medial dorsal thalamus, the nucleus of the solitary tract and the medullary catecholamine cell groups; the defining interface is the boundary with Lissauer's tract, the band of incoming pain fibres lying directly on top of lamina I.

NUMBER:

In the rat there are about 400 lamina I projection neurons per side in the fourth lumbar segment and about 215 per side at the seventh cervical, of which only about 15 and about 90 respectively reach the thalamus.

Summed across segments that is roughly 20 to 30 thousand in a rat, so a human figure of 100 to 300 thousand is defensible, under 0.2 percent of the cord's approximately 200 million neurons; confidence is high for the rat counts and low for the human extrapolation.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Four firing patterns recur: tonic, delayed by an A type potassium current, phasic and single spike.

The defining behaviour is wind-up, in which identical C fibre volleys at about one per second produce steadily more spikes, because a slow depolarisation built from substance P and NMDA receptor currents accumulates over tens of seconds; rest is near minus 65 millivolts, threshold near minus 40, and the chloride reversal potential is normally about minus 70.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are peptidergic C fibres releasing glutamate with substance P, A-delta nociceptors, cooling and itch afferents and local excitatory interneurons including lamina II vertical cells, with inhibition from lamina I and II interneurons and from descending noradrenergic and serotonergic fibres.

Outputs are exclusively excitatory, and the parabrachial target closes a loop back down through the rostral ventromedial medulla to the dorsal horn, so these cells sit inside a circuit that can amplify its own input.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Under 2 micrometres in diameter and slow for such a long projection, roughly 1 to 15 metres per second, so a signal from the foot takes tens of milliseconds to reach the brainstem.

Most axons give collaterals to the parabrachial nucleus and periaqueductal grey on the way to the thalamus, so one cell reports to several places at once.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the output transmitter without exception.

The interesting chemistry is on the receiving side: neurokinin 1 receptors for substance P, NMDA receptors rich in GluN2B, AMPA receptors that in one subpopulation lack GluA2 and therefore admit calcium directly, and TrkB receptors for brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).

MYELINATION:

The ascending axon is myelinated once in the anterolateral white matter but thinly, which is why conduction is slow, while within lamina I it is bare.

The thin sheath is a design decision rather than an oversight: pain does not need to be fast, it needs to be unignorable.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high for a spinal cell, because an axon up to 45 centimetres long requires continuous transport of proteins and mitochondria and these cells fire for hours during injury or inflammation.

They are among the most mitochondria-dependent neurons in the cord, which is one reason chemotherapy drugs that damage mitochondria produce neuropathic pain.

PLASTICITY:

They support long-term potentiation at their C fibre inputs after high-threshold stimulation, a cellular mechanism of pain memory, and substance P pulls the neurokinin 1 receptor inside the cell within minutes of a noxious stimulus.

After nerve injury microglial BDNF acting through TrkB reduces the potassium chloride cotransporter 2 (KCC2), the pump keeping internal chloride low, and the chloride reversal potential rises until GABA and glycine stop inhibiting the cell and start exciting it.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here behave as they do nowhere else.

Superficial dorsal horn microglia carry the ATP-sensing P2X4 receptor and, after nerve injury, drive p38 signalling and BDNF release aimed specifically at these projection neurons, so a glial cell reprogrammes a named neuron's chloride handling, and astrocytes here release GABA tonically through monoamine oxidase B, which paradoxically raises neuronal activity and glucose use in neuropathic pain.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and lamina I becomes a sense organ with no wire.

When they are destroyed by substance P linked to the toxin saporin, animals still respond normally to mild noxious stimuli but lose their responses to strongly noxious ones and lose hyperalgesia almost entirely, so the layer keeps its detection and loses its escalation.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Wind-up is a real temporal integrator built from substance P acting through a G-protein-coupled receptor and NMDA receptors released from their magnesium block, with a memory measured in tens of seconds.

Calcium-permeable AMPA receptors let synaptic input trigger biochemistry without waiting for a spike, back-propagating action potentials spread into the flat dendritic sheet and drive gene transcription over hours, the chloride reversal potential is itself a plastic variable under glial control, and the parabrachial loop means their own output eventually returns to their own input.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: peptidergic C fibre volleys, 0 to 20 spikes per second, carrying glutamate plus substance P; A-delta volleys, 0 to 100 spikes per second; cooling afferents, 0 to 50 spikes per second; local inhibition, 0 to 5 nanosiemens; descending monoamine modulation, 0 to 1 normalised; microglial BDNF, 0 to 1 normalised.

• OUTPUTS: spike trains, 0 to 60 spikes per second, on a thinly myelinated ascending axon to the lateral parabrachial nucleus, periaqueductal grey, VMpo, ventral posterolateral thalamus and nucleus of the solitary tract.

• STATE: membrane voltage; slow neurokinin 1 and NMDA facilitation, 0 to 1; chloride reversal potential, minus 70 to minus 40 millivolts; receptor internalisation fraction; potentiated weight at the C fibre synapse.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 65 millivolts; threshold minus 40 millivolts; membrane time constant 15 to 30 milliseconds; tonic inhibitory conductance 0.5 to 1.5 nanosiemens; conduction velocity 1 to 15 metres per second; KCC2 activity 0 to 1.

• TIME CONSTANTS: AMPA 2 to 5 milliseconds; NMDA 100 to 200 milliseconds; substance P depolarisation 5 to 30 seconds; wind-up envelope tens of seconds; potentiation minutes to hours; KCC2 loss hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of KCC2 turns inhibition into excitation, giving allodynia, where light touch hurts, and hyperalgesia; destroying the population abolishes hyperalgesia while sparing basic nociception; runaway wind-up plus descending facilitation produces chronic pain that outlasts the injury.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to reproduce wind-up in a lamina I projection neuron and show that a weakened chloride pump makes it start earlier.
Create a number variable called membraneVoltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called slowFacilitation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called pumpActivity with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called chlorideReversal with initial value -70.
Create a number variable called spikeCount with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spikesPerVolley with initial value empty list.
Set chlorideReversal to the sum of -70 and the product of 30 and the difference of 1 and pumpActivity.
Repeat the following steps exactly 16 times.
    Set spikeCount to 0.
    Set slowFacilitation to the sum of slowFacilitation and 0.1.
    Check if slowFacilitation is greater than 1.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set slowFacilitation to 1.
    End the conditional block.
    Repeat the following steps exactly 1000 times.
        Set membraneVoltage to the result of one millisecond of leak, tonic inhibition towards chlorideReversal, and synaptic drive scaled by slowFacilitation.
        Set slowFacilitation to the difference of slowFacilitation and the quotient of the product of 0.001 and slowFacilitation divided by 8.
        Check if membraneVoltage is greater than -40.
        If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set membraneVoltage to -60.
            Set spikeCount to the sum of spikeCount and 1.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
    Add spikeCount to the end of spikesPerVolley.
End the loop.
Display spikesPerVolley to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: wind-up is bookkeeping over one slow variable, and Python keeps the
# accumulation, the threshold and the reset all in view.
DT = 0.001                               # one millisecond steps, in seconds

def windup(pulses=16, hz=1.0, kcc2=1.0):
    """Identical C fibre volleys at 1 Hz. kcc2 is chloride pump activity,
    1.0 healthy and lower after nerve injury."""
    v, s = -65.0, 0.0                    # millivolt, and slow facilitation
    e_cl = -70.0 + 30.0 * (1.0 - kcc2)   # chloride reversal, millivolt
    tau_m, tau_s = 0.020, 8.0            # seconds
    g_inh, amp = 0.8, 1200.0             # tonic inhibition, volley drive
    counts = []
    for _ in range(pulses):
        fired = 0
        s = min(1.0, s + 0.10)           # each volley loads the slow term
        for i in range(int(1.0 / hz / DT)):
            drive = amp * (1.0 + 2.0 * s) if i < 50 else 0.0
            v += DT * ((-65.0 - v) / tau_m + g_inh * (e_cl - v) / tau_m + drive)
            s -= DT * s / tau_s
            if v > -40.0:                # spike, then reset
                v, fired = -60.0, fired + 1
        counts.append(fired)
    return counts

print("healthy chloride pump :", windup(kcc2=1.0))
print("pump reduced to 30 pc :", windup(kcc2=0.3))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is a large flat cell in the topmost sheet of the dorsal horn whose axon leaves the spinal cord altogether, and nothing else in lamina I does that.

Stain for the neurokinin 1 receptor, inject a tracer into the parabrachial nucleus of the pons, and the handful of cells lit by both are these and only these.

CHAPTER 183. ISLET CELLS (NON-COG)

Imagine a neuron stretched like a thread of chewing gum, running head to tail through the pain layer of your spinal cord for the better part of a millimetre while staying almost perfectly flat in every other direction.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An islet cell is an inhibitory interneuron of lamina II, the layer beneath lamina I known since the nineteenth century as the substantia gelatinosa because fresh tissue there looks translucent and jelly-like.

Gobel named it in the 1970s for the self-contained island its dendrites form in stained sections, and its job is to hold down traffic in the pain layer, receiving the C fibres that carry burning, aching and itching and releasing GABA onto the neighbours those same fibres are trying to excite.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small spindle-shaped cell body with exactly two main dendritic trunks, one heading towards the head and one towards the tail, each branching into a flat sheet lying in the plane of lamina II.

The axon arborises inside the same territory the dendrites occupy, and the dendrites themselves contain synaptic vesicles and make outgoing contacts, so a dendrite here is not only an ear but also a mouth.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are small, 10 to 15 micrometres across.

The head to tail dendritic span is the signature measurement, typically over 400 micrometres and sometimes beyond 800, longer than any other lamina II cell, while dorsoventral spread stays under about 40 micrometres and mediolateral under about 100, making the cell a ribbon roughly a millimetre long and a twenty-fifth of a millimetre thick.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Classic islet cells, firing tonically, showing a voltage sag on hyperpolarisation caused by the current called Ih, and using GABA.

• Nitric oxide producing islet cells, carrying neuronal nitric oxide synthase and releasing a diffusible gas from the dendritic tree.

• Peptide-expressing subsets carrying galanin or neuropeptide Y alongside GABA.

• Central cells, a shorter-armed neighbour with the same plan but a span of only 100 to 300 micrometres, treated by several authors as the small end of one islet to central continuum.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Lamina II, both outer and inner divisions, at every spinal level, and in the medullary dorsal horn as the outer layers of the spinal trigeminal nucleus caudalis, which handles the face.

The interface that matters most is the boundary between lamina II outer and lamina II inner, where peptide-releasing C fibres end above and non-peptidergic C fibres marked by the plant lectin IB4 end below, because an islet cell's ribbon lies along that boundary and samples both.

NUMBER:

Older Golgi studies put islet cells at about 30 percent of substantia gelatinosa neurons, but modern work finds only about a quarter of lamina II neurons are inhibitory at all, so the classical figure must have included cells now classed differently.

A defensible modern range is 10 to 25 percent of lamina II neurons, giving perhaps 3 to 8 million in a human cord, about 1.5 to 4 percent of its approximately 200 million neurons; confidence is low, and the definitional disagreement is currently larger than the counting error.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The most reliable electrical signature in the dorsal horn: a tonic discharge lasting the whole of a depolarising step rather than adapting away, with resting potentials often more negative than minus 60 millivolts.

Hyperpolarising the cell produces a characteristic sag as Ih turns on through HCN channels, named for hyperpolarisation-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated, and the low-threshold T type calcium current is distributed unevenly across lamina II classes with islet cells at one end of that distribution.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are dominated by direct C fibre contacts, with some A-delta input plus local vertical and radial cells and descending noradrenergic and serotonergic fibres.

Outputs go three ways: onto other lamina II neurons, onto the dendrites of lamina I projection neurons, and onto the central terminals of primary afferents inside synaptic glomeruli, which is presynaptic inhibition, turning the volume down before the message is even released.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, under 0.5 micrometres, unmyelinated, and confined to the same ribbon as the dendrites, never leaving lamina II.

Conduction is well under 1 metre per second, but with distances under a millimetre the whole cell operates within a millisecond or two of itself.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA acting on GABA type A receptors, which open chloride channels, is primary, and some islet cells co-release glycine.

Subsets add galanin or neuropeptide Y as slow modulators, and the nitric oxide subset releases a gas that is never packaged in vesicles and simply diffuses out of the dendrite in all directions.

MYELINATION:

None, and this is not a deficiency: an axon confined to a ribbon shorter than a grain of rice gains nothing from insulation, and myelin would only add bulk to the most crowded neuropil in the spinal cord.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest in absolute terms but continuous, because tonic firing never lets the sodium and potassium pump rest.

Mitochondria run all along the long dendritic trunks, and the vesicle-filled dendrites carry their own release and recycling machinery, so the dendrite is expensive per micrometre in a way most dendrites are not.

PLASTICITY:

Inhibitory tone in lamina II falls after nerve injury, and this disinhibition is a main engine of neuropathic pain.

Whether islet cells actually die is disputed: in the spared nerve injury model, tactile allodynia appeared without any selective loss of GABA or GABA type A receptors from lamina I and II synapses, so changed function rather than lost cells is better supported, and glycinergic transmission is selectively impaired in a subpopulation of dorsal horn interneurons.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here do things they do nowhere else.

Superficial dorsal horn astrocytes take up GABA through GAT-3 and, in neuropathic pain, run it in reverse, synthesising GABA through monoamine oxidase B and releasing it tonically, which unexpectedly raises rather than lowers neuronal activity and glucose use, while microglia carrying P2Y12 and P2X4 receptors alter excitatory transmission onto lamina II neurons; unlike the ventral horn this layer has essentially no perineuronal nets, the lattice cages that stabilise synapses, which is part of why it stays so plastic in adulthood.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove islet cells and lamina II loses its ruler.

The specific loss is restraint along the head to tail axis: a pinprick that should feel like a point begins to feel like a band because nothing holds down the neighbouring stretch of the layer, and a brief stimulus outlasts itself because nothing terminates the local excitation, so the jelly layer stops being a filter and becomes an amplifier.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Islet cell dendrites are presynaptic as well as postsynaptic, making dendrodendritic contacts so the cell can compute and output in the same branch with no spike at all.

The nitric oxide subset does something genuinely counterintuitive, releasing a gas from its dendrites that diffuses through lamina II outer and increases substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) release from C fibre terminals, so an inhibitory cell exerts an excitatory volume effect on its own inputs; they also produce primary afferent depolarisation at axoaxonic contacts, and Ih gives the membrane a pacemaker-like tendency to return towards threshold after inhibition.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: C fibre volleys distributed along the ribbon, 0 to 20 spikes per second per contact; A-delta input, 0 to 100 spikes per second; local excitatory interneurons; descending monoamine modulation, 0 to 1 normalised.

• OUTPUTS: GABAergic conductance onto neighbouring lamina II somata and lamina I projection dendrites, 0 to 3 nanosiemens; axoaxonic conductance onto primary afferent terminals; a nitric oxide field spreading roughly 100 to 200 micrometres.

• STATE: membrane voltage per dendritic compartment; Ih activation, 0 to 1; nitric oxide concentration per compartment; presynaptic dendritic vesicle pool.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 62 millivolts; threshold minus 45 millivolts; membrane time constant 10 to 20 milliseconds; electrotonic space constant about 150 to 250 micrometres; compartment spacing 40 micrometres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; GABA type A decay 10 to 30 milliseconds; Ih activation 100 to 500 milliseconds; nitric oxide lifetime a few hundred milliseconds; disinhibition after injury days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: reduced GABA or glycine output gives mechanical allodynia and spreading, poorly localised pain; astrocytic reverse GABA release converts the layer's inhibition into tonic excitation; total loss removes presynaptic inhibition so every arriving volley releases its full transmitter load.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to spread one C fibre input along an islet cell's head to tail dendrite and find how much of that dendrite releases nitric oxide.
Create a list variable called compartmentVoltage with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called nitricOxide with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called restingVoltage with initial value -62.
Create a number variable called releaseThreshold with initial value -45.
Create a number variable called releasingCompartments with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called thisVoltage with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 21 times.
    Add restingVoltage to the end of compartmentVoltage.
    Add 0 to the end of nitricOxide.
End the loop.
Repeat the following steps exactly 20000 times.
    For each position in compartmentVoltage, perform the following operations.
        Set thisVoltage to the result of leak towards restingVoltage plus axial flow from both neighbours plus any synaptic drive at this position.
        Set the item at position in compartmentVoltage to thisVoltage.
    End the loop.
    For each position in nitricOxide, perform the following operations.
        Set the item at position in nitricOxide to the result of diffusion from both neighbours plus synthesis when the local voltage exceeds releaseThreshold minus breakdown.
    End the loop.
End the loop.
For each position in compartmentVoltage, perform the following operations.
    Check if the item at position in compartmentVoltage is greater than releaseThreshold.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set releasingCompartments to the sum of releasingCompartments and 1.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display releasingCompartments to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C: a fixed grid cable plus a fixed grid diffusion, where the cost and the
   stability of each step stay visible. Compile: cc -std=c99 -O2 islet.c */
#include <stdio.h>
#define N 21           /* dendritic compartments, 40 micrometres apart */
#define DT 0.0001      /* time step, seconds                           */
#define VREST -62.0    /* resting potential, millivolt                 */
#define VNO -45.0      /* voltage above which nitric oxide is made     */

int main(void) {
    double v[N], no[N], drive[N];
    double tau = 0.015, gc = 25.0, dno = 30.0;  /* seconds, coupling, per s */
    int i, t;
    for (i = 0; i < N; i++) { v[i] = VREST; no[i] = 0.0; drive[i] = 0.0; }
    drive[10] = 16000.0;   /* a C fibre volley lands mid ribbon, mV per s */
    drive[11] = 11000.0;
    for (t = 0; t < 20000; t++) {              /* two seconds of model time */
        double vn[N], non[N];
        for (i = 0; i < N; i++) {
            double vl = (i > 0) ? v[i - 1] : v[i];        /* sealed ends */
            double vr = (i < N - 1) ? v[i + 1] : v[i];
            vn[i] = v[i] + DT * ((VREST - v[i]) / tau
                    + gc * (vl + vr - 2.0 * v[i]) / tau + drive[i]);
            double nl = (i > 0) ? no[i - 1] : no[i];
            double nr = (i < N - 1) ? no[i + 1] : no[i];
            non[i] = no[i] + DT * (dno * (nl + nr - 2.0 * no[i])
                    + ((v[i] > VNO) ? 3.0 : 0.0) - no[i] / 0.5);
        }
        for (i = 0; i < N; i++) { v[i] = vn[i]; no[i] = non[i]; }
    }
    for (i = 0; i < N; i++)
        printf("compartment %2d  %+5.0f um   V %7.2f mV   NO %5.3f\n",
               i, (i - 10) * 40.0, v[i], no[i]);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Fill a lamina II neuron with dye and look at it from the side.

If the dendrites run head to tail for more than four hundred micrometres and hardly at all up, down or sideways, if the cell fires steadily rather than in a burst, if hyperpolarising it produces a slow sag, and if staining shows GABA, it is an islet cell, and no other neuron in the human nervous system is that long, that flat, that steady and that quiet all at once.

CHAPTER 184. VERTICAL CELLS, ALSO CALLED STALKED CELLS (NON-COG)

Picture a tiny tree growing upside down, branches hanging into the layer where burning pain arrives and one trunk climbing up to pass it on.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A vertical cell is a small excitatory neuron, one that makes its partners more likely to fire, in lamina II of the dorsal horn, the sensory back wing of the spinal grey matter.

It hands signals of burning and tissue damage to the lamina I neurons that carry pain to the brain, so it is the last local relay before pain leaves the cord.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The soma sits atop lamina II and sprays dendrites, the branches that collect signals, downward in a narrow cone, while one axon climbs into lamina I.

SIZE:

The soma is 10 to 15 micrometres across, and in rat the excitatory form spreads 200 to 546 micrometres head to tail and 122 to 552 top to bottom.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• The common glutamate using excitatory form, 12 of 15 cells in one rat study.

• The rare inhibitory form using gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), the main calming chemical, 3 of 15.

• A somatostatin carrying subset, about half of those tested.

WHERE IT LIVES:

They occupy lamina II outer, the top half of lamina II, in the dorsal horn of all 31 spinal segments, densest in the cervical enlargement, C5 to T1, and the lumbosacral enlargement, L3 to S2.

Many sit on the lamina I to lamina II interface, and the class continues into the brainstem's spinal trigeminal nucleus, which serves the face.

NUMBER:

A defensible estimate is 1 to 3 million in the human cord, 2 million as the working figure, with low confidence since nobody has counted them in a human.

That is about 1 percent of the roughly 200 million spinal neurons and about 0.002 percent of the roughly 100 billion in the whole nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Rest is near minus 64 millivolts and the signature is delayed firing, a hesitation imposed by the A type potassium current of Kv4 channels, which must inactivate before threshold near minus 40 millivolts.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input comes directly from C and A delta fibres and indirectly from A beta touch fibres through protein kinase C gamma and central cells, and output is glutamate onto lamina I neurons bearing the neurokinin 1 receptor.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres thick and unmyelinated, running 50 to 150 micrometres up into lamina I at under 1 metre per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glutamate packaged by the vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (VGLUT2), often with somatostatin, and carries AMPA, N methyl D aspartate (NMDA), neurokinin 1 and often mu opioid receptors.

MYELINATION:

Essentially none, because this axon crosses a fraction of a millimetre in a layer so poor in myelin that it looks translucent, the old substantia gelatinosa.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest per spike because the cell is small, but the steady bill is high because lamina II holds one of the densest synapse fields in the central nervous system.

PLASTICITY:

Its synapses are a main site of spinal long term potentiation, and after nerve injury microglial brain derived neurotrophic factor lowers the chloride pump KCC2 so touch begins driving the cell hard.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here are exceptionally fine, wrapping synapses a micrometre apart with high GLT 1 and GLAST glutamate transporter levels, while microglia, quiet in health, answer nerve injury through the P2X4 to BDNF pathway.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and a pinprick still hurts, but the region loses emphasis: the build up during a sustained burn, the tenderness around an injury, and the ability of a brush to feel like fire.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The dendritic A type current filters out single weak inputs while several arriving together outrun it, making the cell a coincidence detector rather than an adder.

Somatostatin diffuses to bias neighbours it never touches, called volume transmission, and the endocannabinoid 2 arachidonoylglycerol travels backwards to silence the terminals inhibiting it.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ C fibre glutamate and substance P 0 to 5 hertz per fibre, 20 to 200 fibres; A delta 0 to 30 hertz; A beta 0 to 100 hertz; GABA tonic 1 to 10 hertz.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Glutamate onto lamina I neurokinin 1 neurons, 0.5 to 2 millivolts per event; somatostatin above 10 hertz, diffusing 20 to 50 micrometres.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential; A current activation and inactivation, each 0 to 1; dendritic calcium; synaptic weights.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 64 millivolts, threshold minus 40, capacitance 0.08 to 0.12 nanofarads, leak 0.004 to 0.006 microsiemens, peak A conductance 0.04 to 0.08 microsiemens.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds, A activation 2, A inactivation 30 to 60, NMDA decay 100 to 200.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of inhibitory gating after nerve injury lets touch drive the cell, producing allodynia, which is pain from stroking the skin.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide when a vertical cell relays a nociceptive message to lamina I.
Create a number variable called potential with initial value -64.
Create a number variable called gate with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called elapsed with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called fired with initial value false.
Repeat the following steps exactly 200 times.
    Calculate the product of gate and 0.34.
    Calculate the difference of 0.38 and the result.
    Calculate the product of the result and 1.2.
    Calculate the sum of potential and the result.
    Set potential to the result.
    Calculate the product of gate and 0.978.
    Set gate to the result.
    Calculate the sum of elapsed and 1.
    Set elapsed to the result.
    Check if potential is greater than -40.
    Set fired to the result.
    If fired is true, then perform the following actions.
        Display elapsed to the console.
        Break out of the current loop immediately.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Language chosen: Python, because the delayed first spike is pure arithmetic and Python keeps every step visible.

import math
DT = 0.1                              # milliseconds per step
def vertical_cell(drive_na, steps=2000):
    v, a, b = -64.0, 0.0, 1.0         # millivolts; A current activation, inactivation
    cm, gl, el = 0.10, 0.005, -64.0   # nanofarads, microsiemens, millivolts
    gka, ek = 0.060, -90.0            # microsiemens, millivolts
    spikes = []
    for i in range(steps):
        a += DT * (1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(v + 40.0) / 8.0)) - a) / 2.0
        b += DT * (1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 75.0) / 6.0)) - b) / 45.0
        i_a = gka * a * a * a * b * (v - ek)   # A type potassium current
        v += DT * (drive_na - gl * (v - el) - i_a) / cm
        if v >= -40.0:                         # spike threshold
            spikes.append(round(i * DT, 1))
            v, b = -70.0, b * 0.9              # reset; spikes shave the A current
    return spikes
s = vertical_cell(0.35)
print("first spike after", s[0], "ms;", len(s), "spikes in 200 ms")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A soma pinned to the roof of lamina II with a cone of dendrites beneath and one axon climbing back into lamina I, in a cell that pauses a tenth of a second before firing at all.

CHAPTER 185. RADIAL CELLS (NON-COG)

If the vertical cell is an upside down tree, the radial cell is a dandelion clock, with short branches shooting out equally in every direction.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A radial cell is a small excitatory interneuron of lamina II, an interneuron being a cell whose axon never leaves its own region, and its compact tree radiates in all directions at once.

It amplifies pain and itch signals locally, and every radial cell ever examined has proved excitatory.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Three to six primary dendrites leave a small rounded soma at wide angles and branch heavily nearby, giving a dense roughly spherical tuft like a burr.

SIZE:

The soma is 8 to 14 micrometres across and rat dendrites spread 147 to 271 micrometres head to tail and 59 to 157 top to bottom, a ratio near 1.7 where an islet cell has one near 7.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Lamina II outer radial cells, where C fibre nociceptors end.

• Lamina II inner radial cells, where itch and low threshold inputs arrive.

• A somatostatin carrying group, which in one study included every radial cell tested.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Radial cells occur throughout lamina II, both lamina II outer and lamina II inner, densest in the cervical enlargement, C5 to T1, and the lumbosacral enlargement, L3 to S2.

Cells at the lamina II inner to lamina III interface bridge two worlds, since lamina II handles noxious and itch signals while lamina III handles innocuous touch.

NUMBER:

A defensible estimate is 0.8 to 1.6 million in the human cord, 1.2 million as the central figure, with low confidence since it extrapolates a rodent share of 10 to 16 percent of lamina II neurons.

That is about 0.6 percent of the roughly 200 million spinal neurons and about 0.001 percent of the roughly 100 billion in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Rest is near minus 62 millivolts, and every radial cell in one rat study fired in an A type potassium current pattern: delayed, meaning a pause before the first spike, gap, meaning spike then silence then a train, or reluctant.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input comes from C fibre nociceptors including the MRGPRD class that reports pinch, from A delta fibres and from local excitatory cells, with inhibition from islet cells, and output reaches vertical, central and lamina I neurons.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is 0.2 to 0.4 micrometres thick and unmyelinated, stays within a few hundred micrometres of the soma, and never projects out of the region.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate packaged by VGLUT2 in every case examined, usually with somatostatin, on a membrane carrying AMPA, GluN2B rich NMDA, GABA A, glycine and sometimes mu opioid receptors.

MYELINATION:

Not applicable, and the reason matters: myelination speeds conduction over distance, and this axon crosses a fraction of a millimetre, so the cell is bare by design.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low per cell and concentrated in the tuft, where synapse density is very high and vesicle refilling dominates the bill, while reluctance to fire keeps spike costs low.

PLASTICITY:

C fibre conditioning strengthens their inputs through NMDA receptors and calcium, and after nerve injury the A type current shrinks, turning reluctant firing into ready firing.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Because the tuft is so compact, astrocyte processes here squeeze between contacts a micrometre apart with a high density of the glutamate transporter GLT 1, and supply the D serine without which these NMDA receptors cannot open.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete radial cells and pain still reaches lamina I, but as a private line rather than a signal that recruits neighbours, so the ache spreading outward from a bruise is lost.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Each dendrite subtracts with its own A type current, yet because the tree is symmetric and compact the cell approximates a true summing junction, a rarity where most neurons weight inputs by position.

Somatostatin release is volume transmission reaching cells it never contacts, and back propagating spikes travelling out into the dendrites tag recently active synapses with calcium.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ C fibre glutamate including MRGPRD nociceptors 0 to 5 hertz per fibre; A delta 0 to 30 hertz; local excitatory cells 0 to 50 hertz; GABA tonic 1 to 10 hertz.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Glutamate onto vertical, central and lamina I projection neurons; somatostatin above about 10 hertz, diffusing 20 to 50 micrometres.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, A current activation and inactivation gates, per sector dendritic charge, dendritic calcium.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 62 millivolts, threshold minus 40, capacitance 0.07 to 0.11 nanofarads, leak 0.004 to 0.006 microsiemens, peak A conductance 0.2 to 0.4 microsiemens, 4 to 8 equal sectors.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 15 to 20 milliseconds, A inactivation 30 to 50, recovery 100 to 300, somatostatin action 1 to 30 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Shrinkage of the A type current after nerve injury turns a reluctant amplifier into an eager one, feeding central sensitisation and mechanical hypersensitivity.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make a radial cell sum equal inputs from all directions and fire once its A type current fades.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called potential with initial value -80.
Create a number variable called gate with initial value 0.79.
Create a list variable called sectors with initial value empty list.
Add 0.15 to the end of sectors.
Add 0.10 to the end of sectors.
Add 0.07 to the end of sectors.
For each sector in sectors, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the sum of drive and sector.
    Set drive to the result.
End the loop.
Repeat the following steps exactly 500 times.
    Calculate the product of gate and 0.36.
    Calculate the difference of drive and the result.
    Calculate the product of the result and 1.1.
    Calculate the sum of potential and the result.
    Set potential to the result.
    Calculate the product of gate and 0.985.
    Set gate to the result.
End the loop.
Display potential to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Language chosen: C, because a tight fixed step loop is what a large scale spinal simulation will actually run.

#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#define SECTORS 6
#define DT 0.1                                  /* milliseconds per step */
int main(void) {
    double in[SECTORS] = {0.10, 0.00, 0.09, 0.00, 0.11, 0.02};  /* nanoamps */
    double v = -80.0, h = 0.79;  /* held hyperpolarised, which frees the A current */
    double drive = 0.0, act, i_a;
    int k, step, spikes = 0, first = 0;
    for (k = 0; k < SECTORS; k++) drive += in[k];   /* equal weights: radial symmetry */
    for (step = 0; step < 5000; step++) {
        act = 1.0 / (1.0 + exp(-(v + 45.0) / 7.0));          /* A current activation */
        h += DT * (1.0 / (1.0 + exp((v + 72.0) / 6.0)) - h) / 40.0;
        i_a = 0.30 * act * h * (v + 90.0);                   /* nanoamps */
        v += DT * (drive - 0.005 * (v + 62.0) - i_a) / 0.09;
        if (v >= -40.0) {
            v = -68.0; h *= 0.9; spikes++;
            if (!first) { printf("first spike at %.1f ms\n", step * DT); first = 1; }
        }
    }
    printf("spikes in 500 ms: %d\n", spikes);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small round lamina II cell whose dendrites shoot out in every direction with no favourite axis, always glutamate using, always showing the delayed or gap firing signature of the A type current.

CHAPTER 186. CENTRAL CELLS (Close-Range Relay Neuron) (NON-COG)

Central cells are the shortened cousins of the long islet cells, and unlike almost every other class in the layer they can be either accelerator or brake.

Central teaches nothing, since it names neither a shape a student could draw nor a job, and it is easily misread as an address in the middle of the cord.

Close-Range records the one solid fact, that their dendrites and axons stay inside a very small head-to-tail column of lamina II.

Relay records the other solid fact, that their main known output is onto other local interneurons, transient central cells preferentially innervating the substance P radial cells, which in turn receive about half of their excitatory input from interneurons rather than from the skin.

Neuron marks it honestly, because this class is not one function, since central cells come in both excitatory and inhibitory flavours and no single physiological name would be true.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A central cell is a small lamina II interneuron whose dendrites run head to tail like an islet cell but cover a far shorter stretch, which is why Grudt and Perl named them separately in 2002.

About half are excitatory and half inhibitory, and among the excitatory ones the transient central cells are the best documented relay in the gate control circuit for pain.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Two or three sparsely branching dendrites leave opposite poles of a small rounded soma and run head to tail with little spread otherwise, making the cell a short thin rod lying along the cord.

SIZE:

The soma is 8 to 13 micrometres across, and in rat the inhibitory form spans 191 to 385 micrometres head to tail and the excitatory form 189 to 324, about a quarter of an islet cell's 466 to 1069.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Tonic central cells, firing steadily while depolarised, usually inhibitory and using GABA, glycine or both.

• Transient central cells, bursting at onset then falling silent, sitting at the lamina II outer to inner boundary.

• Transient central cells that also carry an A type potassium current, adding a delay before the burst.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Central cells occupy lamina II throughout its depth in all 31 segments, densest in the cervical and lumbosacral enlargements, and the class recurs in the spinal trigeminal nucleus.

The transient subgroup sits exactly on the interface between lamina II outer, which receives peptide containing C fibres, and lamina II inner, which receives touch endings, so it hears both conversations.

NUMBER:

A defensible estimate is 1.5 to 3 million in the human cord, 2 million as the working figure, with low confidence since a rodent share of 5 to 20 percent of lamina II neurons has been scaled up.

That is about 1 percent of the roughly 200 million spinal neurons and about 0.002 percent of the roughly 100 billion in the nervous system, split about half excitatory and half inhibitory.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Transient central cells rest unusually depolarised at minus 50 to minus 60 millivolts and answer a steady current with a few spikes in the first ten or twenty milliseconds, then stop, because their sodium channels inactivate without recovering.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They take direct C fibre input and input from protein kinase C gamma cells driven by A beta touch fibres, and their key output is onto vertical cells, the junction where the touch and pain streams join.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is 0.2 to 0.4 micrometres thick and unmyelinated, running head to tail parallel to the dendrites within 200 to 400 micrometres of the soma, and never leaves the region.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Excitatory central cells use glutamate loaded by VGLUT2 and inhibitory ones GABA with glycine, and both carry AMPA, NMDA, GABA A, glycine and often mu opioid receptors that let morphine silence them.

MYELINATION:

None, because lamina II is almost free of myelin and this axon travels a few hundred micrometres at most, so insulation would cost without buying speed.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low, and lowest for the transient subtype since a cell that bursts once and stops spends little restoring ion gradients; the tonic inhibitory cells are the expensive half.

PLASTICITY:

The transient central to vertical synapse strengthens after inflammation and nerve injury, one mechanism by which touch becomes painful, and excitability also shifts by altering sodium channel availability.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here have an extra duty, because these cells rest close to threshold and small rises in extracellular potassium would tip them into firing, so astrocytic Kir4.1 potassium buffering matters more here than almost anywhere.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove central cells and a pinprick still hurts, but the cross talk between touch and pain is cut, so the layer can no longer turn a bedsheet into a source of pain or raise the alarm around an injury.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Transient firing is itself a computation, because reporting onset and ignoring continuation hands downstream circuits a derivative, a signal proportional to change rather than level.

Sodium channel inactivation acts as a memory lasting hundreds of milliseconds, inhibitory central cells damp incoming terminals by presynaptic inhibition, and both kinds are silenced from the far side by retrograde endocannabinoids.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ C fibre glutamate 0 to 5 hertz per fibre; protein kinase C gamma glutamate carrying A beta touch 0 to 100 hertz; GABA and glycine tonic 1 to 10 hertz.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Excitatory type: glutamate onto vertical cells and neighbouring excitatory interneurons.

◦ Inhibitory type: GABA and glycine onto excitatory interneurons and onto primary afferent terminals.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, sodium channel availability 0 to 1, refractory flag, synaptic weights.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 50 to minus 60 millivolts, threshold minus 38, capacitance 0.06 to 0.10 nanofarads, leak 0.005 to 0.008 microsiemens, availability threshold 0.15, cost per spike 35 percent.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 to 15 milliseconds, availability loss 20 to 30, recovery 200 to 400, burst duration 10 to 20.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ When inhibition fails, the touch driven route through these cells to vertical cells and on to lamina I opens, producing allodynia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make a transient central cell burst at the onset of a maintained input and then fall silent.
Create a number variable called potential with initial value -55.
Create a number variable called available with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called spikes with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called crossed with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called can_spike with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called fire_now with initial value false.
Repeat the following steps exactly 3000 times.
    Calculate the difference of potential and -55.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.006.
    Calculate the difference of 0.30 and the result.
    Calculate the product of the result and 1.25.
    Calculate the sum of potential and the result.
    Set potential to the result.
    Check if potential is greater than -38.
    Set crossed to the result.
    Check if available is greater than 0.15.
    Set can_spike to the result.
    Check if both crossed and can_spike are true.
    Set fire_now to the result.
    If fire_now is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of spikes and 1.
        Set spikes to the result.
        Set potential to -45.
        Calculate the product of available and 0.65.
        Set available to the result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spikes to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Language chosen: Python, because the transient burst comes from one extra state variable and Python keeps it in plain sight.

import math
DT = 0.1                                  # milliseconds per step
def transient_central(drive_na=0.30, steps=3000):
    v, p = -55.0, 1.0                     # millivolts; sodium channels available
    c, gl, el = 0.08, 0.006, -55.0        # nanofarads, microsiemens, millivolts
    spikes = []
    for i in range(steps):
        p_inf = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((v + 52.0) / 3.0))  # availability falls if depolarised
        tau_p = 25.0 if v > -52.0 else 300.0              # slow recovery once repolarised
        p += DT * (p_inf - p) / tau_p
        v += DT * (drive_na - gl * (v - el)) / c
        if v >= -38.0 and p > 0.15:       # a spike needs available sodium channels
            spikes.append(round(i * DT, 1))
            v, p = -45.0, p * 0.65
        elif v >= -38.0:
            v = -38.0                     # depolarised block, the burst is over
    return spikes
s = transient_central()
print("burst of", len(s), "spikes at", s, "then silence")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A short rod lying head to tail in lamina II, a quarter the length of an islet cell, answering a maintained current with a handful of spikes and then nothing.

CHAPTER 187. ANTENNA CELLS (NON-COG)

The antenna cell is a listening post with aerials pointing two ways at once, up into the layer where injury is reported and down into the layers where touch arrives.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An antenna cell is a medium sized dorsal horn neuron with two clearly separated dendritic fields, named by Miklós Réthelyi and János Szentágothai in 1969 for its upward pointing aerials.

Its job is convergence, since it is one of the few superficial dorsal horn cells arranged to sample the pain stream and the touch stream directly rather than through go betweens.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

One to three thick dendrites climb steeply and branch only near their tips in lamina I, while a separate set fans down through laminae III and IV, leaving the middle sparse so the cell looks like a radio mast.

SIZE:

The cell body is 20 to 30 micrometres across, two to three times the width of a vertical, radial or central cell, and the whole cell can span 400 micrometres top to bottom.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Excitatory antenna cells, positive for the vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (VGLUT2) and often the neurokinin 1 receptor, with axons descending into laminae III and IV.

• Inhibitory antenna cells, positive for glutamic acid decarboxylase, the enzyme that makes gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA), with axons ascending into lamina I.

• Lamina III antenna cells, overlapping the lamina III neurokinin 1 cells that project to the brain.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Antenna cells sit in deep lamina II or lamina III, and since their dendrites occupy lamina I above and laminae III and IV below, one cell spans four layers and is best documented in the lumbar enlargement, L3 to L5.

It bridges three interfaces: lamina I to lamina II at the top, lamina II inner to lamina III at the soma, and lamina III to lamina IV below.

NUMBER:

A defensible estimate is 100 thousand to 400 thousand in the human cord, 250 thousand as a working figure, with low confidence since no one has counted them in a large sample of any species.

That is about 0.12 percent of the roughly 200 million spinal neurons and about 0.00025 percent of the roughly 100 billion in the nervous system, with a safe bound of fewer than one million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Because the two dendritic fields are far apart and joined only by a thin stem, the cell is electrically compartmentalised, so lamina I and lamina IV synapses reach the soma along different cables with different losses.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The dorsal dendrites collect C fibre and A delta input including substance P, the ventral fan collects A beta input from the thick fast fibres of touch and vibration, and inhibition from islet and parvalbumin cells lands on both.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Most axons are local, 0.3 to 0.6 micrometres thick and unmyelinated, travelling 100 to 400 micrometres opposite the main dendritic fan, while a projecting minority ascend in the anterolateral tract.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Excitatory cells release glutamate and inhibitory ones GABA with glycine, and both carry AMPA and N methyl D aspartate (NMDA) receptors plus the neurokinin 1 receptor, which is visibly pulled inside the cell after a strong noxious volley.

MYELINATION:

Mostly none, since a quarter of a millimetre needs no insulation, except in the projecting minority whose myelinated axons carry a signal the whole length of the cord.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Higher than the small interneurons around it, since the membrane area is several times larger and the substance P driven depolarisation keeps sodium flowing in for seconds at a time.

PLASTICITY:

Repeated noxious input internalises the neurokinin 1 receptor for minutes, and after nerve injury the ventral touch driven field grows stronger, biasing the cell toward reporting touch as injury.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

This cell is served by two different astrocyte populations at its two ends, the fine bushy astrocytes of lamina II clearing peptide from the aerials and the larger fibrous astrocytes of laminae III and IV clearing fast touch synapses.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take it away and the dorsal horn loses one of its few single cell comparators, so it can no longer judge instantly that a firm grip is pressure rather than injury, or that the same grip on sunburn is injury after all.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The two dendritic fields behave as semi independent computing units, so the cell performs a genuine comparison rather than a sum, and inhibition on one field leaves the other untouched.

Substance P acting on neurokinin 1 receptors leaves a slow depolarisation lasting many seconds, a chemical memory of a noxious event, and dendritic calcium drives protein synthesis out at the tips.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Dorsal field: C fibre and A delta glutamate plus substance P from lamina I, 0 to 30 hertz per fibre.

◦ Ventral field: A beta mechanoreceptor glutamate from laminae III and IV, 0 to 200 hertz per fibre; GABA and glycine on both fields, tonic 1 to 10 hertz.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Excitatory type: glutamate onto laminae III and IV neurons; inhibitory type: GABA onto lamina I projection neurons; projecting subset: glutamate to brainstem and thalamus.

• STATE.

◦ Dorsal, ventral and somatic potentials; neurokinin 1 slow current; receptor internalisation fraction; two synaptic weight vectors.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 60 millivolts, threshold minus 42, somatic capacitance 0.06 to 0.09 nanofarads, dendritic 0.02 to 0.04 each, leak 0.003 to 0.005 microsiemens, coupling 0.015 to 0.025 microsiemens.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, dendrite to soma equalisation 3 to 8, neurokinin 1 rise 300 to 500 and decay several seconds.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss of inhibition on the ventral field lets touch alone reach threshold, one cellular route to allodynia, and ablating neurokinin 1 cells in animals abolishes much post injury hypersensitivity.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make an antenna cell fire only when its dorsal aerials and its ventral fan are driven together.
Create a number variable called dorsal with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called ventral with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called potential with initial value -60.
Create a boolean variable called crossed with initial value false.
Repeat the following steps exactly 4000 times.
    Calculate the difference of 0.17 and dorsal.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.02.
    Calculate the sum of dorsal and the result.
    Set dorsal to the result.
    Calculate the difference of 0.12 and ventral.
    Calculate the product of the result and 0.02.
    Calculate the sum of ventral and the result.
    Set ventral to the result.
    Calculate the sum of dorsal and ventral.
    Calculate the product of the result and 78.
    Calculate the sum of -60 and the result.
    Set potential to the result.
End the loop.
Check if potential is greater than -42.
Set crossed to the result.
Display crossed to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Language chosen: JavaScript, because it runs anywhere with no toolchain and the two branch comparison reads as two lines of arithmetic.

// Three compartment antenna cell: dorsal aerials, ventral fan, soma.
function antennaCell(dorsal, ventral, steps) {
  const dt = 0.1, EL = -60.0;      // milliseconds; resting millivolts
  const gL = 0.004, gC = 0.020;    // leak and coupling, microsiemens
  const Cd = 0.030, Cs = 0.070;    // dendrite and soma capacitance, nanofarads
  let vD = EL, vV = EL, vS = EL, nk1 = 0.0, spikes = 0;
  for (let i = 0; i < steps; i++) {
    const t = i * dt, iD = dorsal(t), iV = ventral(t);   // nanoamps
    nk1 += dt * (0.9 * Math.max(iD - 0.15, 0.0) - nk1) / 350.0;  // substance P, slow
    vD += dt * (iD + nk1 - gL * (vD - EL) - gC * (vD - vS)) / Cd;
    vV += dt * (iV - gL * (vV - EL) - gC * (vV - vS)) / Cd;
    vS += dt * (gC * (vD - vS) + gC * (vV - vS) - gL * (vS - EL)) / Cs;
    if (vS >= -42.0) { spikes++; vS = -65.0; }
  }
  return spikes;
}
const pinch = t => (t > 50 && t < 350) ? 0.17 : 0.0;   // dorsal aerials
const brush = t => (t > 50 && t < 350) ? 0.12 : 0.0;   // ventral fan
const none = () => 0.0;
console.log(antennaCell(pinch, none, 4000), antennaCell(none, brush, 4000),
            antennaCell(pinch, brush, 4000));   // only the third fires

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A cell body 20 to 30 micrometres across at the bottom of lamina II or in lamina III, with a small tuft climbing into lamina I, a wide fan spreading through laminae III and IV, and almost nothing between them.

CHAPTER 188. LAMINA V WIDE DYNAMIC RANGE NEURONS (Touch-To-Damage Grading Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that answers the question every doctor asks, because its firing rate is a genuine dial running from a feather touch to a crushing injury.

Lamina V is an address and wide dynamic range is laboratory shorthand that a newcomer cannot unpack.

Touch-To-Damage names the actual span of the cell's sensitivity, because a single one of these neurons will fire to gentle brushing of the skin, harder to firm pressure, and hardest to frankly injurious heat or pinch, and many of them also take input from muscle and from viscera.

Grading names the work, which is not detection but scaling, since the cell reports how much rather than merely whether.

Neuron marks it as the cell in which repeated noxious stimulation at about one per second escalates output stimulus after stimulus in the effect known as windup, a short-term sensitisation thought to seed chronic pain.

This chapter now carries the whole of the wide dynamic range class, which was previously described a second time at the end of the catalogue, so that one cell type occupies exactly one chapter.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A wide dynamic range neuron is a large cell in the deep dorsal horn that responds across the whole range of stimulus strengths, firing a little to a brush, more to pressure and hard to a pinch or burn.

It is marked cognitive because its output is the closest thing the nervous system has to an internal number for pain intensity, and because it learns and compares rather than merely relaying.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The soma is large and multipolar, and its dendrites climb out of lamina V through laminae IV and III and often to lamina I, which is why one cell can hear both touch fibres and pain fibres.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 20 to 45 micrometres across, they are recorded 500 to 1200 micrometres below the cord surface, and the dendritic tree spans 600 to 1200 micrometres top to bottom.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Interneuronal wide dynamic range cells, the majority, whose axons stay in the cord.

• Projection cells, whose axons cross the midline and ascend in the spinothalamic and spinoreticular tracts.

• Convergent viscerosomatic cells, taking input from skin and organs, the reason a heart attack is felt in the left arm.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The core population sits in Rexed lamina V, the broad neck of the dorsal horn, with a large contingent in lamina VI, at all spinal levels and studied most in the lumbar enlargement, L3 to L5.

Lamina V is itself an interface, where the sensory dorsal horn above meets the motor intermediate zone below, which is why a painful stimulus produces immediate withdrawal.

NUMBER:

A defensible estimate is 1 to 2 million in the human cord, 1.5 million as the working figure, with low to moderate confidence because the class is defined by behaviour rather than by any stain and cannot be counted in fixed tissue.

That is about 0.75 percent of the roughly 200 million spinal neurons and about 0.0015 percent of the roughly 100 billion in the nervous system, of which plausibly one in twenty projects to the brain.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Rest is near minus 62 millivolts with a background discharge of 0.1 to 5 spikes per second, and the defining dynamic is windup, in which C fibre stimulation at about one per second makes each response larger than the last, often two to five times over sixteen stimuli.

Each volley leaves a slow depolarisation that has not decayed before the next arrives, expelling the magnesium that plugs the N methyl D aspartate (NMDA) receptor channel, with L type calcium and calcium activated cation currents adding more.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

A beta, A delta and C fibres all converge directly on one cell, joined by excitatory interneurons of laminae I to IV, with inhibition from local GABA and glycine cells and from descending serotonin, noradrenaline and enkephalin systems.

A brainstem loop called diffuse noxious inhibitory control quiets the cell whenever anything painful happens elsewhere, which is why biting your lip can dull a headache.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Projecting cells have myelinated axons 1 to 4 micrometres thick that cross the midline and ascend up to a metre at a few metres per second to about 40, while the majority keep thin propriospinal axons spanning a few segments.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

They release glutamate packaged by the vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (VGLUT2), and their receptor list reads like a pharmacy: AMPA, NMDA, neurokinin 1, GABA A, glycine, mu opioid, alpha 2 adrenoceptor and the excitatory 5 hydroxytryptamine 3 receptor.

MYELINATION:

Partial and specific, since the ascending axons of the projecting subset are myelinated for a journey of up to a metre while the local axons of the majority are barely insulated.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High by spinal standards, because the cell is large, fires continuously even at rest, and must clear the calcium that floods in through NMDA receptors and L type channels during windup.

PLASTICITY:

Windup lasts seconds, but repeated input converts it into central sensitisation lasting hours to days, with a lower threshold, a wider receptive field and larger responses, backed by transcription of genes such as c fos.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here are larger and more fibrous than those of lamina II and their special job is buffering potassium around a continuously firing cell, and raising their glutamate transporter GLT 1 reduces windup, so astrocytic uptake sets the ceiling on sensitisation.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and lamina I still reports that damage occurred, so a burn registers, but graded intensity vanishes along with summation, referred pain and reflexes scaled to the threat.

The region becomes a smoke alarm instead of a thermometer.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Windup is a genuine short term memory implemented by receptor biophysics rather than synaptic weights, since the recent history of the cell is stored in the position of a single magnesium ion.

The long dorsal dendrites can produce local calcium spikes without a somatic spike, back propagating spikes tell every branch the cell has fired, and released nitric oxide diffuses backwards across synapses and outwards to widen local blood vessels.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ A beta glutamate 0 to 200 hertz per fibre; A delta 0 to 50; C fibre glutamate with substance P and calcitonin gene related peptide 0 to 5; visceral afferents 0 to 20.

◦ Local GABA and glycine tonic 1 to 20 hertz; descending serotonin and noradrenaline as a gain from 0.3 to 2.0.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Glutamate onto laminae VII and VIII motor circuits, onto sympathetic preganglionic neurons, and for the projecting subset onto thalamus and brainstem; firing 0 to about 100 hertz.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, slow depolarisation in millivolts, intracellular calcium, chloride reversal potential, receptive field gain map.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 62 millivolts, threshold minus 45, capacitance 0.3 to 0.6 nanofarads, input resistance 30 to 150 megaohms, windup increment 3 to 4 millivolts per volley saturating near 25 to 40.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, NMDA decay 100 to 250, windup decay 2 to 5 seconds, central sensitisation hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Persistent central sensitisation underlies neuropathic pain, loss of diffuse noxious inhibitory control is measurable in fibromyalgia, and prolonged calcium loading can kill the very cell that was measuring the injury.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to make a wide dynamic range neuron wind up during a train of sixteen noxious volleys.
Create a number variable called slow with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called total with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called responses with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 16 times.
    Calculate the quotient of slow divided by 40.
    Calculate the difference of 1 and the result.
    Calculate the product of the result and 3.5.
    Calculate the sum of slow and the result.
    Set slow to the result.
    Calculate the product of slow and 1.1.
    Calculate the sum of the result and 3.
    Set total to the result.
    Add total to the end of responses.
    Calculate the product of slow and 0.72.
    Set slow to the result.
End the loop.
Display responses to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Language chosen: Python, because windup is bookkeeping across trials and Python makes the accumulation and its decay obvious.

import math
def windup(n_stimuli=16, interval_ms=1000.0):
    """Spikes evoked by each C fibre volley in a 1 hertz train."""
    slow = 0.0             # slow depolarisation from NMDA and neurokinin 1, millivolts
    tau_slow = 3000.0      # decays with a 3 second time constant
    slow_max = 40.0        # saturation ceiling, millivolts
    counts = []
    for k in range(n_stimuli):
        fast = 3                                    # A fibre and early C fibre burst
        slow += 3.5 * (1.0 - slow / slow_max)       # saturating step per volley
        late = int(slow * 1.1)                      # late C window scales with slow
        counts.append(fast + late)
        slow *= math.exp(-interval_ms / tau_slow)   # decay before the next volley
    return counts
c = windup()
print("spikes per volley:", c)
print("windup ratio, last over first:", round(c[-1] / c[0], 2))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A large cell 500 to 1200 micrometres deep that answers brush, pressure and pinch in a smooth graded sequence, then winds up when its C fibre input is stimulated sixteen times at one per second.

CHAPTER 189. CLARKE COLUMN NEURONS, ALSO CALLED THE POSTERIOR THORACIC NUCLEUS (NON-COG)

A slender column of large cells in your lower back is right now forwarding reports from every muscle spindle in your legs to the cerebellum at up to 110 metres per second.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Clarke column neurons form a narrow nucleus running lengthwise through the cord, named after Jacob Lockhart Clarke, who described it in the 1850s.

They relay unconscious proprioception, the continuous sense of limb position and speed that the body computes without telling you, from muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs to the cerebellum.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell bodies are oval or pear shaped with the nucleus set off centre and coarse clumps of Nissl substance, the stacked protein making machinery, and their long dendrites run head to tail parallel to the incoming sensory fibres.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 25 to 60 micrometres across, the column is 0.5 to 1.5 millimetres wide and 20 to 30 centimetres long in an adult, and the axons are 10 to 20 micrometres thick including myelin.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Muscle spindle dominated cells, driven by group Ia and group II afferents reporting length and velocity.

• Golgi tendon organ dominated cells, driven by group Ib afferents reporting force.

• Cells with direct excitatory corticospinal input and cells receiving it only through inhibitory interneurons.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The nucleus occupies Rexed lamina VII, the intermediate zone, at the medial base of the dorsal horn against the dorsal columns, running from segment C8 to L2 or L3 and largest around T12.

It sits at a true interface, sensory territory above and behind and motor territory below and in front, and its work is done below L3 by the lumbar border cells and above C8 by the accessory cuneate nucleus.

NUMBER:

A defensible estimate is 50 thousand to 150 thousand in the human cord counting both sides, 100 thousand as a working figure, with low confidence since no reliable modern count of the human nucleus exists.

That is about 0.05 percent of the roughly 200 million spinal neurons and about 0.0001 percent of the roughly 100 billion in the nervous system, bounded below twenty thousand and above one million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

They fire tonically even when the limb is still, so both stretch and shortening register as changes from a baseline, and they follow input faithfully into the hundreds of hertz because the cerebellum needs a stream rather than a summary.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs are group Ia, Ib and II afferents from the same side, arriving in unusually large boutons using the vesicular glutamate transporter 1 (VGLUT1) that make transmission almost one to one, plus corticospinal fibres direct and indirect.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon ascends without crossing, in the dorsolateral funiculus, at about 30 to 110 metres per second, entering the cerebellum through the inferior cerebellar peduncle and ending as mossy fibres in the anterior lobe vermis and paravermis.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

They are glutamatergic with strongly VGLUT1 positive mossy terminals, carry fast AMPA receptors suited to high frequency transmission alongside NMDA, GABA A and glycine receptors, and express glial cell line derived neurotrophic factor (Gdnf) as their identity badge.

MYELINATION:

Extensive and essential, since myelin lets the signal jump between gaps called nodes of Ranvier and so reach the cerebellum from the foot in about a hundredth of a second.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high, because a large tonically firing cell must maintain gradients along a thick axon up to half a metre long, with mitochondria packed at the nodes and in the giant mossy terminals.

PLASTICITY:

Deliberately among the least plastic cells in the nervous system, because a measuring instrument that drifts is worse than useless, so gain is set from outside by cortical input and by gamma motor neurons resetting the spindles.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The oligodendrocytes here build some of the thickest sheaths in the cord, with many wraps and long internodes matched to an axon conducting at up to 110 metres per second, while astrocytes must clear glutamate within a millisecond to keep successive volleys distinct.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and reflexes survive and conscious position sense survives, but the automatic feedback that lets the cerebellum predict and correct movement is gone, producing the wide based stamping walk of sensory ataxia.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The nucleus performs a comparison rather than a relay, since it receives both the sensory report and a copy of the descending motor command, an arrangement engineers call corollary discharge and the raw material of motor learning.

The giant VGLUT1 boutons make transmission close to deterministic so the cell's job is fidelity rather than integration, thick axons instruct their own oligodendrocytes, and the energy load is met by lactate handed over directly from astrocytes.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Group Ia spindle afferents 0 to 200 hertz encoding length and velocity; group II 0 to 100 hertz encoding length; group Ib 0 to 100 hertz encoding force, all ipsilateral.

◦ Corticospinal glutamate, direct excitatory and indirect inhibitory, as gain and offset; local GABA and glycine 0 to 50 hertz.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Glutamate onto cerebellar granule cells as mossy fibres via the inferior cerebellar peduncle; collaterals onto local interneurons; firing 5 to 300 hertz.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane potential, adaptation current, previous muscle length for velocity estimation, corticospinal gain term.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus 63 millivolts, threshold minus 45, capacitance 0.15 to 0.30 nanofarads, length gain about 6 nanoamps per unit fractional length, velocity gain about 0.3, baseline drive about 0.42 nanoamps.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 8 to 12 milliseconds, synaptic 1 to 2, axonal conduction 5 to 15 milliseconds from lumbar cord to cerebellum.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ In Friedreich ataxia the sensory neurons feeding this nucleus degenerate and the Clarke cells atrophy and die, a change so consistent it is treated as defining the disease.

◦ Demyelination of the tract in multiple sclerosis or vitamin B12 deficiency slows the report and produces sensory ataxia on the same side, because the tract never crosses.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn muscle length and stretch velocity into a Clarke column firing rate for the cerebellum.
Create a number variable called previous with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called velocity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called lengths with initial value empty list.
Add 1.00 to the end of lengths.
Add 1.03 to the end of lengths.
Add 1.05 to the end of lengths.
Add 1.02 to the end of lengths.
For each sample in lengths, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of sample and previous.
    Calculate the product of the result and 10.
    Set velocity to the result.
    Set previous to sample.
    Calculate the difference of sample and 1.
    Calculate the product of the result and 6.
    Set drive to the result.
    Calculate the product of velocity and 0.3.
    Calculate the sum of drive and the result.
    Calculate the sum of the result and 0.32.
    Calculate the product of the result and 150.
    Display the result to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Language chosen: C, because a fixed step loop like this drops straight into a real time cerebellar model.

#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#define PI 3.14159265358979
#define DT 0.0001                 /* seconds, that is 0.1 millisecond steps */
int main(void) {
    double v = -63.0;             /* membrane potential, millivolts */
    double len, vel, prev = 1.0, drive, cortical, t;
    int i, spikes = 0;
    for (i = 0; i < 10000; i++) {                    /* one second of movement */
        t = i * DT;
        len = 1.0 + 0.05 * sin(2.0 * PI * 2.0 * t);  /* muscle stretched at 2 hertz */
        vel = (len - prev) / DT;                     /* lengths per second */
        prev = len;
        cortical = (t > 0.5) ? -0.25 : 0.0;          /* corollary discharge damps the relay */
        drive = 6.0 * (len - 1.0) + 0.30 * vel + 0.42 + cortical;   /* nanoamps */
        v += DT * 1000.0 * (drive - 0.020 * (v + 63.0)) / 0.20;     /* microsiemens, nanofarads */
        if (v >= -45.0) { v = -60.0; spikes++; }
    }
    printf("dorsal spinocerebellar spikes in 1 second: %d\n", spikes);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A large pear shaped cell with an off centre nucleus, packed into a narrow column at the medial base of the dorsal horn only between C8 and L3, smothered in giant VGLUT1 boutons and firing all the time.

CHAPTER 190. LAMINA X NEURONS (Deep-Core Crossroads Neuron) (NON-COG)

Ringing the hollow core of your spinal cord is a sleeve of grey matter thinner than a pencil lead, and some of its cells dip a hair-tipped finger into the fluid inside and taste it.

Lamina X is purely a coordinate, the ring of grey matter around the central canal, and the number tells a reader nothing.

Deep-Core names the position that distinguishes it, the innermost ring of the cord wrapped around the central canal.

Crossroads names the defining job, because this is the one place where signals from the skin and signals from the gut, bladder and heart land on the same cells, making it the cord's chief site of somatic and visceral convergence.

Neuron marks it as a cell of a region regarded as critical for visceral pain, the poorly localised ache of a diseased organ, and among the least studied regions of the cord, so the name deliberately claims convergence and no more.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Lamina X is the tenth and innermost layer of spinal grey matter, mapped by the Swedish anatomist Bror Rexed in 1952.

Most of its cells are interneurons, local cells serving neighbours not the brain, merging gut and skin signals to steer organ control and movement.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Most are small multipolar cells whose dendrites, the input branches, cross the midline into the other half of the cord.

A minority push one dendrite into the central canal, capped by a bulb of hairs that taste the cerebrospinal fluid.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are small, roughly 10 to 25 micrometres wide, matching a measured input resistance of 1.0 gigaohm.

The sensory bulb is 3.0 to 5.0 micrometres in rodents and 5.2 to 8.8 in macaques.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Fluid contacting neurons, marked by the polycystic kidney disease 2-like 1 (PKD2L1) channel and releasing gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the brake chemical.

• Central canal cluster cells releasing acetylcholine and GABA together.

• Dorsal grey commissure cells fed by the internal organs.

• Projection neurons reaching thalamus and parabrachial area.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The grey sleeve around the central canal at every segment, first cervical to coccygeal, and the only spinal tissue touching the ependyma that lines it.

Laterally it joins lamina VII, it inhibits the thoracic intermediolateral cell column, and at S2 to S4 it abuts the sacral parasympathetic nucleus.

NUMBER:

Best estimate 2 to 6 million cells, 1 to 3 percent of the cord's 200 million neurons, with low confidence since no human count exists.

The fluid contacting subset runs about 8 cells per 40 micrometre section in all species measured, near 100 thousand per cord.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Measured resting voltage is minus 56 millivolts and input resistance 1.0 gigaohm.

Among 21 rat cells firing split as tonic 9, transient 6, delayed 3, single spiking 2 and bursting 1, with slow 3.9 millisecond upstrokes in fluid contacting cells.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

All 20 cells tested answered the fifth lumbar dorsal root, and inhibition appeared in all 9 tested for it.

None answered the ventral root, and the slowest inputs conducted under 0.5 metres per second.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Most axons are short, crossing the midline through the grey commissure to the mirror-image cell opposite.

A minority climb the ventrolateral funiculus to brainstem and thalamus.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA and glycine dominate the fluid contacting cells, acetylcholine the central canal cluster, glutamate the excitatory and projecting cells, with somatostatin and enkephalin acting slowly.

MYELINATION:

Local axons are bare or thinly wrapped, since the fatty insulation called myelin is largely absent from grey matter.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest, since these cells are small and slow firing, but the region depends on the thin sulcal branches of the anterior spinal artery.

PLASTICITY:

Inflammation of an organ sensitises these cells for hours to days.

After injury the neighbouring ependymal cells proliferate and fluid contacting neurons in mice carry stem cell markers, the cord's only credible repair reserve.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The specialised glia are ependymal cells, which beat hairs to stir the fluid and double as a dormant stem cell pool, unlike glia elsewhere.

In adults it mostly vanishes, the canal being shut in 88 percent of young adults and everyone over 65.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete these cells and the two halves of the cord stop talking across the midline here.

Visceral pain would lose its diffuse, nauseating, hard to locate character.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

These are sensors, not relays, reading acidity through PKD2L1 and acid-sensing ion channel 3 (ASIC3), and reading flow through the bending of their hairs.

They also broadcast peptides into the fluid, reaching cells they never touch.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: canal pH 7.20 to 7.40; wall bending 0 to 1; dorsal root drive to 200 hertz.

• OUTPUTS: GABA and glycine across the midline; acetylcholine to motor neurons; peptides into the fluid.

• STATE: membrane voltage; sensor current in picoamps; recent spikes.

• PARAMETERS: rest minus 56 millivolts; input resistance 1000 megaohm; threshold minus 40.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 25 milliseconds; spike upstroke 3.9 milliseconds; peptides seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: syringomyelia hollows this sleeve, giving cape-like loss of pain and temperature.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire a fluid contacting lamina X neuron from the acidity and motion of the fluid in the central canal.
Create a number variable called lift with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 20000 times.
    Calculate the difference of 7.32 and the newest canal acidity reading.
    Set drive to the result.
    Calculate the product of drive and 120.
    Set drive to the result.
    Calculate the sum of drive and the canal bending current.
    Set drive to the result.
    Calculate the difference of drive and lift.
    Set drive to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of drive divided by 250.
    Set drive to the result.
    Calculate the sum of lift and drive.
    Set lift to the result.
    Check if lift is greater than or equal to 16.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set lift to -4.
        Display "spike" to the console.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: a few scalars stepped every 0.1 ms, so clarity beats speed.
import math
DT, TAU, RIN = 0.1, 25.0, 1000.0            # ms, ms, megaohm
VREST, VTHR, VRESET = -56.0, -40.0, -60.0   # measured lamina X values, mV
PH0, G_PH, G_BEND = 7.32, 120.0, 30.0       # pH, pA per pH, pA per bend
def step(v, ph, bend):
    i = G_PH * (PH0 - ph) + G_BEND * bend              # pA
    v += (-(v - VREST) + RIN * i / 1000.0) / TAU * DT  # mV
    return (VRESET, True) if v >= VTHR else (v, False)
v, spikes = VREST, 0
for n in range(20000):                      # 2 seconds
    t = n * DT
    ph = PH0 - (0.10 if 500.0 < t < 1500.0 else 0.0)
    v, fired = step(v, ph, 0.5 * math.sin(2 * math.pi * t / 400.0))
    spikes += fired
print(spikes, "spikes in 2 s")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron puts a hair-tipped finger into the cerebrospinal fluid and reads its acidity and motion.

A small GABA-making cell carrying PKD2L1 against the ependymal lining settles it.

CHAPTER 191. LISSAUER TRACT INTERNEURONS (Neighbouring-Segment Spreading Neuron) (NON-COG)

Pain does not enter the spinal cord and stop; it first runs a short lane up and down the cord's back corner, and the neurons inside decide how far it spreads.

The old label names a white matter bundle rather than a cell, so it is an address rather than a description, and the eponym belongs to the tract and not to the neuron.

Neighbouring-Segment records the measured fact that these propriospinal axons, arising from cells in the substantia gelatinosa, travel only about one to two spinal segments up or down before diving back into the grey matter.

Spreading names the consequence, that a painful input arriving at one segment is shared sideways along the cord to the dorsal horns above and below it, which is why stimulating this tract changes the excitability of dorsal horn cells for prolonged periods.

Neuron marks it as a local propriospinal cell rather than a long tract cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Lissauer's tract is the thin cap of white matter over the tip of the dorsal horn, described in 1885 by Heinrich Lissauer.

Its interneurons sit inside that cap, passing pain signals one or two segments away and damping arriving fibres at their own terminals.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

They are small spindle-shaped or star-shaped cells whose dendrites, the input branches, run lengthwise beside the tract fibres.

Each therefore samples a long thin column of segments, not a ball of nearby tissue.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are roughly 8 to 20 micrometres wide, with dendritic fields several hundred micrometres long but narrow.

The tract is roughly one percent of the cord's cross-section.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Interstitial neurons whose cell bodies sit inside the tract, ringed by passing axons.

• Marginal cells on the lamina I boundary, straddling grey and white matter.

• Medial cells near the dorsal columns, and lateral cells distinct from the neighbouring lateral spinal nucleus.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The crescent between the dorsolateral sulcus and the apex of the dorsal horn, at every segment.

Its defining interface is the dorsal root entry zone, where Schwann cell myelin yields to oligodendrocyte myelin at the Obersteiner-Redlich line.

Medially it borders the dorsal columns, ventrally lamina I, laterally the dorsolateral funiculus.

NUMBER:

Best estimate 100 thousand to 400 thousand interstitial cells, under 0.2 percent of the cord's 200 million neurons, with low confidence.

Fibre counts are firmer: over two thirds of the tract's axons in rat are sensory, and 13 percent of the rest are myelinated.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

No human recordings exist, so the bound comes from the tract itself, whose fibres need pulses of 155 to 380 microseconds.

After each impulse a supernormal period up to 20 milliseconds long speeds conduction by 25 percent and raises excitability by 40 percent.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs come from the slow pain fibres in the tract, plus returning input from lamina II.

Outputs land on lamina I and II cells and on the arriving fibres' own terminals.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Axons run one to two segments before diving into grey matter, and few from the seventh cervical segment pass beyond the sixth or eighth.

Most are unmyelinated, 0.05 to 0.6 micrometres wide, so conduction stays under one metre per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid and glycine for the inhibitory cells, glutamate for the excitatory ones, with enkephalin and somatostatin as slower modulators.

MYELINATION:

Overwhelmingly absent: bare axons in a peripheral nerve sit in Schwann cell pockets, while here they lie naked and packed, parted only by astrocyte processes.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low per cell but high per millimetre of axon, since an unmyelinated fibre must pump sodium out along its whole surface, not leap between gaps.

PLASTICITY:

Repeated slow fibre input produces wind-up, a growing response to an unchanging stimulus.

After nerve injury that spread lets pain occupy skin beyond the injured dermatome, and burning this tract in the dorsal root entry zone operation relieves 65 to 77 percent of avulsion cases.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here build an unusually dense wall stopping peripheral Schwann cells and their axons from invading the cord.

Microglia here activate among the first anywhere after a nerve is cut, while oligodendrocytes do little.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and a pinprick would light up exactly one dermatome and stop dead at its edge.

The blurred halo around a sore spot is theirs.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

They make axoaxonic synapses, contacts onto another cell's output terminal rather than its inputs, the machinery of presynaptic inhibition.

Strong enough, it flips into a dorsal root reflex firing backwards into the skin, and bare packed axons let one fibre nudge another electrically.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: slow volleys to 20 hertz; thinly myelinated volleys to 100 hertz; descending serotonin.

• OUTPUTS: excitation and inhibition of lamina I and II, here and up to two segments away.

• STATE: membrane voltage; relayed drive per segment; inhibition level; time since last impulse.

• PARAMETERS: reach 2 segments; relay fraction 0.45; maximum inhibition 0.6; conduction 0.3 to 1.0 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: supernormal 20 milliseconds; dorsal root potential 100 to 300 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: the painful field widens beyond the injured dermatome, as in root avulsion.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to spread a pain volley from one spinal segment into the one or two segments above and below it.
Create a number variable called entrySegment with initial value 15.
Create a number variable called relay with initial value 0.45.
Create a number variable called distance with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called spread with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 2 times.
    Calculate the sum of distance and 1.
    Set spread to the result.
    Calculate the quotient of relay divided by spread.
    Set spread to the result.
    Calculate the product of spread and 0.6.
    Set inhibition to the result.
    Calculate the sum of entrySegment and distance.
    Display the result to the console.
    Calculate the difference of entrySegment and distance.
    Display the result to the console.
    Display inhibition to the console.
    Calculate the sum of distance and 1.
    Set distance to the result.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C: a cord model runs this kernel millions of times a second. */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#define NSEG 31   /* segments on one side */
#define REACH 2   /* 1 to 2 segments */
int main(void) {
    double drive[NSEG] = {0.0}, pad;
    const int entry = 15;       /* entry segment */
    const double relay = 0.45;  /* tract share */
    for (int s = 0; s < NSEG; s++) {
        int d = abs(s - entry);
        if (d <= REACH) drive[s] = relay / (1.0 + d);
    }
    drive[entry] += 1.0 - relay;
    for (int s = 0; s < NSEG; s++) {
        if (drive[s] <= 0.0) continue;
        pad = 0.6 * drive[s] / (0.25 + drive[s]);   /* saturating gate */
        printf("seg %2d drive %.3f inhib %.3f\n", s + 1, drive[s], pad);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron whose cell body sits inside a bundle of naked pain fibres, dendrites stretched lengthwise along them.

Stimulate the tract and inhibition runs backwards along the fibres that brought the pain in.


PART ELEVEN: RETINA - THE EYE'S NEURAL SHEET

CHAPTER 192. ROD PHOTORECEPTORS (NON-COG)

A single rod can announce the arrival of one particle of light, which makes it the most sensitive detector your body owns.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A rod is a slender nerve cell at the back of the eye that turns light into an electrical signal, and it is the cell of night vision.

Unlike almost every other neuron it is busiest in darkness and falls quiet in light.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A rod has four parts in a line: an outer segment holding roughly 700 to 1,000 flattened membrane discs, an inner segment full of mitochondria, a cell body, and a tiny output ending called a spherule.

SIZE:

The outer segment is about 2 micrometres across and 25 micrometres long, thinner than spider silk, and the whole cell runs about 100 to 120 micrometres end to end.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Rods are famously uniform, and single-cell gene sequencing finds one main rod population in the human retina, with central rods merely longer and thinner than peripheral ones.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Rods fill the outer nuclear layer of the retina, the light-sensitive sheet lining the back of the eyeball, with their outer segments pushed into the retinal pigment epithelium, a layer of dark support cells.

NUMBER:

About 92 million rods per eye, so roughly 184 million across both eyes, from Curcio and colleagues who counted eight human retinas.

Confidence is high for the average and moderate for any individual, because the measured range was 77.9 to 107.3 million per eye.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

In darkness a rod sits at about minus 40 millivolts on an inward dark current of 20 to 50 picoamperes, and light closes those channels to hyperpolarise it toward minus 70 millivolts.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Each rod ends in one spherule carrying a single synaptic ribbon, a bar-shaped conveyor that queues vesicles for continuous release, sitting above two horizontal cell processes and usually two rod bipolar dendrites.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The rod axon is a short unbranched spike-free fibre, tens of micrometres long in the periphery and several hundred near the fovea where it runs sideways in the fibre layer of Henle.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Rods release glutamate, the main excitatory messenger of the nervous system, continuously in the dark at hundreds of vesicles per second, and light reduces that release, so a rod speaks by falling silent.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable.

Myelin would scatter light before it reached the photoreceptors, so the retina contains no myelin-forming oligodendrocytes at all until the optic nerve head.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Photoreceptors consume more oxygen per gram than any cell in the body, their inner segments hold 55 to 65 percent of all retinal mitochondria, and most of that energy bails out the dark current, so a rod burns more fuel in darkness than in light.

PLASTICITY:

Rods do not rewire like cortical neurons but retune their gain continuously through calcium feedback onto the light cascade, and in disease they retract their spherules and sprout processes into the inner retina.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The retinal pigment epithelium does something no other support cell does: it eats the shed disc tips each dawn and rebuilds the bent form of vitamin A that rhodopsin needs, using the enzyme RPE65.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove rods and the retina keeps colour and daylight but loses the entire night, and the periphery becomes a useless grey field, because outside the central few degrees rods outnumber cones more than twenty to one.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

A rod amplifies before it integrates, since one activated rhodopsin switches on around 100 transducin molecules and each activated phosphodiesterase destroys roughly a thousand cyclic guanosine monophosphate molecules.

Falling calcium acts as a backward-travelling messenger that speeds recovery and resets sensitivity, which is dark adaptation at the molecular level.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: photons from 380 to 700 nanometres, peak 498 nanometres, as photoisomerisations per rod per second from 0.001 in starlight to above 10,000 where the rod saturates.

• OUTPUTS: graded glutamate from one ribbon onto two rod bipolar dendrites and two horizontal cell processes, plus gap junction current into neighbouring cones.

• STATE: activated rhodopsin, transducin and phosphodiesterase pools, cyclic guanosine monophosphate level, internal calcium, open channel fraction, membrane voltage.

• PARAMETERS: dark current 20 to 50 picoamperes; single photon response about 1 picoampere; quantum efficiency 0.67; about 100 million rhodopsin copies; 700 to 1,300 discs.

• TIME CONSTANTS: single photon response peaks near 150 to 200 milliseconds; disc renewal 10 days; full dark adaptation 20 to 40 minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: rhodopsin mutations cause about a quarter of dominant retinitis pigmentosa, affecting roughly 1 in 3,000 to 1 in 4,000 people, killing rods first and then starving cones.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn photons caught by a rod outer segment into the rod's graded membrane voltage.
Create a number variable called dark current with initial value 30.
Create a number variable called single photon amplitude with initial value 0.7.
Create a number variable called half saturating suppression with initial value 12.
Create a number variable called decay factor with initial value 0.994.
Create a number variable called suppression with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called working value with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called voltage trace with initial value empty list.
For each photon count in the list of photons caught this millisecond, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of photon count and single photon amplitude.
    Set working value to that product.
    Calculate the sum of suppression and working value.
    Set suppression to that sum.
    Calculate the product of suppression and decay factor.
    Set suppression to that product.
    Calculate the sum of suppression and half saturating suppression.
    Set working value to that sum.
    Calculate the quotient of suppression divided by working value.
    Set working value to that quotient.
    Calculate the product of working value and negative 30.
    Set working value to that product.
    Calculate the difference of working value and 40.
    Add that difference to the end of voltage trace.
    If suppression is greater than 300, then perform the following actions.
        Display "the rod is saturated and can report nothing further" to the console.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Return voltage trace to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because a rod's job is stochastic and the standard library
# alone supplies the random draws, so this sample runs anywhere unchanged.
import math, random

DARK_PA, SPR_PA, HALF_PA = 30.0, 0.7, 12.0   # dark current, one photon, half saturation
TAU_R, TAU_F = 80.0, 300.0                   # rise and fall constants, milliseconds
QE, RATE = 0.67, 0.01                        # quantum efficiency, photons per millisecond

kernel = [math.exp(-i / TAU_F) - math.exp(-i / TAU_R) for i in range(1500)]
peak = max(kernel)
kernel = [SPR_PA * v / peak for v in kernel]  # single photon response in picoamperes

random.seed(3)
linear = [0.0] * 2500
for ms in range(1000):
    if random.random() < RATE * QE:           # so rare that photons arrive singly
        for j, k in enumerate(kernel):
            linear[ms + j] += k

for ms in range(0, 1000, 200):
    s = DARK_PA * linear[ms] / (linear[ms] + HALF_PA)      # saturating suppression
    print("t=%4d ms  current=%5.2f pA  Vm=%6.2f mV"
          % (ms, DARK_PA - s, -40.0 - 30.0 * s / DARK_PA))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

If a cell is depolarised in the dark, releases glutamate all night, saturates in daylight, reports single photons by going quiet, and hands its worn tip to a pigmented epithelium each dawn, it is a rod.

CHAPTER 193. CONE PHOTORECEPTORS (NON-COG)

Every word you have ever read arrived through cones, and almost all of them through a patch of retina no wider than the head of a pin.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A cone is a photoreceptor built for daylight, speed and colour rather than sensitivity.

It gives you sharp detail, fast motion and all of colour vision, and it never saturates however bright the day becomes.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A cone follows the rod's four-part plan, but its outer segment is a tapering cone of membrane folds that stay attached to the surface instead of sealing into free discs, and its output ending is a broad flat pedicle rather than a small spherule.

SIZE:

A foveal cone inner segment is only about 2.0 to 2.5 micrometres wide with an outer segment 30 to 50 micrometres long, while peripheral cones swell to 5 to 8 micrometres wide with short squat outer segments.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

By shape, cones form a smooth gradient from slim foveal to stout peripheral rather than two clean classes; by pigment they split into the short, middle and long wavelength types, which are the next three entries here and are subdivisions of this same population, not extra cells.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cones occupy the outer nuclear layer across the whole retina, with outer segments embedded in the retinal pigment epithelium at the same neural-to-epithelial interface the rods use.

NUMBER:

About 4.6 million cones per eye on the Curcio count, so roughly 9.2 million across both eyes, inside the sectional budget of about 5 million per eye.

Confidence is high for the mean and moderate for individuals, since the range was 4.08 to 5.29 million per eye and peak foveal density ran from about 100,000 to 324,000 per square millimetre around a mean of 199,000.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

A cone rests near minus 40 millivolts in darkness on a dark current of 20 to 40 picoamperes and hyperpolarises only to about minus 55 or minus 60 millivolts in bright light.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

One cone pedicle holds around 20 ribbons in the fovea and 40 to 50 in the periphery, each ribbon over a triad of two horizontal cell processes and one or more invaginating ON bipolar dendrites, with flat basal contacts feeding OFF bipolar cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The cone axon is a thick, unmyelinated, spike-free fibre that conducts passively, so it acts as a low-pass filter, gently smoothing the fastest flicker before it reaches the pedicle.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Cones release glutamate steadily in darkness and reduce it in light, and the same molecule reaches ON bipolar cells through the sign-inverting mGluR6 receptor and OFF bipolar cells through sign-conserving AMPA and kainate receptors, so one chemical carries two opposite messages.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable.

Cones lie directly in the light path and any myelin would scatter the image, so no myelin-forming cells exist in the retina until the optic nerve head.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Cones pack dense mitochondria into an ellipsoid beneath the outer segment that doubles as a microlens, they draw oxygen almost entirely from the choroid behind the retina, and foveal cones are especially exposed because the fovea has no retinal capillaries of its own.

PLASTICITY:

Cone gain control is fast and continuous, following Weber's law so the response tracks relative rather than absolute change in light, and adaptive optics imaging shows individual cones shifting position over weeks even in healthy eyes.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Cones have a private second visual cycle that rods lack, in which Muller cells regenerate the bent form of vitamin A locally, which is why cones recover from bleaching in seconds while rods need many minutes.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete cones and the retina keeps night vision but loses colour, reading, faces and any detail finer than a coarse blur, and acuity collapses from a normal one minute of arc to near legal blindness.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Cone inner segments act as optical waveguides, which is why light entering the edge of the pupil looks dimmer, the effect named after Stiles and Crawford.

Cones run calcium-dependent gain control within milliseconds, receive horizontal cell feedback that sharpens their output before it leaves the pedicle, and couple to each other and to rods through connexin 36 gap junctions.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: photons from 380 to 700 nanometres at about 100 to more than 1,000,000 photoisomerisations per cone per second, plus horizontal cell feedback of a few millivolts.

• OUTPUTS: graded glutamate onto roughly ten bipolar types and two horizontal cell types, and gap junction current to neighbouring cones and rods.

• STATE: bleached pigment fraction, transducin and phosphodiesterase pools, cyclic guanosine monophosphate level, internal calcium, membrane voltage, adaptation gain.

• PARAMETERS: dark current 20 to 40 picoamperes; 20 to 50 ribbons per pedicle; peak foveal density about 199,000 per square millimetre; sensitivity about one hundredth of a rod.

• TIME CONSTANTS: response peak 20 to 50 milliseconds; bleach recovery about 100 milliseconds; cone dark adaptation 5 to 10 minutes; outer segment renewal about 10 days.

• FAILURE MODE: achromatopsia, a total loss of cone function affecting roughly 1 in 30,000 people and usually caused by CNGA3 or CNGB3 mutations, leaves night vision intact but removes colour and acuity.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute a cone's fast flash response after its gain has been set by the background light.
Create a number variable called dark current with initial value 25.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 0.692.
Create a number variable called first stage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called second stage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called half saturating signal with initial value 2.5.
Create a number variable called working value with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called current trace with initial value empty list.
For each flash strength in the list of photoisomerisations per time step, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the product of flash strength and gain.
    Set working value to that product.
    Calculate the sum of first stage and working value.
    Set first stage to that sum.
    Calculate the sum of second stage and half saturating signal.
    Set working value to that sum.
    Calculate the quotient of second stage divided by working value.
    Set working value to that quotient.
    Calculate the product of working value and dark current.
    Set working value to that product.
    Calculate the difference of dark current and working value.
    Add that difference to the end of current trace.
    Calculate the product of first stage and 0.92.
    Set second stage to that product.
    Calculate the product of first stage and 0.08.
    Set first stage to that product.
End the loop.
Return current trace to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C is chosen because a whole-retina simulation steps millions of cones per
   video frame. Build with: cc -std=c99 cone.c -o cone                        */
#include <stdio.h>
#define DT        0.001    /* time step in seconds                            */
#define TAU_R     0.012    /* first cascade stage constant, seconds           */
#define TAU_D     0.022    /* second cascade stage constant, seconds          */
#define DARK_CUR  25.0     /* dark current in picoamperes                     */
#define I_HALF    4500.0   /* background giving half gain, isomerisations/s   */
#define SAT       2.5      /* half saturating internal signal, model units    */

int main(void) {
    double x = 0.0, y = 0.0;                     /* two stages of the cascade */
    double gain = 1.0 / (1.0 + 2000.0 / I_HALF); /* steady background of 2000 */
    int t;
    for (t = 0; t < 120; t++) {
        if (t == 20) x += 600.0 * gain;          /* one brief flash           */
        double suppressed = DARK_CUR * y / (y + SAT);
        if (t % 10 == 0)
            printf("t=%3.0f ms  current=%6.2f pA  Vm=%7.2f mV\n", t * DT * 1000.0,
                   DARK_CUR - suppressed, -40.0 - 20.0 * suppressed / DARK_CUR);
        double dx = -x / TAU_R, dy = (x - y) / TAU_D;
        x += dx * DT;
        y += dy * DT;
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A cone is the only photoreceptor with a wide flat pedicle carrying dozens of ribbons, a mitochondrial lens in its neck, and a response that is over before a rod's has properly begun.

CHAPTER 194. S-CONES, OR SHORT-WAVELENGTH CONES (Short-Wave Blue-Catching Cell) (NON-COG)

There is a tiny blue blind spot at the exact centre of your gaze, and it exists because this cell refuses to live there.

The letter S is a one-character barcode that teaches nothing on its own, so the wavelength dimension is written into the name instead.

Short-Wave places this cell at the blue end of the visible spectrum, with a pigment peaking near 420 to 440 nanometres.

Blue-Catching names the perceptual work it starts.

Cell marks it as a photoreceptor, and the name warns that this is a rare and coarse channel, since these cells are under ten percent of all cones and are absent from the very centre of the fovea, which is why the sharpest point of vision is blue-blind.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An S-cone is the rarest of the three colour cones, tuned to short-wavelength light that we call violet and blue.

It supplies one half of the blue-versus-yellow channel, the oldest colour comparison in the primate brain, and contributes almost nothing to brightness or fine detail.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

An S-cone looks much like any other cone but tends to have a slightly taller, more slender inner segment and a pedicle that sits a little deeper in the outer plexiform layer.

SIZE:

Inner segment about 2 to 3 micrometres wide near the fovea and 5 to 8 micrometres in the periphery, with an outer segment of 10 to 40 micrometres, matching neighbouring cones.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

None are recognised, and single-cell sequencing of human retina finds one S-cone transcriptional class, although the S-cones inside the central one degree differ from peripheral ones in packing and connection.

WHERE IT LIVES:

S-cones sit in the outer nuclear layer everywhere except the very centre, where a roughly 0.34 degree S-cone-free zone leaves the foveola with no blue sensitivity at all.

NUMBER:

Roughly 5 to 10 percent of cones are S-cones, so taking 7 percent gives about 320,000 per eye and about 640,000 across both eyes.

Confidence is moderate, resting on adaptive optics imaging and immunostaining rather than a single large count, and the percentage rises modestly from centre to periphery.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Electrically an S-cone behaves like any cone, resting near minus 40 millivolts in darkness and hyperpolarising in light, but its peak sensitivity lies near 420 nanometres rather than in the yellow-green.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The S-cone pedicle drives a dedicated blue-ON bipolar cell that reaches past the L and M pedicles to find it, and that bipolar drives the small bistratified ganglion cell, which is excited by blue and inhibited by yellow.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A short, unmyelinated, passively conducting axon identical in kind to other cone axons, displaced sideways into the fibre layer of Henle near the fovea.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, released tonically in darkness and reduced by light, with no transmitter unique to S-cones.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable.

Like every retinal neuron the S-cone is unmyelinated, because myelin in the light path would blur the image before it was ever captured.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The same very high oxidative demand as other cones, supplied by the choroid, with the added burden that short-wavelength light is the most energetic in the visible range and does the most photochemical damage.

PLASTICITY:

S-cone sensitivity declines measurably with age faster than L and M sensitivity, partly through yellowing of the lens and partly through genuine loss of S-cone signal.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The macular pigments lutein and zeaxanthin, concentrated in Muller cell fibres over the central retina, absorb exactly the blue light S-cones use, so the support tissue around them acts as a permanent blue filter that no other cone class has to see through.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove S-cones and the world does not turn grey; it loses blues and violets, so skies, veins and bruises turn dull, and the retina keeps acuity and brightness untouched.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

S-cones are laid down first in fetal development and lay out a quasi-regular lattice by mutual repulsion, an example of a cell type patterning its own mosaic.

They are largely excluded from the connexin 36 gap junction network that links L and M cones, which keeps the blue signal from being smeared into the luminance signal.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: photons 380 to 540 nanometres, peak near 420 nanometres, plus feedback from H2 horizontal cells.

• OUTPUTS: graded glutamate to blue-ON bipolar cells, to some OFF midget bipolar cells and to H2 horizontal cells.

• STATE: bleached pigment fraction, cascade activation, cyclic guanosine monophosphate level, internal calcium, membrane voltage.

• PARAMETERS: peak wavelength 419 to 426 nanometres; 5 to 10 percent of cones; S-free zone radius about 0.17 degrees; gene OPN1SW on chromosome 7.

• TIME CONSTANTS: flash response peak 20 to 50 milliseconds; the blue-yellow channel is the slowest colour channel, resolving flicker only to about 10 hertz.

• FAILURE MODE: tritan colour deficiency, from OPN1SW mutations with incomplete penetrance and an incidence near 1 in 500, removes blue-yellow discrimination while leaving red-green intact.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to report how many S-cones sit at a given distance from the centre of the fovea.
Create a number variable called free zone radius with initial value 0.17.
Create a number variable called far fraction with initial value 0.07.
Create a number variable called s fraction with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called cone density with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called working value with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called s cone counts with initial value empty list.
For each eccentricity in the list of test eccentricities in degrees, perform the following operations.
    Set cone density to the smooth cone density fit evaluated at eccentricity.
    If eccentricity is less than free zone radius, then perform the following actions.
        Set s fraction to 0.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the difference of eccentricity and free zone radius.
        Set working value to that difference.
        Set working value to one minus the exponential decay of working value over 0.30.
        Calculate the product of far fraction and working value.
        Set s fraction to that product.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of cone density and s fraction.
    Add that product to the end of s cone counts.
    Display that product to the console.
End the loop.
Return s cone counts to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because this is a short numeric table where clarity beats speed.
import math

def sensitivity(nm, lmax, width=0.032):
    """Log-Gaussian stand-in for a cone absorption spectrum."""
    x = math.log10(nm) - math.log10(lmax)
    return math.exp(-(x * x) / (2.0 * width * width))

def cone_density(ecc):
    """Smooth fit to human cone density, cones per square millimetre."""
    return 183000.0 * math.exp(-ecc / 0.6) + 12000.0 * math.exp(-ecc / 8.0) + 4000.0

S_FREE_DEG, S_FAR = 0.17, 0.07     # S-free radius, and S share far from centre

def s_fraction(ecc):
    if ecc < S_FREE_DEG:
        return 0.0
    return S_FAR * (1.0 - math.exp(-(ecc - S_FREE_DEG) / 0.30))

print("ecc(deg)   cones/mm2   S-cones/mm2")
for ecc in (0.0, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0, 10.0, 20.0):
    d = cone_density(ecc)
    print("%8.1f %11.0f %13.0f" % (ecc, d, d * s_fraction(ecc)))

print("S sensitivity at 420 nm: %.3f" % sensitivity(420.0, 420.0))
print("S sensitivity at 560 nm: %.5f" % sensitivity(560.0, 420.0))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cone missing from the centre of the fovea, the only one with its own private bipolar cell that reaches over its neighbours, and the only one whose pigment gene sits on an ordinary chromosome rather than the X.

CHAPTER 195. M-CONES, OR MIDDLE-WAVELENGTH CONES (Middle-Wave Green-Catching Cell) (NON-COG)

Call it the green cone if you like, but it peaks in yellow-green and its real job is to disagree, very slightly, with the cone next door.

M alone is an alphabetical address, so the name states the position on the spectrum that the letter was standing in for.

Middle-Wave marks a pigment peaking around 530 to 545 nanometres, in the centre of the visible band.

Green-Catching names the sensation this channel feeds.

Cell marks it as a photoreceptor, and together with its long-wave partner it carries the bulk of daylight vision, the two types making up more than ninety percent of all cones.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An M-cone is a colour cone tuned to middle-wavelength light, peaking near 530 nanometres.

Together with the L-cone it builds both the red-green colour channel and the brightness channel, and red-green vision works only because the tiny difference between their outputs is amplified.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

An M-cone is structurally indistinguishable from an L-cone under a microscope, sharing the same tapering outer segment, mitochondrial ellipsoid and flat pedicle.

SIZE:

Identical to cones generally: about 2.0 to 2.5 micrometres wide in the fovea, 5 to 8 micrometres in the periphery, with outer segments of 10 to 50 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There are no shape subtypes, but there is genetic variety, since people carry one to several OPN1MW gene copies in a tandem array and hybrid genes formed by unequal crossing over produce pigments with shifted peaks.

WHERE IT LIVES:

M-cones are spread through the outer nuclear layer from the very centre of the foveola to the ora serrata at the retinal edge, mixed randomly with L-cones rather than arranged in a pattern.

NUMBER:

Taking about 93 percent of cones as L or M and an average L to M ratio near two to one gives roughly 1.4 million M-cones per eye and about 2.9 million across both eyes.

Confidence is low for any individual, because measured L to M ratios in colour-normal men run from 1.1 to 1 up to 16.5 to 1, a fortyfold spread, with no effect on colour discrimination.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Electrically an M-cone is an ordinary cone, resting near minus 40 millivolts in darkness with fast responses peaking in 20 to 50 milliseconds, differing from an L-cone only in which photons it absorbs.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

In the central retina one M-cone drives one ON midget bipolar cell and one OFF midget bipolar cell privately, a one-to-one wiring found nowhere else in the nervous system.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A short, thick, unmyelinated, spike-free cone axon that conducts passively, displaced sideways into the fibre layer of Henle in the central retina.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, released tonically in darkness, with the sign inverted at ON bipolar cells by mGluR6 and preserved at OFF bipolar cells by AMPA and kainate receptors.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable.

No retinal neuron is myelinated, because a fatty sheath in the light path would scatter the image before capture.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The same extreme oxidative demand as other cones, met by the choroid, and no measurable difference from L-cones has been reported.

PLASTICITY:

The M-cone signal is normalised by the visual system rather than by the cell, which is why people with wildly different L to M ratios still call the same wavelength yellow.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

M-cones use the standard cone support arrangement, the retinal pigment epithelium plus the Muller cell visual cycle, with nothing special to report; the only asymmetry is that macular pigment absorbs blue light and so barely filters M-cone input.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove M-cones and the retina keeps brightness, acuity and blue-yellow vision but loses red-green entirely, which is deuteranopia; reds, greens, oranges and browns collapse into one confusable band.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The M-cone's most important property is not electrical at all: its pigment sits only about 28 nanometres from the L pigment, so the retina must extract a tiny difference from two nearly identical signals, and the private midget wiring exists to preserve that difference.

Because M and L cones are randomly interleaved, every local patch has its own L to M ratio, and the visual system must calibrate itself to the mosaic it happens to have been given.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: photons 450 to 640 nanometres, peak near 530 nanometres, plus H1 horizontal cell feedback and gap junction current from neighbours.

• OUTPUTS: graded glutamate to one ON and one OFF midget bipolar cell centrally, to diffuse bipolar cells, and to H1 horizontal cells.

• STATE: bleached pigment fraction, cascade activation, cyclic guanosine monophosphate level, internal calcium, membrane voltage, adaptation gain.

• PARAMETERS: peak wavelength 530 to 534 nanometres; gene OPN1MW at Xq28; about 31 percent of cones on average, range 6 to 45 percent.

• TIME CONSTANTS: flash response peak 20 to 50 milliseconds; the red-green channel resolves flicker to roughly 10 to 15 hertz, far slower than the luminance channel.

• FAILURE MODE: deuteranomaly and deuteranopia together affect about 6 percent of men of northern European ancestry, caused by unequal recombination in the X-linked opsin array.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to build a patch of the L and M cone mosaic and measure the local middle-wavelength share.
Create a number variable called probability of L with initial value 0.667.
Create a number variable called patch size with initial value 400.
Create a number variable called m count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called local share with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called mosaic with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 400 times.
    If a fresh random number between zero and one is less than probability of L, then perform the following actions.
        Add "L" to the end of mosaic.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Add "M" to the end of mosaic.
        Calculate the sum of m count and 1.
        Set m count to that sum.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Calculate the quotient of m count divided by patch size.
Set local share to that quotient.
Display local share to the console.
If local share is less than 0.1, then perform the following actions.
    Display "this patch is nearly red-green blind by mosaic alone" to the console.
End the conditional block.
Return mosaic to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

// JavaScript is chosen because a cone mosaic demo belongs in a browser next to
// a picture of the mosaic itself, with no build step at all. Run with: node m.js
const W = 0.032;                                   // log-Gaussian spectral width
function sensitivity(nm, lmax) {
  const x = Math.log10(nm) - Math.log10(lmax);
  return Math.exp(-(x * x) / (2 * W * W));
}
const L_MAX = 558, M_MAX = 530;

// A test light made of three narrow bands: [wavelength nm, radiance].
const light = [[450, 1.0], [530, 1.0], [610, 1.0]];
const excite = (lmax) => light.reduce((s, [nm, p]) => s + p * sensitivity(nm, lmax), 0);
const L = excite(L_MAX), M = excite(M_MAX);
console.log("L = " + L.toFixed(4) + "   M = " + M.toFixed(4));
console.log("midget red-green signal L minus M = " + (L - M).toFixed(4));

// A 20 by 20 patch at a 2 to 1 L to M ratio, then count isolated M-cones.
const N = 20, mosaic = [];
let mCount = 0;
for (let i = 0; i < N * N; i++) {
  const isL = Math.random() < 2 / 3;
  mosaic.push(isL ? "L" : "M");
  if (!isL) mCount++;
}
let isolated = 0;
for (let r = 1; r < N - 1; r++)
  for (let c = 1; c < N - 1; c++)
    if (mosaic[r * N + c] === "M" &&
        ![mosaic[(r-1)*N+c], mosaic[(r+1)*N+c], mosaic[r*N+c-1], mosaic[r*N+c+1]].includes("M"))
      isolated++;
console.log("M-cones: " + mCount + " of " + N * N + ", isolated: " + isolated);

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

An M-cone cannot be recognised by shape at all, only by the fact that it absorbs about 28 nanometres shorter than its identical-looking neighbour, and that single small difference is the whole of red-green vision.

CHAPTER 196. L-CONES, OR LONG-WAVELENGTH CONES (Long-Wave Red-Catching Cell) (NON-COG)

The cone we call red actually peaks in yellow-green, and it is the most numerous colour detector in your eye by a wide margin.

L is a letter, not a lesson, so the name carries the spectral fact directly.

Long-Wave marks a pigment peaking near 560 to 565 nanometres, the far end of the visible range.

Red-Catching names the percept it serves.

Cell marks it as a photoreceptor, and the name sits deliberately alongside its middle-wave and short-wave siblings so the single dimension separating the three, the wavelength each is tuned to, is visible in all three names at once, this type being the most numerous and outnumbering the middle-wave type roughly two to one in many eyes.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An L-cone is a colour cone tuned to long-wavelength light, peaking near 558 nanometres, which is yellow-green rather than red.

With the M-cone it carries the red-green colour channel and most of the brightness signal that drives acuity and motion.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

An L-cone is structurally identical to an M-cone, with the same tapering outer segment, mitochondrial ellipsoid and broad flat pedicle, and no microscope can separate the two.

SIZE:

The standard cone dimensions: about 2.0 to 2.5 micrometres wide in the fovea, 5 to 8 micrometres in the periphery, with outer segments of 10 to 50 micrometres.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two genuine spectral variants exist, because position 180 of the OPN1LW protein carries either serine or alanine, and the alanine version peaks about 4 nanometres shorter.

WHERE IT LIVES:

L-cones are present from the exact centre of the foveola, where they and M-cones alone are packed at up to about 199,000 cones per square millimetre, out to the ora serrata at the retinal edge.

NUMBER:

Taking about 93 percent of cones as L or M and an average L to M ratio near two to one gives roughly 2.9 million L-cones per eye and about 5.7 million across both eyes.

Confidence is low for any individual, because measured ratios in colour-normal men span 1.1 to 1 up to 16.5 to 1, so some people carry over four million L-cones in one eye.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

An L-cone behaves like any cone, resting near minus 40 millivolts in darkness with a flash response peaking in 20 to 50 milliseconds, and differs only in which photons it absorbs.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

In the central retina one L-cone drives a private pair of midget bipolar cells, one ON and one OFF, which in turn drive single midget ganglion cells, giving a labelled line from one cone to the brain.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A short, thick, unmyelinated, passively conducting cone axon, swept sideways into the fibre layer of Henle wherever the fovea has displaced the inner retina.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, released tonically in darkness, inverted at ON bipolar cells by the mGluR6 receptor and preserved at OFF bipolar cells by AMPA and kainate receptors.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable.

Myelin in the light path would scatter the image, so the retina contains no myelin-forming cells until the optic nerve head.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The same extreme oxidative demand as other cones, supplied by the choroid, with the foveal L-cones especially vulnerable because the foveal avascular zone has no capillaries of its own.

PLASTICITY:

L-cone signals are normalised centrally rather than locally, so people with very different L to M ratios agree on which wavelength looks pure yellow, a striking case of the brain calibrating to its own sensor array.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Standard cone support applies, the retinal pigment epithelium plus the Muller cell cone visual cycle, and nothing about L-cone glia is special; the honest statement is that no L-specific glial specialisation has been demonstrated.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove L-cones and the retina keeps acuity and blue-yellow vision but loses red-green and dims the long-wavelength end of the spectrum, which is protanopia, in which deep reds look almost black.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Spectral tuning in an L-cone is set by three amino acid positions in the opsin protein, sites 180, 277 and 285, whose substitutions shift the peak by roughly 4, 9 and 15 nanometres respectively, a molecular dial for colour.

Only one of the two X-linked opsin genes is expressed per cone, chosen stochastically by a locus control region, so each cone effectively flips a coin during development to decide whether it will be L or M.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: photons 490 to 700 nanometres, peak near 558 nanometres, plus H1 horizontal cell feedback and gap junction current from neighbours.

• OUTPUTS: graded glutamate to private ON and OFF midget bipolar cells centrally, to diffuse bipolar cells, and to H1 horizontal cells.

• STATE: bleached pigment fraction, cascade activation, cyclic guanosine monophosphate level, internal calcium, membrane voltage, adaptation gain.

• PARAMETERS: peak wavelength 555 to 560 nanometres, shifted about 4 nanometres by the serine or alanine at site 180; gene OPN1LW at Xq28; about 62 percent of cones on average.

• TIME CONSTANTS: flash response peak 20 to 50 milliseconds; luminance flicker resolved to about 60 hertz, far faster than the red-green channel it also serves.

• FAILURE MODE: protanomaly and protanopia together affect roughly 2 percent of men, and blue-cone monochromacy, in which the whole L and M array is silenced, affects about 1 in 100,000 and leaves acuity near 20/100 with nystagmus.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to predict a long-wavelength pigment's peak sensitivity from its three spectral tuning sites.
Create a number variable called base peak with initial value 530.
Create a number variable called site 180 shift with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called site 277 shift with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called site 285 shift with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called peak wavelength with initial value 0.
If the residue at site 180 is equal to "Ser", then perform the following actions.
    Set site 180 shift to 4.
End the conditional block.
If the residue at site 277 is equal to "Tyr", then perform the following actions.
    Set site 277 shift to 9.
End the conditional block.
If the residue at site 285 is equal to "Thr", then perform the following actions.
    Set site 285 shift to 15.
End the conditional block.
Calculate the sum of base peak and site 180 shift.
Set peak wavelength to that sum.
Calculate the sum of peak wavelength and site 277 shift.
Set peak wavelength to that sum.
Calculate the sum of peak wavelength and site 285 shift.
Set peak wavelength to that sum.
Display peak wavelength to the console.
Calculate the difference of peak wavelength and 530.
If that difference is less than 12, then perform the following actions.
    Display "red-green discrimination will be anomalous" to the console.
End the conditional block.
Return peak wavelength to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the model is a small lookup and a sum, where a reader
# checking the biology matters far more than execution speed.
BASE = 530.0                       # the middle-wavelength backbone, nanometres
SHIFTS = {("180", "Ser"): 4.0, ("180", "Ala"): 0.0,
          ("277", "Tyr"): 9.0, ("277", "Phe"): 0.0,
          ("285", "Thr"): 15.0, ("285", "Ala"): 0.0}

def lambda_max(s180, s277, s285):
    """Peak sensitivity from the three tuning sites of the opsin protein."""
    total = BASE
    for site, residue in (("180", s180), ("277", s277), ("285", s285)):
        total += SHIFTS[(site, residue)]
    return total

PIGMENTS = {"normal L, serine 180": ("Ser", "Tyr", "Thr"),
            "normal L, alanine 180": ("Ala", "Tyr", "Thr"),
            "normal M": ("Ala", "Phe", "Ala"),
            "anomalous L-M hybrid": ("Ser", "Tyr", "Ala")}

for name, residues in PIGMENTS.items():
    print("%-22s peak = %5.1f nm" % (name, lambda_max(*residues)))

normal_gap = lambda_max("Ser", "Tyr", "Thr") - lambda_max("Ala", "Phe", "Ala")
anom_gap = lambda_max("Ser", "Tyr", "Ala") - lambda_max("Ala", "Phe", "Ala")
print("normal L minus M separation: %.1f nm" % normal_gap)
print("anomalous separation:        %.1f nm" % anom_gap)
print("red-green sensitivity retained: %.0f%%" % (100.0 * anom_gap / normal_gap))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the most common cone, invisible to anatomy, defined entirely by three amino acids on an X-linked gene, and it is the reason a ripe strawberry looks different from its leaves.

CHAPTER 197. ROD BIPOLAR CELLS (COG)

This small cell throws away most of what it hears, and that act of deliberate deafness is what lets you see by starlight.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A rod bipolar cell is the single relay that carries the rod signal into the inner retina.

It performs two computations: it flips the sign of the rod message, so that light becomes excitation, and it applies a threshold that discards the constant chemical noise of the rods while keeping the rare genuine single-photon events.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is a small, neat cell with a bushy dendritic tuft that pushes up into the invaginations of many rod spherules, a compact cell body at the outer edge of the inner nuclear layer, and a long axon ending in swollen terminals at the very bottom of the inner plexiform layer.

SIZE:

Cell body about 7 to 10 micrometres across, dendritic field 10 to 30 micrometres wide, and an axon 40 to 80 micrometres long crossing the whole inner plexiform layer.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Classically there is exactly one rod bipolar type, which is unusual in a retina with a dozen cone bipolar types; recent single-cell sequencing hints at internal heterogeneity, but the evidence for true human subtypes is weak and should be treated as unresolved.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell body sits in the outermost tier of the inner nuclear layer, the dendrites reach up into the outer plexiform layer to meet rod spherules, and the axon terminals occupy sublamina 5, the innermost stratum of the inner plexiform layer.

NUMBER:

Rod to rod bipolar convergence runs from about 10 to 1 near the fovea to about 30 to 1 far out, and peak density in primate retina is 15,000 to 20,000 cells per square millimetre at 1 to 3 millimetres from the centre.

Dividing 92 million rods by an average convergence near 20 gives roughly 4 to 5 million rod bipolar cells per eye, so 8 to 10 million across both eyes, which is about 13 percent of the bipolar budget.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The rod bipolar cell does not fire action potentials in the usual sense; it holds a graded membrane potential near minus 45 to minus 55 millivolts and depolarises by 10 to 25 millivolts in response to light.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Its dendrites invaginate 15 to 45 rod spherules, and its axon terminals form ribbon synapses onto two amacrine cells: the glycine-releasing AII cell and the GABA-releasing A17 cell, which feeds inhibition straight back onto the same terminal.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single thin unmyelinated axon of 40 to 80 micrometres that conducts passively and ends in two to four bulbous terminals, each holding several ribbons.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The cell releases glutamate from its terminals, and receives glutamate at its dendrites through mGluR6, a metabotropic receptor that inverts the signal, plus GABA at its terminals through GABA-A and GABA-C receptors from A17 cells.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable.

Its entire axon lies inside the retina, which contains no myelin-forming oligodendrocytes, and at 40 to 80 micrometres there would be nothing to gain from insulating it.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate by retinal standards and far below a photoreceptor's, though continuous graded transmitter release at ribbon synapses makes the axon terminal the cell's main energy sink, with mitochondria clustered there.

PLASTICITY:

The threshold at the rod-to-bipolar synapse is not fixed; it shifts with background light so that the cell stops discarding signals when photons become plentiful, an adaptive change in the computation itself.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Muller cell processes wrap the rod bipolar axon terminals tightly and clear released glutamate through the EAAT1 transporter, which matters more here than elsewhere because these terminals release continuously rather than in bursts.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove rod bipolar cells and the rods still work perfectly but nothing downstream ever hears them, so the inner retina becomes purely a daylight machine and night vision vanishes completely.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its defining trick is a nonlinear threshold applied to each rod input separately before summation, which is essential because 20 noisy rods pooled linearly would drown the one rod that actually caught a photon.

The signal passes through a G protein cascade rather than a direct ion channel, which is why the rod pathway is slow, and reciprocal inhibition from A17 amacrine cells shapes each terminal locally without involving the cell body.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from 15 to 45 rod spherules at 0 to 100 micromolar in the cleft, and GABA feedback from A17 amacrine cells.

• OUTPUTS: graded glutamate from two to four ribbon terminals onto AII and A17 amacrine cells in sublamina 5.

• STATE: mGluR6 occupancy, G protein alpha-o activation, TRPM1 open fraction, membrane voltage, terminal calcium, releasable vesicle pool.

• PARAMETERS: convergence 15 to 45 rods; resting potential minus 45 to minus 55 millivolts; light response 10 to 25 millivolts; threshold near 1 single-photon response; density 15,000 to 20,000 per square millimetre at peak.

• TIME CONSTANTS: response onset 20 to 60 milliseconds and time to peak 100 to 200 milliseconds, set by the G protein cascade; threshold readjusts over seconds to minutes with background light.

• FAILURE MODE: complete congenital stationary night blindness from mutations in NYX, TRPM1, GRM6, GPR179 or LRIT3, with NYX and TRPM1 together accounting for over three quarters of cases, and the same signature appears in melanoma-associated retinopathy when antibodies attack TRPM1.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert many noisy rod inputs into one rod bipolar cell current using a threshold before summation.
Create a number variable called threshold with initial value 1.0.
Create a number variable called steepness with initial value 0.18.
Create a number variable called maximum conductance with initial value 60.
Create a number variable called half opening drive with initial value 8.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 6.
Create a number variable called working value with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called conductance with initial value 0.
For each rod signal in the list of rod inputs, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of rod signal and threshold.
    Set working value to that difference.
    Calculate the quotient of working value divided by steepness.
    Set working value to that quotient.
    Set working value to the logistic function of working value.
    Calculate the sum of drive and working value.
    Set drive to that sum.
End the loop.
Calculate the sum of drive and half opening drive.
Set working value to that sum.
Calculate the quotient of drive divided by working value.
Set working value to that quotient.
Calculate the product of working value and maximum conductance.
Set conductance to that product.
Display conductance to the console.
Return conductance to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the claim here is statistical, and the standard library
# gives the random draws and arithmetic needed to prove it in a few lines.
import math, random

N_RODS = 25        # rods converging on one rod bipolar cell in mid periphery
NOISE_SD = 0.30    # continuous dark noise of one rod, in single-photon units
THETA = 1.00       # half point of the synaptic threshold, same units
SLOPE = 0.18       # steepness of that threshold
OFFSET = 6.0       # tonic drive so the model never runs below zero
G_MAX = 60.0       # maximum TRPM1 conductance, picosiemens
K_HALF = 8.0       # drive that opens half the TRPM1 channels
FLASH = 2.0        # mean photoisomerisations shared across the 25 rods

def synapse(x, thresholded):
    if not thresholded:
        return x
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(x - THETA) / SLOPE))

def trial(mean_photons, thresholded):
    drive = OFFSET
    for _ in range(N_RODS):
        hit = 1 if random.random() < mean_photons / N_RODS else 0
        drive += synapse(hit + random.gauss(0.0, NOISE_SD), thresholded)
    return G_MAX * drive / (drive + K_HALF)

def stats(v):
    m = sum(v) / len(v)
    return m, sum((x - m) ** 2 for x in v) / (len(v) - 1)

def d_prime(thresholded, n=4000):
    md, vd = stats([trial(0.0, thresholded) for _ in range(n)])
    ml, vl = stats([trial(FLASH, thresholded) for _ in range(n)])
    return (ml - md) / math.sqrt(0.5 * (vd + vl))

random.seed(7)
print("linear synapse      d-prime = %.2f" % d_prime(False))
print("thresholded synapse d-prime = %.2f" % d_prime(True))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only bipolar cell that touches rods and nothing else, the only one stained strongly by protein kinase C alpha, and the only one whose axon reaches the innermost stripe of the inner plexiform layer to hand its signal to an amacrine cell rather than to a ganglion cell.

CHAPTER 198. CONE BIPOLAR CELLS (COG)

Every cone in your eye hands its signal to a committee of about ten different relay cells, and each member hears the same whisper and files a different report.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A cone bipolar cell is a second-order neuron, meaning the first cell in the chain after the light-catching photoreceptor, and its job is not to relay but to split, fanning one cone's voltage into parallel channels that separately carry brightening, darkening, fine detail, coarse motion and colour.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body sits in the inner nuclear layer, the middle band of the retina, with a dendritic bush above that ends either inside a cone's terminal, called an invaginating contact, or flat against its base, called a basal contact, a difference that predicts the cell's whole physiology.

SIZE:

The cell body is 5 to 10 micrometres across, about one tenth the width of a human hair, the whole cell stands 30 to 70 micrometres tall, dendritic fields run from about 5 to 100 micrometres, and each cell carries 15 to 100 output ribbon synapses.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Primate anatomy defines flat midget bipolar, invaginating midget bipolar, diffuse types DB1, DB2, DB3a, DB3b, DB4, DB5 and DB6, the blue-cone bipolar and the giant bipolar, about eleven to twelve cone-driven types, and human gene-expression atlases recover a comparable set of roughly fourteen bipolar clusters once the rod bipolar cell is included.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The soma occupies the outer half of the inner nuclear layer from the foveal slope to the ora serrata at the retina's edge, with dendrites in the outer plexiform layer and terminals in the inner plexiform layer, so this is the only neuron holding a synapse in each of the retina's two wiring layers at once.

NUMBER:

About 15 to 18 million cone bipolar cells per eye, roughly 30 to 36 million across both eyes, which fits inside the retinal budget of about 35 million bipolar cells per eye once rod bipolar cells are added, and amounts to about 0.04 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the human nervous system.

Confidence is moderate, because the count is inferred from cone density and convergence ratios rather than from a direct census of human tissue.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

It fires no action potentials at all, signalling instead with graded voltage over a range of 10 to 20 millivolts around a resting level near minus 50 to minus 60 millivolts, with input resistance in the gigaohm range and a membrane time constant of 10 to 30 milliseconds.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inputs arrive from cone ribbon synapses and from horizontal cells delivering an inhibitory surround with gamma-aminobutyric acid, the brain's main inhibitory chemical, while outputs are dyads, meaning each release site faces two partners at once, usually one ganglion cell and one amacrine cell.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is short, 20 to 40 micrometres, thinner than 1 micrometre, and so brief that voltage spreads down it passively with no action potential required.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Every cone bipolar cell releases glutamate, the main excitatory messenger of the nervous system, continuously rather than in bursts, packaged by vesicular glutamate transporter type 1 and triggered by L-type calcium channels of the Cav1.3 and Cav1.4 families clustered at the ribbon.

MYELINATION:

None, because there are no oligodendrocytes, the myelin-making cells, anywhere inside the retina, and myelin begins only behind the lamina cribrosa where the optic nerve leaves the eye.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high, since the retina consumes more oxygen per gram than any other human tissue, about ninety percent of its adenosine triphosphate, the cell's energy currency, goes to pumping ions, and these cells can burn extracellular lactate when glucose is short.

PLASTICITY:

Gain is reset continuously across the ten-billion-fold range of natural light levels, mainly at the ribbon and by dopamine acting as a daylight signal, while in retinitis pigmentosa the dendrites retract and sprout into the wrong layer, a slow structural rewriting called retinal remodelling.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

There are no astrocytes here at all, since retinal astrocytes stay in the nerve fibre layer, so the whole job falls to the Muller cell, a radial glial cell that mops up glutamate with the transporter GLAST, converts it to glutamine, hands it straight back for reuse, buffers potassium through Kir4.1 channels and delivers lactate.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this class and the retina still catches light and still has output neurons but has no channels, so there is no brightening and no darkening signal, no fine and coarse streams, no colour opponency, and the electroretinogram loses its b-wave, the upward deflection reporting inner retinal function.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The dendritic tip is a computer in its own right, inverting the sign of the message through a metabotropic receptor, and horizontal cells feed back partly by ephaptic action, an electrical field effect through the extracellular space with no transmitter at all.

ON terminals are electrically fused to AII amacrine cells by connexin36 gap junctions, terminals carry the transporter EAAT5 whose chloride current gives feedback within a millisecond, and calcium spikes occur in terminals even though the soma never fires.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: cone glutamate in the cleft, normalised 0 to 1, from 1 to 14 named pedicles; horizontal cell feedback in millivolts; amacrine inhibitory conductance.

• OUTPUTS: graded glutamate release, 0 to 1 of maximum, onto named ganglion and amacrine dyad partners at a specified inner plexiform layer stratum.

• STATE: membrane voltage; receptor or cascade activation; slow adaptation average; terminal calcium; releasable vesicle pool.

• PARAMETERS: convergence 1 to 14 cones; polarity sign minus 1 for ON and plus 1 for OFF; gain 1 to 2; ribbon count 15 to 100.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 30 milliseconds; synaptic transfer 1 to 20 milliseconds; adaptation 100 to 1000 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: loss of transmission from cones gives a negative electroretinogram with no b-wave, and dendritic retraction in retinitis pigmentosa disconnects the surviving inner retina from any prosthesis placed in front of it.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn the voltages of the cones above a cone bipolar cell into one graded output voltage.
Create a number variable called centre_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called cone_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gap with initial value 0.
For each cone_voltage in contacted_cones, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the sum of centre_total and cone_voltage.
    Set centre_total to the result.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in contacted_cones.
Set cone_count to the result.
Calculate the quotient of centre_total divided by cone_count.
Set drive to the result.
Calculate the difference of drive and surround_voltage.
Set drive to the result.
Calculate the product of drive and signed_gain.
Set drive to the result.
Calculate the sum of resting_voltage and drive.
Set drive to the result.
Calculate the difference of drive and membrane_voltage.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the product of gap and smoothing_fraction.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the sum of membrane_voltage and gap.
Set membrane_voltage to the result.
Display membrane_voltage to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole cell is one low-pass filter plus one release curve.

import math

def cone_bipolar(cone_mv, surround_mv, sign=-1.0, gain=1.5, tau=20.0, dt=1.0):
    """Graded relay: no spikes, one membrane filter, one release curve."""
    v_rest, v, out = -55.0, -55.0, []
    for c, s in zip(cone_mv, surround_mv):
        # sign = -1 for ON types, +1 for OFF types
        v_target = v_rest + sign * gain * (c - s)
        v += (v_target - v) * (dt / tau)
        out.append((round(v, 2), round(1 / (1 + math.exp(-(v + 45) / 4)), 4)))
    return out

if __name__ == "__main__":
    cone = [-40.0] * 50 + [-55.0] * 150   # darkness, then light
    surround = [-40.0] * 200              # horizontal cell local average
    trace = cone_bipolar(cone, surround)
    print("dark:", trace[40], "light:", trace[-1])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A small cell in the middle band of the retina with a dendritic tuft above and a varicose knob below, no myelin, no action potential, a ribbon at its output, and a glial partner that recycles its transmitter and hands it back.

CHAPTER 199. ON BIPOLAR CELLS (Brightening-Signalling Neuron) (COG)

This cell turns a message upside down, because the cone shouts loudest in the dark, and the ON bipolar cell answers by falling silent, then wakes the instant light arrives.

ON is a two-letter laboratory shorthand that has to be explained every time it is used, so the name says the event out loud.

Brightening names the moment the cell owns, the instant light on its patch of retina increases.

Signalling names the work of passing that increase inward.

Neuron marks it as a bipolar relay cell, and the name quietly records the trick behind it, because these cells carry a receptor called metabotropic glutamate receptor six that flips the sign of the photoreceptor's message, so a fall in transmitter from the cone becomes a rise in this cell's response.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An ON bipolar cell depolarises, meaning its voltage rises towards zero, when light increases, which is remarkable because cones do the opposite and release less glutamate in light, so this cell must invert the sign of its input and in doing so creates the brightening channel of vision.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Its dendrites end as invaginating contacts, pushing deep inside the cone terminal to sit beside the release ribbon, and its axon always ends in the inner half of the inner plexiform layer, the wiring band nearest the output neurons, a zone called sublamina b.

SIZE:

Soma 5 to 10 micrometres and cell height 30 to 70 micrometres, with terminals in macaque retina stratifying about 11.1 micrometres from the ganglion cell layer for DB4, 11.4 for DB5, 6.0 for the invaginating midget bipolar and only 2.3 for DB6, carrying about 68 to 98 ribbons each.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The cone-driven ON types are the invaginating midget bipolar, DB4, DB5, DB6, the blue-cone bipolar and the giant bipolar, and the rod bipolar cell is also an ON cell using the same molecular machinery, which is why one genetic fault can darken both day and night vision.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Soma in the inner nuclear layer, dendrites inside cone pedicles in the outer plexiform layer, and terminals restricted to sublamina b, so the interface that matters is the boundary between sublamina a and sublamina b, an invisible line separating the darkening half of the retina from the brightening half.

NUMBER:

Roughly 7 to 9 million cone-driven ON bipolar cells per eye, about 14 to 18 million across both eyes, rising to perhaps 11 to 13 million per eye if rod bipolar cells are counted as ON cells, which they are, and amounting to about 0.02 percent of the human nervous system.

Confidence is moderate, because the figure comes from convergence ratios rather than a direct human count.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Graded with no somatic action potentials, resting near minus 55 to minus 60 millivolts in darkness, depolarising by 10 to 20 millivolts in light, and lagging the OFF cell by roughly 5 to 15 milliseconds because a chain of proteins must switch off before the channel can open.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input comes from cone ribbons at invaginating positions, output goes to ON parasol and ON midget ganglion cells with DB4 supplying roughly half the bipolar input to ON parasol cells and DB6 sending about 70 percent of its ribbon contacts to ON midget cells, and terminals are coupled to AII amacrine cells by connexin36 gap junctions.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Short, thin, unmyelinated, and defined entirely by which sublayer it stops in.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glutamate, but the interesting chemistry is on the receiving side, where metabotropic glutamate receptor 6, a receptor working through an internal messenger rather than opening a pore itself, drives the G protein Gao with beta3 and gamma13 subunits, which closes the channel TRPM1.

MYELINATION:

None, since no oligodendrocytes exist inside the retina and no retinal neuron of any kind is myelinated.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, with the unusual burden that the cascade proteins mGluR6, TRPM1, nyctalopin, GPR179, LRIT3 and the regulators RGS7 and RGS11 must be continuously trafficked to and maintained at the dendritic tips.

PLASTICITY:

The cascade is this cell's main site of light adaptation, with regulator of G protein signalling proteins speeding it in bright light so the cell does not saturate.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Muller cells wrap the dendritic tips and clear glutamate fast enough that cleft concentration can fall within milliseconds, which is exactly what this cell needs, since its signal is the fall in glutamate rather than its rise, so if Muller clearance fails the ON cell is blinded even though every cone is healthy.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove ON bipolar cells and the retina still sees shadows but never sees light arrive, so white text on a black screen becomes unreadable, contrast sensitivity halves, and the electroretinogram loses its b-wave entirely, leaving the negative waveform clinicians recognise instantly.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell is a biochemical amplifier rather than a summing junction, and TRPM1 is thought to be open by default and actively held shut by G protein activity, so the ON cell in darkness strains against its own machinery.

It couples electrically through connexin36, receives ephaptic feedback from horizontal cells, and depends on a scaffold protein, nyctalopin, that physically anchors TRPM1 in place.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: cleft glutamate from 1 to 14 cones, normalised 0 to 1; horizontal cell feedback in millivolts; AII amacrine junctional current in picoamperes.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto ON ganglion cells and amacrine cells in sublamina b, 0 to 1 of maximum.

• STATE: fraction of active Gao; TRPM1 open probability; membrane voltage; terminal calcium.

• PARAMETERS: half-activation glutamate constant near 0.2 normalised units; voltage swing 15 to 20 millivolts; convergence 1 to 14 cones; ribbon count 59 to 98.

• TIME CONSTANTS: cascade 20 to 50 milliseconds; membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; extra latency versus the OFF pathway 5 to 15 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: mutations in GRM6, TRPM1, NYX, GPR179 or LRIT3 cause complete congenital stationary night blindness, and in melanoma-associated retinopathy antibodies against TRPM1 enter these cells and flatten the electroretinogram b-wave.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute one time step of the sign-inverting cascade that makes an ON bipolar cell depolarise when light reduces the glutamate arriving from its cone.
Create a number variable called gap with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called occupancy with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called open_probability with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called target_voltage with initial value 0.
Calculate the sum of cleft_glutamate and half_activation_constant.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the quotient of cleft_glutamate divided by gap.
Set occupancy to the result.
Calculate the difference of occupancy and active_g_protein.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the product of gap and cascade_fraction.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the sum of active_g_protein and gap.
Set active_g_protein to the result.
Calculate the difference of 1 and active_g_protein.
Set open_probability to the result.
Calculate the product of open_probability and voltage_swing.
Set target_voltage to the result.
Calculate the sum of dark_voltage and target_voltage.
Set target_voltage to the result.
Display target_voltage to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because the cascade is a small fixed-size state machine, and C makes the per-time-step cost of simulating ten million of them explicit.

#include <stdio.h>

int main(void) {
    double glut = 1.0, g_on = 0.9, v = -60.0;  /* glutamate, Gao, millivolts */
    const double dt = 0.5, tau_g = 30.0, tau_m = 15.0, g_leak = 1.0;
    int t;
    for (t = 0; t < 400; t++) {
        if (t == 100) glut = 0.1;              /* light: cone stops releasing */
        double occ = glut / (glut + 0.2);      /* mGluR6 occupancy */
        g_on += (occ - g_on) * (dt / tau_g);   /* cascade lags behind */
        double p_open = 1.0 - g_on;            /* active Gao shuts TRPM1 */
        double vt = (p_open * 0.0 + g_leak * -70.0) / (p_open + g_leak);
        v += (vt - v) * (dt / tau_m);
        if (t % 100 == 0)
            printf("t=%6.1f ms  open=%.3f  V=%.1f mV\n", t * dt, p_open, v);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only cell in the visual pathway that inverts the sign of its input with a metabotropic receptor, its dendrites go inside the cone terminal rather than resting against it, and its failure gives a person normal eyes, normal cones and no b-wave.

CHAPTER 200. OFF BIPOLAR CELLS (Darkening-Signalling Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that reports the arrival of darkness, and it is the faster twin, because it does not have to switch off a chain of proteins before it can answer.

OFF is a barcode label, and worse, it sounds like an absence of activity when in fact this cell is firing hardest when the world dims.

Darkening names the event it reports, a fall in light on its patch of retina.

Signalling matches its brightening partner so the one dimension separating the pair, the direction of the light change, is the only thing that differs in the two names.

Neuron marks it as a bipolar relay cell whose biology differs in one step, since it uses ordinary sign-conserving ionotropic glutamate receptors of the kainate and AMPA families and so simply passes the photoreceptor's message on unflipped.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An OFF bipolar cell hyperpolarises, meaning its voltage falls further from zero, when light increases, conserving the sign of the cone's message because it reads glutamate through an ionotropic receptor, a receptor that is itself a pore and opens the instant glutamate binds.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Its dendrites end as flat or basal contacts on the underside of the cone terminal, outside the invagination and further from the release site, and its axon terminates in the outer half of the inner plexiform layer, called sublamina a, farthest from the ganglion cells.

SIZE:

Soma 5 to 10 micrometres, with dendritic fields from about 5 micrometres for the flat midget bipolar on one cone to 30 to 60 micrometres for DB1 and DB2 in the periphery, and the DB1 terminal sitting roughly 20 to 25 micrometres from the ganglion cell layer in central retina.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Five types are recognised in macaque and human retina, the flat midget bipolar, DB1, DB2, DB3a and DB3b, and they split by speed, since DB2 and DB3b express the kainate receptor subunit GluK1 and respond transiently while flat midget bipolar, DB1 and DB3a lack GluK1 and respond in a sustained way.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Soma in the inner nuclear layer and terminals confined to sublamina a, with the critical interface at the base of the cone pedicle, where triad-associated contacts sit near the ribbon and non-triad-associated contacts sit further away, and roughly three quarters of the basal synapses on DB2 and DB3b dendrites are of the distant, non-triad kind.

NUMBER:

Roughly 7 to 9 million per eye, about 14 to 18 million across both eyes, or about 0.02 percent of the human nervous system, with the ON and OFF populations close to equal.

Confidence is moderate, because the figure is inferred from convergence ratios rather than counted in human tissue.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Graded with no somatic spikes in most types, resting near minus 45 to minus 50 millivolts in darkness because the ionotropic channels are already partly open, and answering a step of light roughly 5 to 15 milliseconds sooner than the ON partner because there is no cascade to unwind.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input comes from cones through kainate receptors, and notably all five macaque OFF types use kainate rather than AMPA receptors, while output goes to OFF parasol and OFF midget ganglion cells and to AII amacrine cells, which send glycine, an inhibitory transmitter, back onto them at night.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Short and unmyelinated, ending high in the inner plexiform layer, with stratification depth the single best predictor of which ganglion cell it will talk to.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases glutamate and receives glutamate through kainate receptors built from GluK1, GluK2 and GluK3 subunits, with GluK1 at the distant non-triad contacts and GluK2 or GluK3 at the triad-associated ones, which is how one cone hands out fast and slow copies of the same message.

MYELINATION:

None, since myelin-forming oligodendrocytes are absent from the retina entirely.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, with the added cost that kainate receptors desensitise heavily and must be continuously recycled and resensitised.

PLASTICITY:

Desensitisation and recovery is itself a fast gain control working over tens to hundreds of milliseconds, and in photoreceptor degeneration OFF dendrites retract earlier and more severely than ON dendrites in several animal models.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Muller glia matter here in a specific way, because these receptors sit far from the ribbon at non-triad contacts, so the glutamate reaching them has already diffused through extracellular space and been partly captured by Muller transporters, making the glial cell a spatial filter that sets how much of the cone's signal they ever see.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete OFF bipolar cells and the retina can see a light switched on but not switched off, so dark text on white paper vanishes, spotting a dark shape against a bright sky becomes impossible, and the retina loses the faster of its two answers.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Receptor desensitisation converts a step into a pulse, which is genuine temporal computation happening inside a protein rather than in a circuit, and receptor placement at triad or non-triad positions means the cell computes with diffusion distance, a purely geometric variable.

Some OFF types generate tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium spikes in the axon terminal, so a subset uses both graded voltage and all-or-nothing events.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: cleft glutamate from 1 to 14 cones, normalised 0 to 1, sampled at the receptor's diffusion distance; horizontal cell feedback; AII glycinergic conductance.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto OFF ganglion cells and amacrine cells in sublamina a, 0 to 1 of maximum.

• STATE: open receptor conductance; fraction of receptors not desensitised; membrane voltage; terminal calcium.

• PARAMETERS: desensitisation strength 0.3 to 0.6; opening time constant about 1 millisecond; closing 10 to 20 milliseconds; recovery 40 to 100 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: opening about 1 millisecond; membrane about 10 milliseconds; desensitisation recovery 40 to 100 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: no isolated human disease removes only OFF bipolar cells, but mutations in CACNA1F, which cause incomplete congenital stationary night blindness, degrade transmission from cones to both ON and OFF cells.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the transient response of an OFF bipolar cell whose kainate receptors desensitise while glutamate remains high.
Create a number variable called target_conductance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gap with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called available_target with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called target_voltage with initial value 0.
Calculate the product of cleft_glutamate and available_receptors.
Set target_conductance to the result.
Calculate the difference of target_conductance and open_conductance.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the product of gap and opening_fraction.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the sum of open_conductance and gap.
Set open_conductance to the result.
Calculate the product of cleft_glutamate and desensitisation_strength.
Set available_target to the result.
Calculate the difference of 1 and available_target.
Set available_target to the result.
Calculate the difference of available_target and available_receptors.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the product of gap and recovery_fraction.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the sum of available_receptors and gap.
Set available_receptors to the result.
Calculate the product of open_conductance and voltage_swing.
Set target_voltage to the result.
Calculate the sum of hyperpolarised_voltage and target_voltage.
Set target_voltage to the result.
Display target_voltage to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole point is a two-state receptor, and the desensitisation term fits on one readable line.

def off_bipolar(glut, dt=0.5, t_open=1.0, t_close=15.0, t_rec=60.0, desens=0.5):
    """Kainate desensitisation turns a step of darkness into a pulse."""
    avail, g, v, out = 1.0, 0.0, -50.0, []
    for x in glut:
        target = avail * x
        g += (target - g) * (dt / (t_open if target > g else t_close))
        avail += ((1.0 - desens * x) - avail) * (dt / t_rec)
        # single leak conductance of 1.0 with a reversal of -70 mV
        v += (((g * 0.0) + (1.0 * -70.0)) / (g + 1.0) - v) * (dt / 10.0)
        out.append((round(g, 3), round(v, 1)))
    return out

if __name__ == "__main__":
    tr = off_bipolar([1.0] * 200 + [0.1] * 200 + [1.0] * 200)  # dark, light, dark
    print("dark:", tr[199], "light:", tr[399], "off-peak:", tr[410])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Flat contacts on the outside of the cone terminal, kainate receptors rather than AMPA receptors, an axon stopping in the outer half of the inner plexiform layer, and a response that beats its ON twin by about ten milliseconds.

CHAPTER 201. MIDGET BIPOLAR CELLS (COG)

In the very centre of your eye one cone gets one private wire to the brain, and this is that wire, the smallest and most exclusive neuron in the human visual system.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A midget bipolar cell contacts a single cone and nothing else, a one-to-one arrangement found nowhere else in the nervous system at this scale, which gives humans acuity of about one sixtieth of a degree and, because its inhibitory surround is built from mixed cones, also gives them red-green colour vision.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A tiny compact dendritic tuft rises to exactly one cone pedicle, and there are two per cone, an invaginating midget bipolar whose dendrites push inside the cone terminal and a flat midget bipolar whose dendrites rest against its base.

SIZE:

The dendritic field is about 5 to 10 micrometres wide, the width of the single pedicle it serves, and the axon arbor is the smallest in the retina at about 68 square micrometres in top view in macaque, roughly 9 micrometres across, yet it carries about 85 output ribbon synapses.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two, the invaginating midget bipolar, an ON cell immunoreactive for cholecystokinin, and the flat midget bipolar, an OFF cell immunoreactive for recoverin.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Soma in the inner nuclear layer, densest on the foveal slope and through the macula, with the invaginating type ending about 6.0 micrometres from the ganglion cell layer in sublamina b and the flat type in sublamina a, so the two halves of one cone's private line sit in different halves of the inner plexiform layer.

NUMBER:

About 7 million per eye and roughly 14 million across both eyes, because in central retina each of the roughly 5 million cones supports two midget bipolar cells, which is about 0.016 percent of the human nervous system.

Density matches cone density out to about 10 millimetres eccentricity then falls to about 60 percent of it, so a far peripheral midget bipolar may contact three cones, and confidence is good because this has been measured directly with recoverin labelling in macaque.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Graded and spikeless, resting near minus 50 millivolts with a light response of about 10 millivolts, and because it is so small its input resistance is several gigaohms, so a handful of channels opening produces a large voltage change and a single cone's vesicle can be heard clearly.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input comes from one cone plus H1 horizontal cells, which build a broad indiscriminate surround from surrounding long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cones, and output goes to a single midget ganglion cell that projects to a single cell in the parvocellular layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus, the visual relay station of the thalamus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Very short, very thin, unmyelinated, and terminating in the tightest arbor in the retina.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, with the invaginating type using metabotropic glutamate receptor 6 and TRPM1 on its input side and the flat type using kainate receptors lacking GluK1, which is why it responds in a sustained rather than transient way.

MYELINATION:

None, since no retinal neuron is myelinated.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high per unit volume, because about 85 release sites are crammed into the smallest terminal in the retina and all release continuously, while the central fovea is avascular, so these cells depend on diffusion from the choroid behind the retina and on Muller cell lactate.

PLASTICITY:

Least plastic in wiring terms, since the one-to-one connection is set during development and defended, but strongly adaptive in gain, and in macular degeneration this population is lost first with no rewiring restoring acuity.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

In the fovea the Muller cells form a cone-shaped plug, the Muller cell cone, whose elongated vertically aligned processes keep light scatter low and shepherd each private line without letting neighbouring signals mix, so here glia serve an optical purpose as well as a metabolic one.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove midget bipolar cells and the fovea stops being a fovea, acuity collapses to something closer to peripheral vision, reading becomes impossible, and red-green colour vision disappears even though every cone and every opsin remains perfectly intact.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Colour opponency is created here rather than in the brain, arising from wiring geometry rather than any colour-selective molecule, because a single cone centre is compared against a mixed-cone surround, and evidence indicates this opponent signal is already present before the midget ganglion cell and carried entirely by modulation of an excitatory conductance.

The cell also depends on horizontal cell feedback that is partly ephaptic, an electrical field effect requiring no transmitter, and on local protein synthesis in a terminal too far from the nucleus to wait for delivery.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: cleft glutamate from exactly one cone centrally, or 1 to 3 cones beyond 10 millimetres eccentricity, normalised 0 to 1; H1 horizontal cell surround voltage.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto one midget ganglion cell and accompanying amacrine cells, 0 to 1 of maximum, at about 85 ribbon sites.

• STATE: membrane voltage; cascade or receptor activation; terminal calcium; vesicle pool.

• PARAMETERS: cone convergence 1; surround weight 0.6 to 0.8; polarity sign minus 1 for invaginating and plus 1 for flat; arbor area about 68 square micrometres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; sustained response with no fast desensitisation; surround feedback 5 to 20 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: loss in age-related macular degeneration and macular dystrophies destroys central acuity permanently, and in retinal remodelling the private line breaks so no downstream prosthesis can reconstruct it.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the colour-opponent output of a midget bipolar cell that listens to exactly one cone in the centre and to a pool of mixed cones in the surround.
Create a number variable called surround_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called surround_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called surround_mean with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called opponency with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called output_voltage with initial value 0.
For each neighbour_voltage in surround_cone_voltages, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the sum of surround_total and neighbour_voltage.
    Set surround_total to the result.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in surround_cone_voltages.
Set surround_count to the result.
Calculate the quotient of surround_total divided by surround_count.
Set surround_mean to the result.
Calculate the product of surround_mean and surround_weight.
Set surround_mean to the result.
Calculate the difference of centre_cone_voltage and surround_mean.
Set opponency to the result.
Calculate the product of opponency and signed_gain.
Set output_voltage to the result.
Calculate the sum of resting_voltage and output_voltage.
Set output_voltage to the result.
Display output_voltage to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because colour opponency here falls out of three lines of arithmetic with no colour term anywhere in the code.

def midget_bipolar(centre_mv, surround_mv, sign=-1.0, w=0.75, gain=1.4):
    """One cone in the centre, a mixed pool of cones in the surround."""
    surround = sum(surround_mv) / len(surround_mv)
    return round(-52.0 + sign * gain * (centre_mv - w * surround), 2)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # Light hyperpolarises a cone, so a strongly driven cone sits more
    # negative in millivolts than its less strongly driven neighbours.
    # Long-wavelength light: this M cone centre is barely driven.
    red = midget_bipolar(-40.0, [-52.0, -53.0, -51.0, -52.0, -50.0])
    # Middle-wavelength light: this M cone centre is driven hard.
    green = midget_bipolar(-56.0, [-46.0, -45.0, -47.0, -46.0, -44.0])
    print("ON midget, red light  :", red)
    print("ON midget, green light:", green)
    print("opponent swing, mV    :", round(green - red, 2))
    # No wavelength appears anywhere: opponency comes from wiring alone.

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

One cone, one bipolar cell, one ganglion cell, one thalamic cell, all the way to the cortex, with the smallest axon arbor in the retina and an ON and OFF pair sitting on every central cone.

CHAPTER 202. DIFFUSE BIPOLAR CELLS (COG)

If the midget bipolar cell is a soloist, this is the choir, five to fourteen cones pooled into one voice, trading the last of the detail for speed, sensitivity and the ability to see something move.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A diffuse bipolar cell spreads its dendrites across many neighbouring cones and adds their signals, which costs spatial detail but buys signal-to-noise ratio, meaning the true signal stands further above the random flicker of photon capture, and it feeds the fast, colourless, motion-sensitive stream of vision.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A broad flat dendritic canopy spans several cone terminals, contacts are flat for the OFF subtypes and invaginating for the ON subtypes, and the axon terminal sits at a depth in the inner plexiform layer that varies systematically by subtype.

SIZE:

Dendritic fields are about 20 to 40 micrometres across centrally and 70 to 100 micrometres in the far periphery, and in macaque retina mean cone convergence is 8.7 cones for DB4, 7.3 for DB5 and 6.2 for DB6, with total contacts of 39.7, 26.7 and 14.6 and ribbon counts of about 97, 68 and 98.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Seven, since DB1, DB2, DB3a and DB3b are OFF cells in sublamina a while DB4, DB5 and DB6 are ON cells in sublamina b, with DB4 and DB5 both stratifying at about 58 percent of inner plexiform layer depth and DB6 at about 93.6 percent, almost touching the ganglion cell layer.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Soma in the inner nuclear layer across the whole retina, present even at the foveal slope where axons are displaced sideways by the pit, with dendrites in the outer plexiform layer and terminals spread across the full depth of the inner plexiform layer, so the seven types together tile that depth from top to bottom.

NUMBER:

About 6 to 8 million per eye, roughly 12 to 16 million across both eyes, or about 0.017 percent of the human nervous system, derived from cone density divided by convergence and multiplied by seven types, so confidence is moderate.

Because each type independently tiles the retina, every cone is read by all seven.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Graded and mostly spikeless, resting near minus 50 millivolts with responses of 10 to 20 millivolts, though several types are strongly transient, DB2 and DB3b most of all because they express the kainate subunit GluK1, and some types carry voltage-gated sodium channels producing all-or-nothing spikes in the axon terminal.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input comes from 5 to 14 cones weighted by distance, and output goes principally to parasol ganglion cells, the large motion-and-contrast cells feeding the magnocellular layers of the thalamus, with DB4 alone supplying roughly half their bipolar input while DB6 sends about 70 percent of its ribbon contacts to ON midget ganglion cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated and short, with a wide varicose terminal arbor whose stratification depth is the cell's functional identity.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate on output, with ON types using metabotropic glutamate receptor 6 and TRPM1 on input and OFF types using kainate receptors, GluK1 present in DB2 and DB3b and absent in DB1 and DB3a.

MYELINATION:

None, for the standard retinal reason that no myelinating glia exist inside the eye.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, with the largest terminals in the retina and up to about 98 ribbons apiece releasing continuously, though in vascularised retina these cells can draw glucose and lactate straight from the deep capillary plexus rather than only from Muller cells.

PLASTICITY:

Strong adaptation, since these cells must work from starlight to noon, and their pooled receptive field size changes with light level as horizontal and amacrine cell coupling shifts under dopamine control.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Because their terminals are large and lie deep in the inner plexiform layer beside the deep capillary bed, these cells sit where Muller endfeet, pericytes and capillaries meet and contribute to neurovascular coupling, the local rise in blood flow that follows local activity, while Muller potassium siphoning stops a widely pooled, continuously active terminal from poisoning its neighbourhood.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove diffuse bipolar cells and the retina keeps its acuity and its colour but loses its speed and its sensitivity, so motion detection collapses, dim-light contrast fades, flicker fusion frequency falls, and the magnocellular stream that warns you of a car in your peripheral vision goes quiet.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Pooling is itself a computation, a spatial low-pass filter built from dendritic geometry with distance-dependent weights, layered with a temporal high-pass filter produced by receptor desensitisation and vesicle depletion at the ribbon.

ON diffuse types are electrically coupled to AII amacrine cells by connexin36 gap junctions, making them the entry point for rod signals into daylight circuitry, and their terminals show calcium spikes and are targets of dopaminergic volume transmission, in which a transmitter diffuses broadly rather than crossing a single synapse.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: cleft glutamate from 5 to 14 cones with distance-dependent weights, normalised 0 to 1; horizontal cell surround; amacrine inhibition; AII gap junction current for ON types.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto parasol and midget ganglion cells and amacrine cells at a defined inner plexiform layer depth, 0 to 1 of maximum.

• STATE: pooled cone average; slow adaptation average; membrane voltage; terminal calcium; vesicle pool.

• PARAMETERS: convergence 6.2 to 12.5 cones by type; stratification depth 0 to 100 percent, DB4 and DB5 near 58 percent and DB6 near 93.6 percent; ribbon count 15 to 98.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 15 milliseconds; transient high-pass 50 to 200 milliseconds; adaptation 100 to 1000 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: degeneration of these cells or their parasol targets, as in glaucoma, causes early loss of motion and contrast sensitivity while letter acuity on a chart still reads normal, which is one reason glaucoma is found late.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to pool the weighted signals of several cones into one diffuse bipolar cell and to report only the change in that pooled signal.
Create a number variable called weighted_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called cone_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called pooled with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gap with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called transient with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called output_voltage with initial value 0.
For each weighted_cone_voltage in weighted_cone_voltages, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the sum of weighted_total and weighted_cone_voltage.
    Set weighted_total to the result.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in weighted_cone_voltages.
Set cone_count to the result.
Calculate the quotient of weighted_total divided by cone_count.
Set pooled to the result.
Calculate the difference of pooled and slow_average.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the product of gap and adaptation_fraction.
Set gap to the result.
Calculate the sum of slow_average and gap.
Set slow_average to the result.
Calculate the difference of pooled and slow_average.
Set transient to the result.
Calculate the product of transient and signed_gain.
Set output_voltage to the result.
Calculate the sum of resting_voltage and output_voltage.
Set output_voltage to the result.
Display output_voltage to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because a weighted pool followed by an adaptation stage is the per-frame arithmetic a browser-based retina simulator would run, needing no toolchain.

// Diffuse bipolar cell: weighted pooling, then a transient high-pass stage.
function diffuseBipolar(coneVoltages, weights, state, dt = 1.0) {
  let total = 0.0, wsum = 0.0;
  for (let i = 0; i < coneVoltages.length; i++) {
    total += weights[i] * coneVoltages[i];   // distance-weighted pooling
    wsum += weights[i];
  }
  const pooled = total / wsum;                          // mean cone mV
  state.slow += (pooled - state.slow) * (dt / 120.0);   // slow adaptation
  const transient = -1.6 * (pooled - state.slow);       // ON sign inversion
  state.v += (-52.0 + transient - state.v) * (dt / 12.0);
  return state.v;
}

const weights = [1.0, 0.9, 0.9, 0.6, 0.6, 0.4, 0.4];   // seven cones, DB4-like
const state = { slow: -45.0, v: -52.0 };
for (let t = 0; t < 400; t++) {
  const cones = new Array(7).fill(t < 200 ? -45.0 : -58.0);  // light step
  const v = diffuseBipolar(cones, weights, state);
  if (t === 199 || t === 205 || t === 399) console.log(t, v.toFixed(1));
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A wide dendritic canopy over many cones, a terminal parked at a precise depth that names the subtype, a mosaic tiling the retina independently of the other six diffuse types, and a response that fades if the light simply stays on.

CHAPTER 203. BLUE-CONE BIPOLAR CELLS (COG)

Only about one cone in ten is blue-sensitive, they are scattered thinly and absent from the very centre of vision, and this rare neuron reaches past every red and green cone in its way to find them.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The blue-cone bipolar cell contacts short-wavelength-sensitive cones, called S-cones, ignores the long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cones between them, depolarises when blue light increases, and forms the first stage of the blue-yellow colour axis, the oldest colour system in vertebrate evolution.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is sometimes called the wide-axoned S-cone bipolar, because its dendrites travel long distances sideways while skipping neighbours, and its tips make invaginating ribbon junctions deep inside the S-cone terminal before its axon plunges to the very bottom of the inner plexiform layer.

SIZE:

Dendritic field roughly 30 to 80 micrometres wide, far wider than its cone count suggests, and in macaque retina it contacts on average 1.7 cones with a standard deviation of 0.8, makes about 24.1 contacts, carries about 59 output ribbons, and ends about 3.3 micrometres from the ganglion cell layer.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Essentially one ON type in primate retina, since the S-cone OFF pathway is carried mainly by S-cone contacts onto OFF midget bipolar cells and by DB6 contacts rather than by a second dedicated blue-cone bipolar type.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Soma in the inner nuclear layer but absent or vanishingly rare in the central foveola, because S-cones are missing from roughly the central 100 micrometres, about 0.35 degrees of visual angle, and its axon terminates in stratum 5, the innermost stratum of the inner plexiform layer, right at the interface with the ganglion cell layer.

NUMBER:

About 0.4 to 0.5 million per eye and roughly 0.8 to 1.0 million across both eyes, matching S-cone numbers since S-cones are 8 to 10 percent of the roughly 5 million cones per eye, and about 0.001 percent of the human nervous system.

Confidence is good, because an independent count also reports blue-cone bipolar cells as only 1 to 2 percent of the whole bipolar population.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Graded, spikeless, of ON polarity, resting near minus 55 millivolts in darkness, with relatively slow and sustained responses that fit the known sluggishness of human blue-yellow colour perception compared with red-green.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input comes from 1 to 3 S-cones through metabotropic glutamate receptor 6 and TRPM1 plus feed-forward inhibition from HII horizontal cells using gamma-aminobutyric acid, the main inhibitory chemical, and output goes almost exclusively to the inner dendritic tier of the small bistratified ganglion cell, the blue-ON yellow-OFF cell feeding the koniocellular thalamus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Long relative to the cell's size, unmyelinated, and terminating deeper than nearly any other bipolar axon.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate on output, metabotropic glutamate receptor 6 and TRPM1 on input, with gamma-aminobutyric acid arriving from HII horizontal cells.

MYELINATION:

None, as for every neuron inside the retina.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate, lower per cell than the diffuse types because it carries only about 59 ribbons, but sustained because release never stops.

PLASTICITY:

The wiring itself is the plastic marvel, since during development these dendrites must recognise S-cones by molecular identity and refuse every neighbouring cone, a selection process with few parallels in the nervous system.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The Muller cell processes around S-cone pedicles form part of a specialised microenvironment in which the machinery for HII horizontal cell feedback is concentrated, so the glial sheath here helps confine a chemical conversation to a single cone type, and no comparable cone-type-specific glial specialisation is described elsewhere in the outer plexiform layer.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this one cell and the retina loses blue, not blue detection, since S-cones would still absorb short-wavelength light, but the entire blue-yellow opponent comparison, leaving a person who sees a bright world in reds, greens and greys with no way to tell a violet from a grey of the same brightness.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell performs molecular recognition as computation, selecting partners by cone identity rather than proximity, a decision made in development and frozen into the anatomy, and it receives feed-forward inhibition rather than the usual feedback arrangement.

Its output onto the small bistratified ganglion cell is spatially coextensive with an OFF input from diffuse cells, so the blue and yellow receptive fields overlap exactly instead of forming a centre and a surround.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: cleft glutamate from 1 to 3 S-cones within a 30 to 80 micrometre reach, normalised 0 to 1; HII horizontal cell inhibitory conductance.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto small bistratified ganglion cells in stratum 5 of the inner plexiform layer, 0 to 1 of maximum, at about 59 ribbons.

• STATE: fraction of active Gao; TRPM1 open probability; membrane voltage; terminal calcium.

• PARAMETERS: dendritic reach 30 to 80 micrometres; S-cone convergence 1.7 plus or minus 0.8; polarity sign minus 1; total cone contacts about 24.

• TIME CONSTANTS: cascade 20 to 50 milliseconds; membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds; sustained response decaying over hundreds of milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: this pathway is among the first to weaken in glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy, which is why short-wavelength automated perimetry, a blue-on-yellow visual field test, can detect damage before standard testing does.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to build the input of a blue-cone bipolar cell by contacting only short-wavelength cones and ignoring every other cone within its dendritic reach.
Create a number variable called s_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called s_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called s_mean with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called output_voltage with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called is_short_wavelength with initial value false.
Create a text variable called cone_opsin with initial value unknown.
Create a number variable called cone_voltage with initial value 0.
For each cone_record in nearby_cones, perform the following operations.
    Set cone_opsin to the opsin type of cone_record.
    Set cone_voltage to the voltage of cone_record.
    Check if cone_opsin is equal to short.
    Set is_short_wavelength to the result.
    If is_short_wavelength is true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of s_total and cone_voltage.
        Set s_total to the result.
        Calculate the sum of s_count and 1.
        Set s_count to the result.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Calculate the quotient of s_total divided by s_count.
Set s_mean to the result.
Calculate the difference of s_mean and dark_reference_voltage.
Set output_voltage to the result.
Calculate the product of output_voltage and signed_gain.
Set output_voltage to the result.
Display output_voltage to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the essential operation is a filter over a list of typed neighbours, and dictionaries make cone identity readable at a glance.

def blue_cone_bipolar(cones, reach=60.0, sign=-1.0, gain=1.3, dark_ref=-45.0):
    """Skip every L and M cone within reach and wire only to S cones."""
    chosen = [c for c in cones if c["type"] == "S" and c["um"] <= reach]
    if not chosen:
        return None    # no S cone in range, so no such cell forms here
    centre = sum(c["mv"] for c in chosen) / len(chosen)
    return round(-54.0 + sign * gain * (centre - dark_ref), 2), len(chosen)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # One dendritic tree's neighbourhood under blue light. Light
    # hyperpolarises a cone, so driven S cones sit more negative.
    patch = [
        {"type": "L", "um": 6.0,  "mv": -45.0},
        {"type": "M", "um": 9.0,  "mv": -45.0},
        {"type": "S", "um": 22.0, "mv": -60.0},
        {"type": "S", "um": 48.0, "mv": -58.0},
        {"type": "M", "um": 70.0, "mv": -45.0},
    ]
    print(blue_cone_bipolar(patch))   # depolarised output, 2 S cones used

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Long dendrites that visibly bypass their nearest neighbours, an axon diving to the innermost stratum of the inner plexiform layer, a partner list of exactly one ganglion cell type, and a population of only 1 to 2 percent of all bipolar cells.

CHAPTER 204. GIANT BIPOLAR CELLS (Largest-Spread Two-Ended Neuron) (COG)

There is a cell in the middle of your retina wide enough to reach a hundred of the light detectors above it, and it deliberately ignores about half of the ones it can touch.

Giant is a size word that ranks the cell without saying what the size buys, so the honest fix keeps the one solid measured fact and states it plainly.

Largest-Spread names the established finding, that among primate cone bipolar cells this type has the widest dendritic and axonal fields of all, exceeded by nothing except unusually large examples of the diffuse bipolar type that feeds melanopsin ganglion cells.

Two-Ended keeps the bipolar relay architecture visible in plain words.

Neuron marks it as a cell whose downstream job is genuinely not settled, since it is suspected to feed the giant melanopsin ganglion cells but that contact has not been demonstrated, so the name deliberately claims nothing beyond reach.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A bipolar cell is a small relay neuron in the middle layer of the retina, the thin sheet of nerve tissue lining the back of the eye.

It takes the electrical signal from the light detectors, called photoreceptors, and passes it inward toward the cells that send messages to the brain.

The giant bipolar cell is the widest member of that relay family in monkey and human retina.

It was first drawn by Anthony Mariani in 1983 in the rhesus monkey, where he called it the giant bistratified bipolar cell because its output branch ends in two separate depths.

A second and closely related giant form was described in 2011 by Joo, Peterson, Dacey, Buck and Haverkamp as an eleventh bipolar type with a very large, sparsely branched input tree.

Its striking habit is choosiness.

Instead of collecting from every cone in reach, it contacts on average about 52 percent of them, with a measured range from 27 to 82 percent in six reconstructed cells.

Functionally it is therefore a wide, sparse, coarse sampler: a channel that reports the average brightness of a patch of retina rather than fine detail.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body sits in the outer half of the inner nuclear layer, the middle cell layer of the retina.

From the top of the cell body a few long, thin, barely branched dendrites, meaning the input fibres, run sideways through the outer plexiform layer, the upper wiring layer where photoreceptors hand over their signal.

The dendrites end in flat, wide-cleft basal contacts pressed against the flattened base of a cone, a structure called the cone pedicle.

From the bottom of the cell body a single short axon, meaning the output fibre, dives into the inner plexiform layer, the lower wiring layer.

In the bistratified form the axon ends in two flat tiers, in strata that Polyak numbered 7a and 7d, near the top and the bottom of that layer.

In the monostratified giant form the axon ends in one broad tier near the middle of the inner plexiform layer, at the same depth as the diffuse bipolar type DB4.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly 7 to 9 micrometres across, about a tenth the width of a human hair.

The dendritic field exceeds 50 micrometres in central retina and reaches 70 to 100 micrometres in the periphery, which is the widest dendritic spread of any primate bipolar cell.

Across that field it contacts about 15 to 20 cones.

The axon is short, roughly 20 to 50 micrometres from cell body to terminal, because the whole retina is under half a millimetre thick.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Two forms are described.

The giant bistratified bipolar cell splits its output between an upper and a lower tier, and because those tiers match the branching depths of the small bistratified blue-yellow ganglion cell it has long been suspected of feeding the blue-yellow colour circuit.

The giant monostratified large-field bipolar cell keeps its output in one middle tier and selectively contacts long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cones rather than short-wavelength cones.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It is found across the whole neural retina of humans and other primates, in the inner nuclear layer, with dendrites in the outer plexiform layer and terminals in the inner plexiform layer.

It is absent from the very centre of the fovea, the pinhead-sized pit of sharpest vision, because there the inner cells are pushed sideways into the sloping Henle fibre layer.

The cell physically straddles the interface between the outer plexiform layer, where photoreceptors talk, and the inner plexiform layer, where the retina decides.

NUMBER:

There is no published count.

From a dendritic field of 70 to 100 micrometres, a coverage factor near one, and a retinal area of about 1,000 square millimetres, a defensible estimate is 100,000 to 250,000 per eye, with a best guess near 150,000.

Confidence is low, and this is an inference from geometry rather than a measurement.

That is under one half of one percent of the roughly 35 million bipolar cells in one eye, and about 0.0003 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Like almost all bipolar cells it does not fire the sharp all-or-nothing electrical pulses called action potentials.

It works by graded potential, meaning its voltage slides smoothly up and down in proportion to the light.

Resting membrane voltage in darkness sits near minus 45 to minus 35 millivolts, and a bright flash moves it by only a few millivolts.

Input resistance is high, roughly 1 to 3 gigaohms, and whole-cell capacitance is small, roughly 3 to 8 picofarads, so the cell is electrically tiny and responds quickly.

Calcium entry at the output terminal runs through L-type calcium channels built from the Cav1.4 protein, which do not inactivate, allowing release to continue for hours.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input comes from cone pedicles at flat basal contacts, which in primate bipolar cells use fast ionotropic glutamate receptors of the AMPA and kainate families and preserve the sign of the signal.

Horizontal cells, the sideways-spreading cells of the outer layer, subtract a wide average from the same cone pedicles, giving the giant bipolar an antagonistic surround.

Output is made at ribbon synapses in the inner plexiform layer, usually onto a dyad, meaning a pair of postsynaptic partners, typically one amacrine cell process and one ganglion cell dendrite.

Amacrine cells feed inhibition back onto the terminal itself, so the terminal is both a transmitter and a target.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is short, unmyelinated, and roughly 0.5 to 1 micrometre thick.

It conducts passively, meaning the voltage simply spreads down it without regeneration, which is possible only because the distance is tens of micrometres.

Conduction is effectively instantaneous on the scale of vision, under one millisecond.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter is glutamate, the main excitatory chemical messenger of the nervous system.

Glutamate is loaded into vesicles by the transporter VGLUT1 and released continuously in darkness from a ribbon, a bar-shaped protein scaffold built mainly of the protein RIBEYE that holds dozens of vesicles ready at once.

Release is graded and tonic rather than pulsed, which is how a non-spiking cell transmits a continuous variable.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable in the usual sense, and for a definite anatomical reason.

Myelin is the fatty insulating wrap made by cells called oligodendrocytes, and there are no oligodendrocytes anywhere inside the neural retina, so no retinal neuron is myelinated until axons leave the eye at the optic nerve head.

The giant bipolar cell never leaves the retina, so it is unmyelinated for life.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Its energy bill is dominated by continuous vesicle release and continuous calcium pumping in darkness, not by spiking.

Mitochondria, the cell's power plants, cluster in the axon terminal beside the ribbon.

Fuel arrives as glucose and as lactate handed over by Müller cells, the retina's main glial cells, and the retina as a whole consumes more oxygen per gram of tissue than the brain does.

PLASTICITY:

Ribbon length and the size of the ready pool of vesicles change with background light over minutes, which is part of how the eye adapts.

Dopamine released by a specialised amacrine cell in daylight adjusts gain across the whole outer retina.

In photoreceptor degeneration, bipolar dendrites retract and then sprout aberrantly, a structural remodelling that limits the usefulness of late-stage retinal implants.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Müller cells wrap this cell almost completely, and they do a job glia elsewhere do not: they act as living optical fibres that guide light through the retina to the photoreceptors.

They also mop up released glutamate with the transporter GLAST, convert it to glutamine, and hand it back, so the giant bipolar cell's transmitter is recycled rather than resynthesised.

They buffer potassium through Kir4.1 channels, which matters here because sustained graded release leaks potassium continuously rather than in bursts.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this one cell type and the outer retina loses its widest and sparsest sampler.

Every other bipolar cell reports on a small, dense, contiguous patch of cones, whereas the giant reports on a broad, deliberately thinned-out sample.

The region would keep its detail and lose its cheapest estimate of the average light level over a large patch, the signal that helps the inner retina judge contrast against local background.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell never integrates to a threshold and never fires, so any simulation that models it as a spiking unit is simply wrong.

Its computation is analogue: a weighted sum over a chosen subset of cones, minus a horizontal cell average, passed through the saturating nonlinearity of calcium-driven ribbon release.

Its wiring rule is itself a computation, because choosing about half the cones in reach, apparently by cone type, is a decision made in development and then frozen into anatomy.

Its terminal is under presynaptic inhibition from amacrine cells, so the output gain is set from below as well as from above.

It participates in volume signalling too, since glutamate that spills out of the cleft reaches receptors on neighbouring processes and on Müller cells.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: graded voltage from 15 to 20 cone pedicles, range minus 60 to minus 35 millivolts, of which only about 52 percent are actually contacted.

• INPUTS: a wide inhibitory average from H1 and H3 horizontal cells at the same pedicles, expressed as a shift of a few millivolts.

• INPUTS: presynaptic inhibition at the axon terminal from GABA-releasing and glycine-releasing amacrine cells, 0 to 1 normalised.

• OUTPUTS: graded glutamate release rate, 0 to 1 normalised, onto amacrine cell processes and ganglion cell dendrites at dyad ribbon synapses.

• STATE: membrane voltage, ribbon ready-pool occupancy, terminal calcium concentration, adaptation gain.

• PARAMETERS: dendritic field diameter 70 to 100 micrometres, cones in reach 15 to 20, contact probability 0.27 to 0.82, capacitance 3 to 8 picofarads, input resistance 1 to 3 gigaohms.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 25 milliseconds, ribbon pool refill 100 to 300 milliseconds, light adaptation tens of seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: in photoreceptor degeneration such as retinitis pigmentosa the dendrites lose their cone partners, retract and sprout, so the wide coarse channel first falls silent and is then corrupted by spontaneous inner retinal activity.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the graded glutamate output of one giant bipolar cell from a sparse selected subset of the cones above it.
Create a list variable called contacted_voltages with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called voltage_total with initial value 0.
For each cone in cones_in_dendritic_field, perform the following operations.
    If the contact flag of cone is equal to true, then perform the following actions.
        Add the membrane voltage of cone to the end of contacted_voltages.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in contacted_voltages.
If the total number of items in contacted_voltages is equal to 0, then perform the following actions.
    Return 0 to the calling function.
End the conditional block.
For each voltage in contacted_voltages, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the sum of voltage_total and voltage.
    Set voltage_total to that sum.
End the loop.
Calculate the quotient of voltage_total divided by the total number of items in contacted_voltages.
Create a number variable called centre_signal with initial value that quotient.
Calculate the difference of centre_signal and horizontal_cell_average.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value that difference.
Calculate the product of drive and minus 0.8.
Create a number variable called target_voltage with initial value the sum of minus 45 and that product.
Calculate the difference of target_voltage and membrane_voltage.
Calculate the product of that difference and 0.05.
Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and that product.
Create a number variable called release with initial value the saturating function of membrane_voltage.
Display release to the console.
Return release to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because retinal models are almost always prototyped in it and the
# whole computation is a handful of floating point operations with no timing pressure.
import math

def giant_bipolar_step(cone_mv, contacted, hc_mv, st, dt=0.001):
    """One 1 ms step. Returns glutamate release rate, 0 to 1."""
    total, n = 0.0, 0
    for v, c in zip(cone_mv, contacted):
        if c:                       # only about half the cones in reach are wired in
            total += v
            n += 1
    if n == 0:
        return 0.0
    centre = total / n              # mean voltage of the contacted cones, mV
    drive = centre - hc_mv          # horizontal cell surround subtracted
    target = -45.0 - 0.8 * drive    # sign inverting: cones hyperpolarise, cell depolarises
    st["v"] += (target - st["v"]) * dt / 0.020      # 20 ms membrane filter
    return 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp(-(st["v"] + 45.0) / 4.0))   # saturating ribbon release

st = {"v": -45.0}
contacted = [True, False] * 6       # 12 cones in reach, 6 actually contacted
for _ in range(200):                # 200 ms in darkness
    dark = giant_bipolar_step([-40.0] * 12, contacted, -40.0, st)
for _ in range(200):                # 200 ms of light: cones and H cells hyperpolarise
    light = giant_bipolar_step([-55.0] * 12, contacted, -48.0, st)
print("release in darkness", round(dark, 3), "in light", round(light, 3))
# prints: release in darkness 0.5 in light 0.802

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other primate bipolar cell reaches 100 micrometres across the cone mosaic, and no other one refuses half the cones it touches.

If you see a bipolar cell with a huge, spindly, barely branched dendritic tree whose terminals skip cones in an apparently deliberate pattern, and whose axon ends either in two flat tiers or in one broad middle tier of the inner plexiform layer, you are looking at a giant bipolar cell.

CHAPTER 205. H1 CELLS (Red-Green Backdrop Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that lets you see a black cat as black in bright sunshine and still black in a dim room, because it never reports light, only difference.

H1 is an alphanumeric series label that tells a reader nothing except that someone counted first.

Red-Green names the spectral diet, because long and middle wavelength cones supply about ninety-nine percent of this cell's input while short-wavelength cones are almost entirely ignored.

Backdrop names the work, since horizontal cells feed a wide averaged signal back onto the cones, which is the raw material of the antagonistic surround that lets a bipolar cell report local contrast rather than absolute light.

Neuron marks it as a horizontal cell that also sends a long axon whose terminal touches rod spherules exclusively, so the same backdrop service is offered to the night receptors.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A horizontal cell is a sideways-running interneuron, meaning a local connector neuron, in the upper wiring layer of the retina.

The H1 cell, also written HI, is the classic and most numerous horizontal cell of the human and monkey retina.

It listens to a patch of cones, averages them, and pushes that average back onto the very cones it listened to, as negative feedback.

That single trick builds the antagonistic surround, the ring of opposite sign around the centre of every receptive field, which is what turns raw brightness into contrast.

Because H1 cells pool long-wavelength cones and middle-wavelength cones without preference, they report luminance rather than colour, and their voltage response was historically called the luminosity or L-type S-potential after its discoverer Gunnar Svaetichin.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body lies at the very top of the inner nuclear layer, just beneath the photoreceptor terminals.

Stout dendrites radiate outward and end in dense clusters of round or doughnut-shaped terminals, each cluster plugged into the base of one cone pedicle as a lateral element of the ribbon synapse.

A single thick axon leaves the cell body, runs more than a millimetre sideways through the outer plexiform layer, and swells into a separate structure called the axon terminal, which carries a fan of hundreds of lollipop-shaped endings.

Those axon terminal endings contact rod spherules, the tiny output knobs of rods, and only rod spherules.

The axon is so thin and so long that the cell body end and the axon terminal end behave as two nearly independent compartments, one cone-driven and one rod-driven.

SIZE:

The dendritic tree is about 15 micrometres across in the fovea and 80 to 100 micrometres across in the periphery.

In the fovea it gathers from about 6 or 7 cones, and in the periphery from as many as 18.

Measured receptive fields, which include the widening effect of coupling to neighbours, run from about 122 micrometres mean diameter at 4 millimetres from the fovea to about 309 micrometres at 11 millimetres.

The axon exceeds 1,000 micrometres, making it one of the longest processes contained entirely within the retina.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There are no accepted subtypes of the H1 cell itself.

The cell is functionally two-part, however, and simulations should treat it that way: a cone-contacting cell body and dendritic compartment, and a rod-contacting axon terminal compartment, joined only weakly through a high-resistance axon.

WHERE IT LIVES:

H1 cells occupy the outermost row of the inner nuclear layer across the entire human retina, from the foveal slope to the far periphery at the ora serrata, the scalloped edge where the retina stops.

Their dendrites and their axon terminals both lie within the outer plexiform layer.

The cell sits exactly at the interface between the photoreceptor layer and the inner retina, which is why it can act on the very first synapse in vision.

NUMBER:

Horizontal cells number roughly 1 million per eye in total.

H1 cells are the majority, and a defensible estimate is about 600,000 per eye, with a range of 500,000 to 700,000; confidence is moderate, because the split among horizontal cell types is inferred from density measurements rather than counted whole.

Their density spans a factor of 25, from about 25,000 cells per square millimetre at 1 millimetre from the foveal centre down to about 1,000 cells per square millimetre in the far periphery.

That is roughly 0.37 percent of the neurons in one retina, and about 0.0014 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

H1 cells never fire action potentials; they hold a smooth graded voltage.

In darkness they sit depolarised near minus 40 to minus 30 millivolts, because cones are releasing glutamate onto them continuously.

Light hyperpolarises them by up to 20 or 30 millivolts, slowly, and roughly in proportion to the logarithm of intensity.

Their glutamate receptors are fast ionotropic channels of the AMPA and kainate families, giving a sign-conserving response.

They are electrically coupled to their neighbours through gap junctions, which are direct pores between cells, so the recorded receptive field is far wider than the anatomical dendritic tree.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input at the dendrites comes from long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cone pedicles, contacted without spectral preference, plus at most sparse contact with short-wavelength cones.

Input at the axon terminal comes from rod spherules, exclusively.

Output is negative feedback onto the same cone pedicles, plus gap junction coupling to other H1 cells.

Feed-forward inhibition onto bipolar cell dendrites in the same synaptic cleft also occurs, which sharpens the surround one synapse further along.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is over 1 millimetre long, unmyelinated, and unusually thin, roughly 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres.

Its high internal resistance means voltage signals attenuate steeply along it, so it does not so much transmit as isolate.

The result is a single cell running two separate feedback loops at once, one for daylight cone vision and one for night-time rod vision.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

H1 cells contain gamma-aminobutyric acid, abbreviated GABA, the main inhibitory chemical messenger of the nervous system, together with its synthesising enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase.

The feedback they exert on cones is now understood as a hybrid of three mechanisms: ephaptic inhibition, meaning a direct electrical field effect through connexin hemichannels in the horizontal cell tip; modulation of the cone's calcium channels by protons, that is by acidity, within the narrow cleft; and slower GABA action.

The ephaptic component is essentially instantaneous, the proton component takes tens to hundreds of milliseconds, and GABA sets the overall efficacy of both.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable, for the same anatomical reason that applies to every neuron inside the retina.

There are no oligodendrocytes within the neural retina, so even this exceptionally long axon is bare.

That bareness is functional rather than a defect, because the signal attenuation it causes is precisely what keeps the rod and cone compartments separate.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Energy goes into holding a depolarised membrane in darkness and into running connexin hemichannels, which leak current continuously by design.

Mitochondria are spread through the dendrites and concentrated in the axon terminal.

Demand falls in bright light, when the cell hyperpolarises and its channels close, so this is one of the few neurons that costs less to run in daylight.

PLASTICITY:

Gap junction coupling between H1 cells is regulated by dopamine acting through D1 receptors, so the receptive field physically shrinks in bright light and widens in dim light, over minutes.

The strength of feedback also adapts to the background level over seconds.

After photoreceptor loss, H1 cells sprout long aberrant neurites into the inner retina, one of the earliest signs of retinal remodelling.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Müller cell processes form the outer limiting membrane, a belt of junctions just above the H1 cell body that seals the outer retina, and no glial structure quite like it exists elsewhere in the nervous system.

Those same Müller processes clear glutamate and, critically for this cell, buffer protons in the synaptic cleft, which makes the glia direct participants in the pH feedback mechanism rather than bystanders.

Astrocytes are absent from the outer retina entirely, so Müller cells do the whole job alone.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete H1 cells and the outer retina keeps its light meter and loses its edge detector.

Every downstream cell would report absolute brightness instead of local contrast, so a page of text would become a uniform grey wash that brightens and dims with the room lights.

Colour would survive but constancy would not, and the retina would saturate at almost every sunlit surface.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell is the standard example of an ephaptic synapse, meaning one that works by an electric field rather than by a chemical messenger, and any faithful model must include a non-chemical pathway.

It is a syncytium as much as a neuron, because gap junctions merge dozens of H1 cells into one electrical sheet whose extent is under dopaminergic control.

Its two compartments compute different things from different photoreceptors at the same time.

Its output changes the acidity of a synaptic cleft, which is chemistry rather than signalling in the ordinary sense.

It never spikes, never integrates to a threshold, and has no refractory period.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate-driven graded voltage from 6 to 18 long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cone pedicles at the dendrites, cone voltage range minus 60 to minus 30 millivolts.

• INPUTS: glutamate from several hundred rod spherules at the axon terminal, active only in dim light below about 0.01 candela per square metre.

• INPUTS: gap junction current from neighbouring H1 cells, coupling conductance roughly 0.1 to 1 nanosiemens per neighbour and modulated by dopamine.

• OUTPUTS: a feedback shift of the cone calcium channel activation curve, minus 5 to 0 millivolts, delivered to every contacted cone pedicle.

• OUTPUTS: cleft pH change and GABA release at the same pedicles, plus feed-forward inhibition onto bipolar dendrites.

• STATE: cell body membrane voltage, axon terminal membrane voltage, cleft proton concentration, coupling conductance, adaptation gain.

• PARAMETERS: dendritic diameter 15 to 100 micrometres, cones contacted 6 to 18, axon length above 1,000 micrometres, dark resting voltage minus 40 to minus 30 millivolts.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 5 to 15 milliseconds, ephaptic feedback under 1 millisecond, proton feedback 100 to 300 milliseconds, dopaminergic coupling change 1 to 10 minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: when horizontal cell feedback fails, as when connexin hemichannels are lost, the surround collapses, contrast sensitivity falls and the electroretinogram b-wave loses its shape; after photoreceptor death the cells sprout and wire wrongly.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute one time step of H1 horizontal cell feedback onto the cones it contacts.
Create a number variable called cone_total with initial value 0.
For each cone in contacted_cones, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the sum of cone_total and the membrane voltage of cone.
    Set cone_total to that sum.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in contacted_cones.
Calculate the quotient of cone_total divided by the total number of items in contacted_cones.
Create a number variable called cone_average with initial value that quotient.
Calculate the sum of cone_average and 40.
Calculate the product of that sum and 0.6.
Create a number variable called target_voltage with initial value the difference of that product and 40.
Calculate the difference of target_voltage and membrane_voltage.
Calculate the product of that difference and 0.1.
Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and that product.
Calculate the difference of neighbour_voltage and membrane_voltage.
Calculate the product of that difference and 0.03.
Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and that product.
Calculate the sum of membrane_voltage and 40.
Calculate the product of that sum and 0.12.
Create a number variable called ephaptic_shift with initial value that product.
Calculate the sum of membrane_voltage and 40.
Calculate the product of that sum and 0.05.
Calculate the difference of that product and proton_shift.
Calculate the product of that difference and 0.005.
Set proton_shift to the sum of proton_shift and that product.
Calculate the sum of ephaptic_shift and proton_shift.
Return that sum to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python again, because the fast ephaptic term and the slow proton term are just two
# first order filters, and clarity matters more than speed for a single cell.
def h1_step(cone_mv, st, dt=0.001):
    """One 1 ms step. Returns the feedback shift applied to each contacted cone, in mV.
    A negative value means the cone's calcium current is disinhibited."""
    mean_cone = sum(cone_mv) / len(cone_mv)                  # pool L and M cones equally
    target = -40.0 + 0.60 * (mean_cone + 40.0)               # graded, sign conserving
    st["v"] += (target - st["v"]) * dt / 0.010               # 10 ms membrane filter
    st["v"] += 0.30 * (st["v_neighbour"] - st["v"]) * dt / 0.010   # gap junction pull
    ephaptic = 0.12 * (st["v"] + 40.0)                       # instantaneous field effect
    st["ph"] += (0.05 * (st["v"] + 40.0) - st["ph"]) * dt / 0.200  # 200 ms proton term
    return ephaptic + st["ph"]

st = {"v": -40.0, "ph": 0.0, "v_neighbour": -40.0}
for _ in range(1000):                       # 1 second of steady light on 9 cones
    fb = h1_step([-55.0] * 9, st)
print("H1 voltage", round(st["v"], 2), "mV, feedback", round(fb, 3), "mV")
# prints: H1 voltage -46.87 mV, feedback -1.166 mV

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Look for a cell in the top row of the inner nuclear layer with a compact bush of doughnut-shaped cone contacts and, a full millimetre away, a completely separate fan of hundreds of lollipop endings sitting inside rod terminals.

Nothing else in the human body is a single neuron whose two ends serve day vision and night vision independently, and no other horizontal cell contacts rods exclusively at its axon terminal.

CHAPTER 206. H2 CELLS (Blue-Sampling Backdrop Neuron) (COG)

Only about one cone in twenty in your eye is sensitive to blue light, and this spidery cell goes hunting for them.

H2 is the second entry in a numbered list and teaches nothing.

Blue-Sampling names the one property that separates this cell from its neighbour in the set, since about forty-two percent of its cone contacts are on short-wavelength cones and fifty-eight percent on long and middle wavelength cones, a far heavier blue diet than any other horizontal cell.

Backdrop is the shared family word for the averaged feedback signal all horizontal cells return to the photoreceptors to build the surround.

Neuron marks it as a horizontal cell, and the name deliberately does not promise colour opponency, because primate horizontal cells were shown to be cone-specific without spectral opponency.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The H2 cell, also written HII, is the second horizontal cell type of the human and monkey retina, and the only one that seeks out short-wavelength cones on purpose.

A horizontal cell is a sideways-running connector neuron in the outer plexiform layer, the upper wiring layer of the retina, where photoreceptors hand their signal on.

Short-wavelength cones, usually called S-cones or blue cones, are the rarest of the three colour detectors, making up only about 5 to 10 percent of all cones and absent altogether from the very centre of the fovea, the pit of sharpest vision.

The H2 cell directs its main dendrites, meaning its input fibres, straight at those rare cones wherever they occur in its territory, while also picking up weaker contacts from nearly every other cone within reach.

Its job is to provide feedback and feed-forward inhibition specialised for the blue-yellow colour circuit, and, remarkably, it does this while remaining a plain luminosity cell itself.

Dacey and colleagues showed in 1996 that primate H2 cells have cone specificity without spectral opponency, meaning that even though they are wired preferentially to S-cones, they hyperpolarise to light of every wavelength and never invert their sign.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Where the H1 cell is stout and bushy, the H2 cell is spidery and intricate.

Its dendrites are fine, wandering and irregularly branched, and they end in small wispy terminals rather than in tidy clusters of doughnuts.

Major dendrites bend out of their way toward S-cone pedicles, the flattened output bases of blue cones, and cluster densely there.

Its axon is quite unlike the H1 axon: it is short, only about 100 to 200 micrometres, and it curls rather than running straight.

That short curled axon ends in wispy terminals that contact cone pedicles, with a further preference for blue cone pedicles, so both ends of the cell serve cones and neither end touches rods.

SIZE:

At any given eccentricity the H2 dendritic field is larger than the H1 field and the cells are sparser on the ground.

In central retina the dendritic tree spans roughly 20 to 40 micrometres and gathers from about 8 to 12 cones, including one to three S-cones.

In peripheral retina it spans roughly 100 to 150 micrometres and gathers from 20 or more cones.

The cell body is about 8 to 12 micrometres across and sits in the outermost row of the inner nuclear layer.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No subtypes of H2 are recognised.

The nearest thing to internal variation is regional: in the far periphery, where S-cones are sparse and scattered, individual H2 cells become correspondingly more asymmetric, reaching further in the direction of the nearest blue cones.

WHERE IT LIVES:

H2 cells lie in the outermost row of the inner nuclear layer, with dendrites and axon terminals in the outer plexiform layer, throughout the human retina.

They are absent from the very centre of the foveola, the innermost few hundred micrometres, because S-cones themselves are absent there and inner retinal cells are displaced sideways into the Henle fibre layer.

Like all horizontal cells they occupy the interface between the photoreceptor layer above and the bipolar cell layer below, and their whole existence is spent modifying the first synapse of vision.

NUMBER:

Within the roughly 1 million horizontal cells per eye, H2 cells are a clear minority.

A defensible estimate is about 230,000 per eye, with a range of 150,000 to 300,000, which is roughly a quarter of all horizontal cells; confidence is moderate to low, because published work reports H2 density relative to H1 rather than an absolute human whole-retina count.

That is about 0.14 percent of the neurons in one retina, and roughly 0.0005 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

H2 cells are non-spiking and graded, sitting depolarised near minus 40 millivolts in darkness and hyperpolarising by up to about 20 millivolts in light.

Their response is sustained, meaning it lasts as long as the light lasts, with no adaptation to zero.

Because their S-cone input is strong and their long-wavelength and middle-wavelength input is weaker but far more numerous, the summed response is still monophasic, that is, always the same sign.

They are electrically coupled through gap junctions into their own network, separate from the H1 network, so H2 cells talk to H2 cells and not to H1 cells.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input: dense dendritic contacts at S-cone pedicles, plus contacts with nearly all long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cones in the dendritic field, all as lateral elements at cone ribbon synapses.

Input: further cone contacts made by the short curled axon terminal, again with a preference for blue cones.

Output: negative feedback onto those same cone pedicles, and feed-forward inhibition onto the dendrites of the blue cone bipolar cell.

The machinery for that feed-forward step, meaning the vesicle release proteins and the receiving GABA receptors, is physically enriched in the small patch of neuropil directly beneath each S-cone pedicle, which is a striking case of a synapse type being concentrated at one address.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is short at 100 to 200 micrometres, thin, curled and unmyelinated.

Because it is short, voltage passes along it with far less loss than in the H1 axon, so the H2 cell behaves much more like a single electrical compartment.

That single-compartment behaviour means the same signal is delivered at the dendrites and at the axon terminal, which suits a cell that serves cones at both ends.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The transmitter is gamma-aminobutyric acid, abbreviated GABA, the main inhibitory chemical messenger of the nervous system.

H2 cells are the strongest primate candidate for genuine vesicular GABA release in the outer retina, because the vesicular GABA transporter and the receiving GABA-A receptor subunits are found concentrated beneath S-cone pedicles precisely where H2 dendrites cluster.

Alongside GABA, H2 cells use the same two non-classical feedback routes as H1 cells: an almost instantaneous ephaptic effect through connexin hemichannels, meaning a direct electrical field acting across the cleft, and a slower change in cleft acidity that shifts the cone's calcium channels.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable, because no neuron inside the neural retina is myelinated.

Myelin is made by oligodendrocytes, and oligodendrocytes are excluded from the retina, appearing only behind the sieve-like lamina cribrosa where the optic nerve leaves the eye.

For a cell whose entire axon is 200 micrometres long, insulation would in any case buy nothing.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Demand is modest and steady: it is dominated by maintaining a depolarised membrane in darkness, by tonic GABA loading into vesicles, and by continuously leaky hemichannels.

Mitochondria are distributed along the fine dendrites, close to the S-cone contact clusters where release is concentrated.

Like other outer retinal neurons, H2 cells draw glucose and lactate from Müller cells and sit in the highest oxygen-consuming tissue in the body by weight.

PLASTICITY:

Coupling within the H2 network is modulated by dopamine and by nitric oxide, so the effective size of the S-cone-weighted pool changes with the ambient light level over minutes.

Feedback gain adapts to background over seconds, keeping blue-yellow signalling usable across a very wide range of illumination.

In photoreceptor degeneration H2 cells, like H1 cells, retract their fine terminals and later sprout aberrant processes.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Müller cells provide the same glutamate recycling, potassium buffering and proton buffering here as they do for H1 cells, but the proton buffering matters more for H2 because its most important contacts are packed into the small clefts under rare S-cone pedicles where local acidity swings fastest.

Müller processes also physically wall off the neuropil beneath each cone pedicle, which is what allows the feed-forward GABA machinery beneath an S-cone to act as an isolated micro-compartment.

There are no astrocytes and no oligodendrocytes in this layer at all.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete H2 cells and the outer retina keeps its brightness and its red-green comparisons and loses the specialised inhibitory scaffolding that supports blue-yellow vision.

Blue would not vanish, because the blue cone bipolar cell would still receive its direct S-cone input, but that input would lose its matched surround and its feed-forward normalisation.

Practically, the region would lose the ability to keep blue-yellow judgements stable as the overall colour of the illumination changes, so a white wall under a blue sky and under a tungsten lamp would no longer look the same colour.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell demonstrates that wiring specificity and response specificity are separate things: it is selectively wired to one cone type yet computes a non-selective average, which is a warning to any modeller who infers function from connectivity alone.

It works partly by ephaptic field effect and partly by changing the acidity of a synaptic cleft, neither of which is a conventional synapse.

It is embedded in a private gap-junction network, so the correct simulation unit is a coupled sheet, not an isolated cell.

Its feed-forward output is spatially compartmentalised under individual cone pedicles, meaning the cell computes different things at different points on its own dendritic tree.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: strong graded drive from 1 to 5 short-wavelength cone pedicles, voltage range minus 60 to minus 30 millivolts, weight about 0.7 of the total.

• INPUTS: weaker graded drive from 8 to 25 long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cone pedicles, weight about 0.3 of the total.

• INPUTS: gap junction current from neighbouring H2 cells only, 0.1 to 1 nanosiemens per neighbour, dopamine modulated.

• OUTPUTS: feedback shift of the calcium channel activation curve at all contacted cone pedicles, minus 5 to 0 millivolts.

• OUTPUTS: feed-forward GABA release onto blue cone bipolar dendrites beneath S-cone pedicles, 0 to 1 normalised, maximal in darkness.

• STATE: membrane voltage, cleft proton level, vesicular GABA pool, network coupling conductance.

• PARAMETERS: dendritic field 20 to 150 micrometres, axon length 100 to 200 micrometres, S-cone weight 0.6 to 0.8, cells per eye about 230,000.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 8 to 15 milliseconds, ephaptic feedback under 1 millisecond, proton feedback 100 to 300 milliseconds, coupling change 1 to 10 minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: when S-cone circuits degrade, as they do early in glaucoma and in diabetic retinopathy, blue-yellow discrimination fails first, producing the acquired tritan defect used clinically as an early warning sign.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute one time step of an H2 horizontal cell, weighting blue cones heavily and all other cones lightly.
Create a number variable called s_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called lm_total with initial value 0.
For each cone in contacted_cones, perform the following operations.
    If the short wavelength flag of cone is equal to true, then perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of s_total and the membrane voltage of cone.
        Set s_total to that sum.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Calculate the sum of lm_total and the membrane voltage of cone.
        Set lm_total to that sum.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Calculate the quotient of s_total divided by s_cone_count.
Create a number variable called s_pool with initial value that quotient.
Calculate the quotient of lm_total divided by lm_cone_count.
Create a number variable called lm_pool with initial value that quotient.
Calculate the product of the sum of s_pool and 40 and 0.7.
Create a number variable called s_term with initial value that product.
Calculate the product of the sum of lm_pool and 40 and 0.3.
Create a number variable called lm_term with initial value that product.
Calculate the sum of s_term and lm_term.
Create a number variable called target_voltage with initial value the difference of that sum and 40.
Calculate the difference of target_voltage and membrane_voltage.
Calculate the product of that difference and 0.083.
Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and that product.
Calculate the product of the sum of membrane_voltage and 40 and 0.06.
Create a number variable called gaba_release with initial value the sum of 1 and that product.
If gaba_release is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
    Set gaba_release to 0.
End the conditional block.
Display gaba_release to the console.
Return gaba_release to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python, because the point of this cell is a weighted pool and a sign convention,
# and Python makes both readable at a glance with no library dependencies.
def h2_step(s_cone_mv, lm_cone_mv, st, dt=0.001):
    """One 1 ms step. Returns tonic GABA release (0 to 1) and the ephaptic shift in mV."""
    s_pool = sum(s_cone_mv) / len(s_cone_mv)        # rare blue cones, heavy weight
    lm_pool = sum(lm_cone_mv) / len(lm_cone_mv)     # common red and green cones, light weight
    target = -40.0 + 0.70 * (s_pool + 40.0) + 0.30 * (lm_pool + 40.0)
    st["v"] += (target - st["v"]) * dt / 0.012      # 12 ms membrane filter
    # GABA release is tonic in darkness and falls as the cell hyperpolarises in light
    gaba = max(0.0, 1.0 + 0.060 * (st["v"] + 40.0))
    ephaptic = 0.10 * (st["v"] + 40.0)              # instantaneous feedback onto cones
    return gaba, ephaptic

st = {"v": -40.0}
for _ in range(500):                 # half a second of blue light: S-cone drops hard
    gaba, ephaptic = h2_step([-58.0], [-42.0] * 11, st)
print("H2", round(st["v"], 2), "mV, GABA", round(gaba, 3), "shift", round(ephaptic, 3), "mV")
# prints: H2 -53.2 mV, GABA 0.208 shift -1.32 mV

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Find the horizontal cell whose thin, spidery dendrites visibly detour toward the scattered blue cones, and whose axon is short and curled instead of long and straight, and which never touches a rod at either end.

If the axon runs a millimetre and ends on rods, it is an H1 cell; if it curls back after 150 micrometres and ends on cones, especially blue ones, it is an H2 cell.

CHAPTER 207. H3 CELLS (Broad-Sweep Backdrop Neuron) (COG)

This is the quietly controversial cell of the human eye: a horizontal cell that looks almost exactly like the commonest one, except that everywhere in the retina it is a third bigger, and lopsided.

H3 is the third label in a numbered series and carries no meaning.

Broad-Sweep names the measured distinction, since in human retina this type has a dendritic field about forty percent larger in area than the first type and bears about thirty percent more dendritic terminal clusters, so it averages light over a wider patch of the sheet.

Backdrop again names the shared duty of returning an averaged signal to the cones.

Neuron marks it as the cell completing the set, since it avoids short-wavelength cones altogether, so the three names now vary along one visible dimension, which cones are pooled and over how wide an area.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The H3 cell, also written HIII, was proposed as a third human horizontal cell type by Helga Kolb, Eduardo Fernandez, Elke Schütte and Peter Ahnelt in 1994, in a paper whose title was itself a question: are there three types of horizontal cell in the human retina.

Like other horizontal cells it is a sideways-running connector neuron in the outer plexiform layer, the upper wiring layer, that averages a patch of cones and pushes that average back onto them as negative feedback.

What distinguishes it is scale and shape rather than chemistry: at every eccentricity its dendritic tree is about one third larger than that of an H1 cell nearby, and in the periphery it is conspicuously asymmetric, reaching much further in one direction than another.

Like the H1 cell it makes large dendritic terminals in long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cones and appears to avoid short-wavelength cones altogether.

Functionally it should therefore deliver a wider, coarser, direction-biased surround: the same operation as H1 performed over a larger and deliberately lopsided patch.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

In outline it resembles an H1 cell: a cell body in the top row of the inner nuclear layer, stout radiating dendrites, and clusters of large terminals plugged into cone pedicles as lateral elements of the cone ribbon synapse.

The differences are that the whole tree is larger, the branch pattern is looser, and the outline of the tree is elliptical or irregular rather than round, especially away from the centre of the retina.

The cell has an axon, but in the original human material that axon was never followed all the way to a terminal, so the identity of the photoreceptors it contacts remains genuinely unknown; the working suspicion is a mixture of rods and cones.

SIZE:

The rule of thumb is one third larger than a neighbouring H1 cell.

That gives roughly 20 micrometres across in the fovea and 110 to 130 micrometres across in the far periphery.

Cone contacts follow: about 9 to 12 cone pedicles in foveal retina, rising to about 20 to 25 in peripheral retina.

The cell body is 8 to 12 micrometres across, indistinguishable by size alone from an H1 cell body.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

None are described, and the honest position is that H3 may itself be a subtype rather than a type.

Golgi staining and electron microscopy of human tissue support three morphological classes, but transcriptomic surveys, which sort cells by which genes they switch on, generally resolve only two horizontal cell clusters in human and monkey retina.

The unresolved question is whether H3 cells are a genuinely separate population or the large, asymmetric tail of the H1 population, and a good simulation should carry the type as a parameterised variant of H1 rather than as an independent module.

WHERE IT LIVES:

H3 cells lie in the outermost row of the inner nuclear layer, with dendrites in the outer plexiform layer, and were described across the human retina from central to peripheral regions.

They have been reported clearly in human tissue and are much less obvious in macaque monkey tissue, which is one reason the type remains debated.

Like every horizontal cell, H3 occupies the interface between the photoreceptor layer and the bipolar cell layer, and it acts on the first synapse in the visual pathway.

NUMBER:

If H3 cells are real and distinct, they make up the remainder of the roughly 1 million horizontal cells per eye after H1 and H2 are counted.

A defensible estimate is about 170,000 per eye, with a range of 100,000 to 250,000, and confidence is low; the type's very existence is contested, so a simulation should expose this count as an adjustable parameter that can be set to zero.

That is roughly 0.10 percent of the neurons in one retina and about 0.0004 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

No one has recorded from a confirmed human H3 cell, so its physiology is inferred rather than measured, and that must be stated plainly.

By anatomy it should behave as a luminosity cell: non-spiking, graded, sitting near minus 40 millivolts in darkness and hyperpolarising in light, with a sustained response and no colour opponency, since it pools long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cones and skips short-wavelength cones.

Because the dendritic tree is larger, the expected receptive field and integration area are correspondingly larger and the response should be slightly slower and smoother.

Gap junction coupling with like neighbours is assumed by analogy with H1 and H2, but has not been demonstrated for H3 specifically.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input: 9 to 25 long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cone pedicles, contacted by large dendritic terminals, with short-wavelength cones apparently skipped.

Output: negative feedback onto those same cone pedicles, and presumed feed-forward inhibition onto bipolar dendrites in the same cleft.

Axonal connections are unknown, which is a real gap in the human connectome and should be represented in software as an explicit unknown rather than filled in by guesswork.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

An axon exists and leaves the cell body, but its length, its calibre and its destination have not been established in human tissue.

It is certainly unmyelinated, because nothing inside the retina is myelinated.

If it resembles the H1 axon it will be long, thin and highly attenuating, creating a second, largely independent compartment; if it resembles the H2 axon it will be short and the cell will behave as one compartment.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

By analogy with the other horizontal cells the transmitter is gamma-aminobutyric acid, abbreviated GABA, the main inhibitory chemical messenger of the nervous system, supported by ephaptic feedback through connexin hemichannels and by proton, that is acidity, modulation of the cone's calcium channels.

No transmitter study has been performed on identified H3 cells specifically.

The safest modelling assumption is that H3 uses the identical feedback machinery to H1 and differs only in the geometry over which it applies it.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable, because the retina contains no oligodendrocytes, the cells that manufacture the fatty insulating myelin sheath.

Every process of every retinal neuron is bare until axons pass through the lamina cribrosa at the optic disc.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Expected to match H1: a steady cost dominated by holding a depolarised membrane in darkness, by continuously conducting hemichannels, and by tonic transmitter loading, with the bill falling in bright light.

The larger dendritic tree means somewhat more membrane to maintain, so a modest upward adjustment of about a third over H1 is a reasonable first estimate.

No direct measurement exists.

PLASTICITY:

Presumed dopaminergic control of gap junction coupling, as in H1 and H2, changing effective receptive field size over minutes with ambient light.

Presumed sprouting after photoreceptor loss, since all horizontal cells studied do this.

The asymmetry of the dendritic tree is itself a developmental outcome, most likely shaped by competition with neighbouring horizontal cells for cone contacts, so the shape encodes a history.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Nothing about the glia around an H3 cell is known to differ from the glia around an H1 cell, and that should be said plainly rather than dressed up.

Müller cells provide the outer limiting membrane just above the cell body, recycle glutamate through the GLAST transporter, buffer potassium through Kir4.1 channels and buffer protons in the cleft where feedback happens.

There are no astrocytes and no oligodendrocytes in this layer.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

If H3 cells are real, removing them would leave the outer retina with a surround that is uniformly sized and uniformly round.

What it would lose is a second, wider, direction-biased layer of lateral inhibition running in parallel with the H1 sheet.

Concretely, the region would lose an oriented bias in contrast processing: elongated edges in one direction would no longer be treated any differently from edges in another, and the coarse, large-scale component of brightness normalisation would be weakened.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The most important point for a simulation is epistemic rather than biophysical: this is a type whose existence is uncertain, and the model should treat it as a hypothesis with a switch, not as an established fact.

Beyond that, everything that makes H1 unconventional applies here: ephaptic field feedback, proton signalling in the cleft, gap junction fusion into a sheet, tonic graded release, no spikes and no threshold.

The elliptical, asymmetric dendritic field means the cell computes an oriented spatial filter, so a rotation parameter belongs in the type definition.

Because it deliberately skips short-wavelength cones, its wiring embodies a cone-type recognition rule that operates during development.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: graded voltage from 9 to 25 long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cone pedicles, minus 60 to minus 30 millivolts, with short-wavelength cones excluded by a wiring rule.

• INPUTS: presumed gap junction current from like neighbours, 0.1 to 1 nanosiemens per neighbour, unverified for this type.

• OUTPUTS: feedback shift of the cone calcium channel activation curve at all contacted pedicles, minus 5 to 0 millivolts.

• OUTPUTS: presumed feed-forward inhibition onto bipolar dendrites; axonal output target unknown and must be flagged as unknown.

• STATE: membrane voltage, cleft proton level, coupling conductance, and a boolean existence flag for this contested type.

• PARAMETERS: dendritic long axis 20 to 130 micrometres, axis ratio about 1.5 to 2 in the periphery, size relative to local H1 cell 1.33, short-wavelength cone weight 0, cells per eye 0 to 250,000.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, ephaptic feedback under 1 millisecond, proton feedback 100 to 300 milliseconds, coupling change 1 to 10 minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: if the type is real, its loss would broaden and isotropise the outer retinal surround and blunt large-scale contrast normalisation; in photoreceptor degeneration it would retract and sprout like every other horizontal cell.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute one time step of an H3 horizontal cell using an elliptical dendritic field that skips short wavelength cones.
Create a number variable called weight_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called weighted_voltage with initial value 0.
For each cone in cones_near_cell, perform the following operations.
    If the short wavelength flag of cone is equal to true, then perform the following actions.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the quotient of the horizontal offset of cone divided by long_axis.
    Create a number variable called x_term with initial value the product of that quotient and itself.
    Calculate the quotient of the vertical offset of cone divided by short_axis.
    Create a number variable called y_term with initial value the product of that quotient and itself.
    Calculate the sum of x_term and y_term.
    Create a number variable called radius_squared with initial value that sum.
    If radius_squared is greater than 4, then perform the following actions.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Create a number variable called weight with initial value the decaying function of radius_squared.
    Calculate the sum of weight_total and weight.
    Set weight_total to that sum.
    Calculate the product of weight and the membrane voltage of cone.
    Set weighted_voltage to the sum of weighted_voltage and that product.
End the loop.
If weight_total is equal to 0, then perform the following actions.
    Return 0 to the calling function.
End the conditional block.
Calculate the quotient of weighted_voltage divided by weight_total.
Create a number variable called pooled_voltage with initial value that quotient.
Calculate the product of the sum of pooled_voltage and 40 and 0.55.
Create a number variable called target_voltage with initial value the difference of that product and 38.
Calculate the difference of target_voltage and membrane_voltage.
Calculate the product of that difference and 0.083.
Set membrane_voltage to the sum of membrane_voltage and that product.
Calculate the product of the sum of membrane_voltage and 38 and 0.1.
Return that product to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python, because the defining feature here is a geometric wiring rule over a cone
# mosaic, and list comprehension over coordinates keeps that rule visible.
import math

def h3_step(cones, st, dt=0.001, long_axis=95.0, short_axis=60.0):
    """cones: list of (dx_um, dy_um, voltage_mV, is_s_cone). Returns feedback shift in mV."""
    wsum = vsum = 0.0
    for dx, dy, v, is_s in cones:
        if is_s:
            continue                                  # H3 dendrites skip blue cones
        r2 = (dx / long_axis) ** 2 + (dy / short_axis) ** 2   # elliptical, oriented field
        if r2 > 4.0:
            continue                                  # outside the dendritic tree
        w = math.exp(-r2)                             # taper toward the edge
        wsum += w
        vsum += w * v
    if wsum == 0.0:
        return 0.0
    pooled = vsum / wsum
    target = -38.0 + 0.55 * (pooled + 40.0)
    st["v"] += (target - st["v"]) * dt / 0.012        # 12 ms membrane filter
    return 0.10 * (st["v"] + 38.0)                    # feedback onto every contacted cone

field = [(x * 20.0, y * 20.0, -55.0, (x + y) % 7 == 0)
         for x in range(-4, 5) for y in range(-3, 4)]     # 63 cones on a 20 um grid
st = {"v": -38.0}
for _ in range(500):
    fb = h3_step(field, st)
print("H3", round(st["v"], 2), "mV, feedback", round(fb, 3), "mV")
# prints: H3 -46.25 mV, feedback -0.825 mV

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Put an H3 cell beside an H1 cell from the same patch of retina and the H3 tree is visibly a third wider and clearly lopsided, while its terminals sit only in red and green cones and never in blue ones.

It is the only named human horizontal cell whose axon has never been traced to its ending, and the only one whose existence as a separate type is still an open question.

CHAPTER 208. AII AMACRINE CELLS (Night-Vision Splitting Neuron) (COG)

On a moonless night, almost every photon your eye manages to catch is funnelled through this one small cell, which makes it the narrowest bottleneck in human vision.

AII is a catalogue code from a morphological survey and teaches nothing about the cell.

Night-Vision names the regime it owns, because in dim light the rod signal reaches the rest of the retina almost entirely through this cell, and its pathway sets the scotopic threshold at which vision begins.

Splitting names the actual operation, since the cell takes one rod signal and divides it two ways, passing it unchanged through electrical gap junctions to the ON cone bipolar cells and sign-inverted through glycine release to the OFF cone bipolar cells, so both halves of vision are served from a single input.

Neuron marks it as a cell that connectome work found contacts at least twenty-eight different cell classes, the most complex interaction repertoire of any known vertebrate neuron.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An amacrine cell is an interneuron of the inner retina, meaning a local connector cell that talks to its neighbours rather than sending a fibre out of the eye.

The AII amacrine cell is the smallest and most numerous of them, and it is the hub of the night vision circuit.

It receives the amplified rod signal from rod bipolar cells and then does something no other retinal neuron does: it splits that single signal into two opposite streams.

To the ON stream, the cells that report light getting brighter, it passes the signal unchanged through electrical junctions.

To the OFF stream, the cells that report light getting dimmer, it passes the same signal through inhibitory chemical synapses that flip its sign.

In daylight it keeps working, supplying what is called crossover inhibition, a correction that stops OFF cone bipolar cells from saturating at high light levels.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body sits right on the border between the inner nuclear layer, the middle sheet of cell bodies, and the inner plexiform layer, the lower wiring carpet.

A single thick primary dendrite drops straight down from the cell body like a plumb line.

In the outer half of the wiring carpet, called sublamina a, that dendrite grows stubby knobs called lobular appendages.

In the inner half, called sublamina b, it ends in a fine bushy spray called the arboreal dendrites.

The two halves do opposite jobs: the knobs release inhibitory chemical transmitter, and the bushy spray makes electrical junctions.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 7 to 10 micrometres across, one of the smallest neurons in the human body.

The dendritic field is roughly 15 to 30 micrometres wide near the centre of vision and 30 to 70 micrometres wide in the far periphery.

Total dendritic length is only a few hundred micrometres, so the whole cell would fit inside a full stop on this page.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

No separate named subtypes are recognised, but the central and peripheral forms differ measurably.

Foveal AII cells are smaller, their inner dendrites are finer, and the two-tiered shape is partly hidden because the retinal layers are stretched sideways at the centre.

Foveal cells carry about 19 gap junctions per 1,000 square micrometres of membrane against about 30 in peripheral cells, and about 58 ribbon inputs per 1,000 square micrometres in the inner tier against about 71 peripherally.

WHERE IT LIVES:

It lies at the inner nuclear layer to inner plexiform layer border across the whole neural retina, from the foveal centre to the ora serrata, the scalloped rim where the retina stops.

In macaque it is present as close as 140 micrometres from the foveal centre, even though the rod bipolar cells that normally feed it do not appear until about 600 micrometres out.

It straddles three interfaces at once: the boundary between the cell body layer and the wiring layer, the boundary between sublamina a and sublamina b, and the functional boundary between the rod system and the cone system.

NUMBER:

The AII is the most numerous amacrine type, making up roughly 11 percent of all amacrine cells.

Its density runs from about 5,000 cells per square millimetre in central retina down to about 1,000 cells per square millimetre in the periphery of the macaque eye.

A defensible estimate for a human eye is about 3 million cells, with a range of 1.5 to 4 million, so roughly 6 million across both eyes.

That is about 2.3 percent of the roughly 260 million neurons in the two retinas, and about 0.007 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

Confidence is moderate: the density figures are solid monkey measurements, but no whole human retina has been counted cell by cell.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Unusually for an amacrine cell, the AII fires small fast electrical pulses called spikelets, roughly 10 to 30 millivolts tall and only a millisecond or two wide.

They are produced by a cluster of voltage-gated sodium channels on the thick proximal dendrite and are abolished by tetrodotoxin, the pufferfish poison that blocks those channels.

They are not full action potentials, because they do not travel far and do not reach the overshoot of a spiking neuron.

The cell rests near minus 60 millivolts, has a very high input resistance of around 1 gigaohm, and can respond to the absorption of a single photon somewhere in its rod pool with a blip of one or two millivolts.

The same sodium channels give the cell a resonance, a preferred frequency of oscillation, in the 10 to 100 hertz range.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

About 25 to 30 rod bipolar cells converge onto one peripheral AII cell through ribbon synapses, releasing glutamate onto AMPA-type receptors on the inner dendrites.

Output leaves by two completely different routes from the two tiers.

The lobular appendages in the outer tier make conventional glycinergic synapses onto the axon terminals of OFF cone bipolar cells and onto the dendrites of OFF ganglion cells.

The arboreal dendrites in the inner tier make gap junctions, direct pores between cells, with the terminals of ON cone bipolar cells and with three to five neighbouring AII cells.

Those junctions are built from connexin 36, the neuronal gap junction protein, and the cell assembles different junctions depending on whether the partner is another AII or a bipolar cell.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Not Applicable, and the reason is in the name.

Amacrine means without a long fibre, and the AII cell has no axon at all: the same short dendrites that receive its inputs also carry its outputs, so there is no separate output cable to describe.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The AII releases glycine, the smallest amino acid and one of the two main inhibitory messengers in the nervous system, packaged by the vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter and recovered by the glycine transporter GlyT1.

Glycine is small enough to pass straight through connexin 36 pores, so it leaks into the coupled ON cone bipolar cells, which is why some bipolar cells stain for a transmitter they never make.

Dopamine acting on D1 receptors and nitric oxide acting through cyclic GMP both modulate the cell, mainly by changing how strongly its gap junctions conduct.

MYELINATION:

None.

Myelin, the fatty insulation that speeds nerve conduction, is absent from the entire retina inside the eye, because a coat of fat would scatter light before it reached the photoreceptors.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High for such a small cell, because it is active continuously in both darkness and daylight and never gets an off shift.

It is packed with mitochondria and with calretinin, a calcium-buffering protein used as its identifying marker in monkey and human tissue.

It sits in the inner retina, the region most vulnerable to oxygen shortage, so it fails early when retinal blood flow is compromised.

PLASTICITY:

Its most important adjustable property is the strength of its electrical coupling, and that follows an inverted U curve against background light.

Coupling is weak in complete darkness, which keeps each cell private so a single photon is not diluted; it peaks at mid-twilight light levels, where averaging across many cells cancels noise; and it falls again in bright light.

Dopamine and nitric oxide carry out this adjustment by changing the phosphorylation state of connexin 36, and the whole cycle is also under circadian control.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Müller cells, the radial glia that span the retina like scaffolding poles, wrap the inner plexiform layer around the AII and buffer potassium through Kir4.1 channels.

What is unusual here is the glycine housekeeping: unlike in the spinal cord, where glial transporters clear glycine, retinal Müller cells carry little GlyT1, so the AII cell recovers most of its own transmitter.

Microglia, the resident immune cells, wrap closely around AII cells during retinal degeneration and are implicated in the rewiring that follows.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this one cell type and starlight vision ends.

Rods would still catch photons and rod bipolar cells would still amplify them, but the signal would have nowhere to go, because the AII is the only exit from the primary rod pathway into the cone circuitry that reaches the brain.

In daylight the region would lose crossover inhibition, so OFF ganglion cells would clip and flatten their responses to bright edges.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The AII is a hybrid device, chemical on one side and electrical on the other, and it inverts the sign of the signal on the chemical side while preserving it on the electrical side.

Its gap junction network turns thousands of separate cells into one adjustable electrical sheet, so the effective receptive field of a single AII can be tuned by a chemical messenger rather than by rewiring.

Its dendritic spikelets act as a local booster, regenerating small signals before they are handed on.

Glycine crossing the gap junctions is a chemical message travelling through an electrical synapse, a genuinely unusual piece of biology.

When photoreceptors die, the AII becomes tonically hyperpolarised, its intrinsic resonance is unmasked as an oscillation near 10 hertz, and that rhythm spreads through the coupled AII and ON bipolar cell network to produce the rhythmic bursting that plagues blind retinas.

Connexin 36 phosphorylation is measurably raised in both fast and slow degeneration models, which increases the coupling that carries the oscillation.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from 25 to 30 rod bipolar ribbon synapses onto AMPA receptors, 0 to 1 normalised release rate.

• INPUTS: junctional current from 3 to 5 neighbouring AII cells and from coupled ON cone bipolar terminals, coupling conductance roughly 0.1 to 1 nanosiemens per partner.

• INPUTS: GABA from wide-field amacrine cells, dopamine 0 to 100 nanomolar, and nitric oxide as gain signals.

• OUTPUTS: glycine release from lobular appendages onto OFF cone bipolar terminals and OFF ganglion cell dendrites, sign-inverting.

• OUTPUTS: bidirectional electrical current into ON cone bipolar terminals, sign-preserving.

• STATE: membrane voltage, sodium channel activation and inactivation, gap junction conductance, connexin 36 phosphorylation level, vesicle pool at the lobules.

• PARAMETERS: resting voltage minus 60 millivolts, spikelet threshold about minus 48 millivolts, spikelet amplitude 10 to 30 millivolts, input resistance about 1 gigaohm, dendritic field 15 to 70 micrometres, density 1,000 to 5,000 cells per square millimetre.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 15 milliseconds, spikelet 1 to 2 milliseconds, glycine synapse 3 to 10 milliseconds, coupling change under dopamine 1 to 10 minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: after photoreceptor loss in retinitis pigmentosa the cell hyperpolarises, oscillates near 10 hertz and drives ganglion cell hyperactivity that masks any residual or restored light response, which is why gap junction blockers improve optogenetic vision restoration in animal models; in inner retinal ischaemia it degenerates early, and loss of its crossover inhibition distorts daylight OFF responses.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to split the rod signal arriving at an AII amacrine cell into an electrical ON output and a chemical OFF output.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called membrane_potential with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called spikelet with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called swing with initial value 0.
For each partner in rod_bipolar_inputs, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the sum of drive and the release_rate of the partner.
    Set drive to the result.
    Calculate the sum of count and 1.
    Set count to the result.
End the loop.
Calculate the quotient of drive divided by count.
Calculate the product of the result and 30.
Calculate the sum of -60 and the result.
Set membrane_potential to the result.
Check if membrane_potential is greater than -48.
If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set spikelet to 15.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Set spikelet to 0.
End the conditional block.
Calculate the sum of membrane_potential and spikelet.
Calculate the difference of the result and -60.
Set swing to the result.
Calculate the product of swing and 0.3.
Display the result to the console.
Calculate the product of swing and -0.9.
Display the result to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the AII is a two-output device and a returned dictionary makes both outputs explicit side by side.

# AII amacrine cell: rod bipolar input split into an electrical ON arm
# and a sign-inverting glycinergic OFF arm.
import math

TAU_MS = 12.0                  # membrane time constant
REST_MV = -60.0                # resting potential
SPIKELET_THRESHOLD_MV = -48.0  # dendritic sodium channel threshold
SPIKELET_MV = 15.0             # small tetrodotoxin-sensitive spikelet
GAP_GAIN = 0.30                # connexin 36 coupling to ON cone bipolar cells
GLYCINE_GAIN = 0.90            # sign-inverting output to OFF cone bipolar cells
N_ROD_BIPOLARS = 28            # convergence onto one peripheral AII cell

def aii_step(vm, release, dt_ms):
    drive = sum(release) / float(len(release))
    target = REST_MV + 30.0 * drive
    vm = vm + (target - vm) * (dt_ms / TAU_MS)
    spikelet = 0.0
    if vm > SPIKELET_THRESHOLD_MV:
        spikelet = SPIKELET_MV * math.tanh((vm - SPIKELET_THRESHOLD_MV) / 4.0)
    return vm, vm + spikelet

def outputs(v_eff):
    swing = v_eff - REST_MV
    return {"to_ON_cone_bipolar_mV": round(GAP_GAIN * swing, 2),
            "to_OFF_cone_bipolar_mV": round(-GLYCINE_GAIN * max(0.0, swing), 2)}

vm = REST_MV
for t in range(120):
    photons = 1.0 if 40 <= t < 90 else 0.05      # a dim flash in darkness
    vm, v_eff = aii_step(vm, [photons] * N_ROD_BIPOLARS, 1.0)
    if t in (39, 60, 89, 119):
        print("t=%3d ms  Vm=%6.2f  effective=%6.2f  %s" % (t, vm, v_eff, outputs(v_eff)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron in the body wears knobs on one tier and a bush on the other, uses chemistry to invert a signal on one side while using raw electricity to preserve it on the other, and leaks its own inhibitory transmitter into its partners through the very junctions that couple them.

CHAPTER 209. STARBURST AMACRINE CELLS (COG)

It looks like a firework caught at the instant of bursting, and every one of its radiating spokes is a separate little computer that can tell which way the world is moving.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An amacrine cell is a local connector neuron of the inner retina, one that talks sideways to its neighbours instead of sending a fibre to the brain.

The starburst amacrine cell is the one that makes motion direction visible.

Each of its dozens of straight radiating dendrites responds more strongly to movement travelling outward from the cell body than to movement travelling inward, and this is the earliest point anywhere in the visual system where direction is computed.

It hands that answer to direction-selective ganglion cells, the output neurons that tell the brain which way something moved, by inhibiting them selectively when motion runs the wrong way.

It is also unusual in releasing two transmitters at once, one excitatory and one inhibitory.

Before birth it has a second career: it generates the slow travelling waves of activity that sweep across the immature retina and wire up the visual brain before the eyes have ever opened.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell is radially symmetric, like a dandelion clock, with slender dendrites leaving the cell body in every direction and branching only a few times.

There is no axon and no obvious main trunk, and the dendrites all stay within a single thin sheet of the inner plexiform layer, the lower wiring carpet.

Output release sites, seen as small swellings called varicosities, are confined to the outer third of each dendrite, while excitatory inputs arrive all along its length.

The population comes in two mirror-image sheets, one for light onset and one for light offset, and the two sheets sit at fixed depths that connectomics laboratories use as the retina's built-in depth ruler.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 7 to 10 micrometres across.

The dendritic field is roughly 150 micrometres wide in central retina and up to about 600 micrometres in far peripheral retina, so a single cell can span a patch of visual field about the width of your thumbnail at arm's length in the periphery.

Each dendrite is well under a micrometre thick, which is precisely what makes it electrically semi-isolated from its siblings.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

There are exactly two, and they are mirror images.

The ON starburst cell keeps its cell body in the inner nuclear layer, the middle sheet of cell bodies, and spreads its dendrites in the inner half of the wiring carpet.

The OFF starburst cell has its cell body displaced downward into the ganglion cell layer and spreads its dendrites in the outer half.

WHERE IT LIVES:

ON starburst cell bodies sit in the innermost row of the inner nuclear layer; OFF starburst cell bodies sit in the ganglion cell layer, where they are called displaced amacrine cells.

Their dendrites occupy two narrow strata of the inner plexiform layer, one on each side of its midline, which are the two bands that stain for the acetylcholine-making enzyme.

They are present across the whole retina of humans and macaques, becoming sparser and wider toward the periphery.

Their dendritic sheets form the interface between the bipolar cell input layer and the direction-selective ganglion cell output layer, and the OFF cell body sits at the interface between the wiring carpet and the ganglion cell layer.

NUMBER:

Cholinergic starburst cells are 3 to 5 percent of all amacrine cells.

Measured densities in human and macaque retina run from 300 to 1,000 cells per square millimetre for the ON type and 100 to 500 cells per square millimetre for the OFF type.

A defensible estimate is about 1.2 million per eye counting both types, with a range of 0.9 to 1.5 million, so roughly 2.4 million across both eyes.

That is about 0.9 percent of the roughly 260 million neurons in the two retinas, and about 0.003 percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the whole nervous system.

Confidence is moderate: the density measurements are direct and include human tissue, but the conversion to a whole-eye total assumes an even coverage that has not been verified end to end.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The starburst cell does not normally fire action potentials; it works with graded voltages and, crucially, with graded calcium signals in each dendritic tip.

It rests near minus 60 millivolts and depolarises by 5 to 20 millivolts to light in its centre.

The thin proximal dendrites have a high axial resistance, so voltage spreads poorly from one spoke to another, and each spoke therefore integrates its own inputs almost independently.

Calcium-sensitive imaging shows that the tip of a spoke responds two to three times more strongly to motion running outward along it than to motion running inward.

In macaque the cell also has a strong antagonistic surround that is not made of inhibition at all but comes from the excitatory bipolar cells feeding it, and that surround is essential for its radial motion sensitivity.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitatory input arrives as glutamate from ON or OFF cone bipolar cells all along each dendrite, with the important detail that bipolar cells contacting the proximal part of the dendrite respond more slowly than those contacting the distal part.

Inhibitory input arrives as GABA, gamma aminobutyric acid, from neighbouring starburst cells, forming a dense reciprocal network.

Output goes from the distal varicosities onto direction-selective ganglion cells, onto other starburst cells, and onto a spiking polyaxonal amacrine cell that is itself direction selective.

The wiring is asymmetric in a very specific way: a direction-selective ganglion cell receives acetylcholine roughly evenly from all the starburst cells around it, but receives GABA only from the starburst cells lying on its null side, the side motion comes from when it is being silenced.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Not Applicable in the ordinary sense.

The word amacrine means without a long fibre, and this cell has no axon whatsoever: each dendrite is both an input cable and an output terminal, which is exactly why the computation can be done separately in every spoke.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

It releases acetylcholine, the transmitter of the neuromuscular junction, made by choline acetyltransferase and packaged by the vesicular acetylcholine transporter, acting on nicotinic receptors on its targets.

It simultaneously releases GABA, packaged by the vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter and made by the enzymes GAD65 and GAD67, acting mainly on GABA-A receptors containing the alpha 2 subunit.

The two transmitters leave from the same distal region but behave differently: the acetylcholine signal is broad and largely symmetric, while the GABA signal is the directional, asymmetrically wired one.

MYELINATION:

None.

No neuron inside the human retina is myelinated, since the fatty insulation that speeds conduction elsewhere would scatter light before it reached the photoreceptors.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate in adulthood and high in development.

Acetylcholine synthesis requires continuous choline uptake through the high-affinity transporter CHT1, and the developmental waves the cell generates are sustained bursts of activity that consume energy across the entire immature retina.

PLASTICITY:

Before eye opening, starburst cells drive stage two retinal waves, slow patches of activity that crawl across the retina roughly once a minute and refine the maps that connect eye to brain.

Direction preference develops largely without visual experience, but wave activity sculpts the dendritic arbour itself.

The gene FRMD7 is required to build the asymmetric wiring, and starburst cells are among the few retinal neurons whose adult wiring depends on a single identified developmental gene.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Müller cells, the radial glia spanning the retina, and a thin layer of astrocytes at the inner surface provide the usual potassium buffering and metabolic support.

What is special here is the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, which breaks acetylcholine down and is concentrated in exactly the two thin bands where starburst dendrites run, sharpening in space and time a signal that would otherwise linger and spread.

Those same two bands, easily stained, are used as fixed depth landmarks by every laboratory reconstructing the inner retina, so this cell type doubles as the anatomical survey marker for its own neighbourhood.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove starburst cells and the retina stops reporting direction.

Laser ablation experiments show that direction selectivity in ganglion cells disappears when these cells are killed, and the optokinetic reflex, the automatic eye movement that keeps a moving scene stable on the retina, is lost.

The region would still see edges, brightness and colour perfectly well; it would simply become blind to which way anything was going.

In development, its removal would leave the visual brain without the waves that pre-wire its maps.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is the textbook example of dendritic computation, where the real work happens in a branch rather than in the cell body.

Each spoke combines three ingredients: a space and time gradient in the bipolar cell input, with slow inputs near the soma and fast inputs near the tip; a chloride gradient inside the dendrite that changes how inhibition acts along its length; and mutual GABAergic inhibition from overlapping neighbours.

Calcium enters only in microdomains at the distal varicosities, so transmitter release is controlled locally rather than by the whole-cell voltage.

Two transmitters are co-released from the same region but with different thresholds and different wiring rules, which is a rare form of dual signalling.

Acetylcholine also acts partly by volume transmission, diffusing a short distance to reach receptors that are not directly opposite a release site.

In the immature retina the same cell is a rhythm generator, using a slow after-hyperpolarisation and recurrent cholinergic excitation among starburst cells to launch and terminate waves.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from ON or OFF cone bipolar cells at 20 to 40 sites distributed along each dendrite, with a proximal-to-distal latency gradient of roughly 10 to 30 milliseconds.

• INPUTS: GABA from 10 to 30 overlapping neighbouring starburst cells, 0 to 1 normalised.

• INPUTS: a strong non-GABAergic antagonistic surround carried by the bipolar cell input itself.

• OUTPUTS: acetylcholine onto nicotinic receptors of direction-selective ganglion cells, broadly and near symmetrically.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto GABA-A alpha 2 receptors of direction-selective ganglion cells, wired only from the null side, and onto neighbouring starburst cells.

• STATE: per-dendrite membrane voltage, per-varicosity calcium concentration, internal chloride concentration, vesicle pools for acetylcholine and for GABA, and in development an after-hyperpolarisation variable.

• PARAMETERS: dendritic field 150 to 600 micrometres, about 8 to 12 primary dendrites, release sites in the distal third only, resting voltage minus 60 millivolts, direction selectivity index 0.3 to 0.8.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 15 to 30 milliseconds, proximal-to-distal delay 10 to 30 milliseconds, calcium microdomain 50 to 200 milliseconds, acetylcholine clearance a few milliseconds, developmental waves once every 30 to 120 seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: mutation of FRMD7 leaves the GABAergic wiring symmetric instead of asymmetric, horizontal direction selectivity is lost, and the result in people is X-linked idiopathic infantile nystagmus, in which the eyes oscillate because the horizontal optokinetic reflex has no directional signal to work with.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the direction preference of one starburst amacrine cell dendrite by testing whether its inputs arrive together at the tip.
Create a number variable called site_count with initial value 8.
Create a number variable called spacing with initial value 15.
Create a number variable called speed with initial value 0.5.
Create a number variable called travel with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called outward_arrivals with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called inward_arrivals with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
While index is less than site_count, repeat the following steps.
    Calculate the difference of site_count and 1.
    Calculate the difference of the result and index.
    Calculate the product of the result and spacing.
    Calculate the quotient of the result divided by speed.
    Set travel to the result.
    Calculate the product of index and spacing.
    Calculate the quotient of the result divided by speed.
    Calculate the sum of the result and travel.
    Add the result to the end of outward_arrivals.
    Calculate the sum of travel and travel.
    Add the result to the end of inward_arrivals.
    Calculate the sum of index and 1.
    Set index to the result.
End the loop.
Call the function named count_coincidences.
Calculate the difference of outward_peak and inward_peak.
Calculate the sum of outward_peak and inward_peak.
Calculate the quotient of the difference divided by the sum.
Display the result to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the whole computation is a small set of delayed arrival times, and plain lists show the coincidence at the dendritic tip without hiding it in a solver.

# Starburst amacrine dendrite: why motion outward from the soma wins.
# Inputs are picked up along the dendrite and must travel to the tip,
# where the release sites are. Outward motion makes them arrive together.
N_SITES = 8                    # bipolar cell inputs along one dendrite
SITE_SPACING_UM = 15.0         # spacing between input sites
PROPAGATION_UM_PER_MS = 0.5    # spread of depolarisation toward the tip
WINDOW_MS = 8.0                # coincidence window at the release sites

def arrival_times(stimulus_speed, outward):
    """When each input's contribution reaches the distal tip."""
    times = []
    for i in range(N_SITES):
        if outward:
            reached = i * SITE_SPACING_UM / stimulus_speed
        else:
            reached = (N_SITES - 1 - i) * SITE_SPACING_UM / stimulus_speed
        travel = (N_SITES - 1 - i) * SITE_SPACING_UM / PROPAGATION_UM_PER_MS
        times.append(reached + travel)
    return times

def peak_coincidence(times):
    """Largest number of inputs overlapping within the window."""
    best = 0
    for t in range(0, 500):
        count = 0
        for a in times:
            if abs(t - a) <= WINDOW_MS:
                count += 1
        best = max(best, count)
    return best

speed = 0.5                                            # image speed in um per ms
out = peak_coincidence(arrival_times(speed, True))     # centrifugal, soma to tip
inn = peak_coincidence(arrival_times(speed, False))    # centripetal, tip to soma
print("centrifugal: %d of %d inputs coincide" % (out, N_SITES))
print("centripetal: %d of %d inputs coincide" % (inn, N_SITES))
print("direction selectivity index: %.2f" % ((out - inn) / float(out + inn)))
# prints 8, then 1, then 0.78

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else in the nervous system looks like a perfect radial firework with its output swellings confined to the outer third of every spoke, releases an excitatory and an inhibitory transmitter from the same varicosities, and computes a different answer in each of its own dendrites while the cell body sits there knowing nothing about any of it.

CHAPTER 210. A17 AMACRINE CELLS (Rod-Signal Curbing Neuron) (COG)

On a moonless night, the A17 cell is what stops your retina from shouting.

A17 is a serial number from a classification table and says nothing.

Rod-Signal names the traffic it polices, because its varicosities are driven by glutamate released from rod bipolar cell terminals and by nothing else of consequence.

Curbing names the work, since each varicosity releases the inhibitory transmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid straight back onto the same rod bipolar terminal that just excited it, cutting the depolarisation short, which sharpens the timing of dim-light signals and improves the signal-to-noise ratio of the rod pathway.

Neuron marks it as a cell gathering from around one hundred rod bipolar cells, yet keeping each contact electrically private to its own varicosity, so the restraint is applied terminal by terminal rather than across the whole cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

The A17 is a wide-field inhibitory interneuron, a nerve cell that talks only to other cells inside the retina, and it returns the calming chemical gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) straight back to the rod bipolar terminal that just excited it.

That loop, called reciprocal feedback, gives night vision automatic gain control, so weak signals pass and the rod channel never saturates.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Picture a spider whose legs are threads of glass strung with a thousand beads.

Fifteen to thirty fine unbranched processes radiate from the cell body, and every few micrometres each swells into a bead, called a varicosity, that takes glutamate in and pushes GABA out at the same spot; there is no axon.

SIZE:

The cell body is 8 to 10 micrometres across and the dendritic field approaches one millimetre in the cat, with human peripheral cells of similar order.

Each bead is about 1 micrometre wide and holds roughly one cubic micrometre, small enough that a trickle of calcium raises the local concentration fast.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The cell is A17 in cat, rat and monkey and S1 and S2 in rabbit, the rabbit names coming from its habit of soaking up indoleamines such as serotonin.

Human gene-expression atlases split the wide-field GABA amacrines into several clusters, so there are probably two or three near-identical human variants, though the count is unsettled.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell body sits in the innermost row of the inner nuclear layer, at its interface with the inner plexiform layer, the carpet where bipolar cells meet ganglion cells.

Its processes occupy stratum 5 of sublamina b, exactly where rod bipolar terminals end, and it is densest 3 to 6 millimetres from the centre of gaze and absent from the rod-free foveal centre.

NUMBER:

Roughly 300,000 to 800,000 per eye, centred near 600,000, at low confidence because it is scaled from cat, rat and rabbit densities onto a human retina of about 1000 square millimetres.

That is 1 to 3 percent of the eye's 30 million amacrine cells and about 0.001 percent of the 86 billion neurons in the human nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

A17 cells are graded, not spiking, signalling by smooth swings of 10 to 40 millivolts from a resting level near minus 60 millivolts.

Each bead is isolated from its neighbours by the thin process between them, and large-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels, called BK channels, open as calcium rises and keep each response local.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

One cell collects glutamate from several thousand rod bipolar terminals through calcium-permeable AMPA receptors, fast glutamate receptors that admit calcium as well as sodium.

It returns GABA onto fast GABA type A and slow GABA type C receptors, and it carries nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and gap junctions, direct pores, to neighbouring A17 cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Not Applicable, for a structural reason and not an omission: the A17 has no axon, every bead is both input and output, and no fibre carries signal away from the cell.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA is the working transmitter, and the stored serotonin behind the old name indoleamine-accumulating amacrine is a marker, not the message.

Release is triggered by calcium arriving through the glutamate receptor itself, skipping the voltage-gated calcium channels almost every other synapse needs.

MYELINATION:

None, as for every retinal neuron, because myelin is opaque and would sit directly in the light path.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low, since the cell never spikes; the recurring cost is clearing calcium from a thousand beads within tens of milliseconds each.

PLASTICITY:

Feedback weakens over minutes as the retina moves into daylight, dopamine from neighbouring dopaminergic amacrine cells uncouples A17 cells from each other, and the synapses depress during long bright stimuli.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Muller cells, the tall radial glia spanning the retina, clear GABA from the tiny reciprocal cleft within milliseconds using the GAT-3 transporter and supply the glutamine from which it is rebuilt.

Without that, one bead's private feedback would leak into its neighbours' and the cell's thousandfold independence would collapse.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete the A17 and rod bipolar output saturates, so starlight and moonlight collapse into a single reading of bright.

Responses grow noisier and longer, and a faint moving shape in a dark field becomes undetectable.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is a neuron that is not one computer but a thousand, each bead running a complete input-to-output loop in parallel.

Release bypasses voltage-gated calcium channels, BK channels form a brake that switches itself on, gap junctions fuse many private loops into one for large stimuli, and acetylcholine and dopamine set behaviour from outside the cell's own input stream.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate conductance per varicosity from one rod bipolar terminal, 0 to about 1 nanosiemens; acetylcholine and dopamine, 0 to 1 normalised; gap-junction current from neighbours, in picoamperes.

• OUTPUTS: GABA release probability per varicosity, 0 to 1, onto the terminal that supplied the input.

• STATE: per-varicosity voltage, free calcium, BK activation, vesicle pool.

• PARAMETERS: about 1000 varicosities, 2 picofarads each, calcium fraction of receptor current about 0.06, release half-point near 1 micromolar with cooperativity about 4.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 4 milliseconds, calcium clearance 20 milliseconds, GABA type A decay 10 milliseconds, GABA type C decay 100 milliseconds, adaptation minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: when rods die in retinitis pigmentosa the loop remodels and breaks, and blocking A17 inhibition experimentally gives oversized sluggish rod responses and poor detection of dim moving targets.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn glutamate arriving at one A17 varicosity into a pulse of inhibitory feedback sent straight back to the rod bipolar terminal that released it.
Create a number variable called calcium with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called calcium squared with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called release with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called feedback trace with initial value empty list.
For each glutamate sample in the input stream, perform the following operations.
    Set calcium to the sum of calcium and the product of glutamate sample and 0.06.
    Set calcium to the difference of calcium and the product of calcium and 0.45.
    Check if calcium is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set calcium to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set calcium squared to the product of calcium and calcium.
    Set release to the quotient of calcium squared divided by the sum of 1 and calcium squared.
    Add release to the end of feedback trace.
End the loop.
Display feedback trace to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: one varicosity is plain scalar arithmetic and the units stay visible.
DT, C_M, G_LEAK = 1e-4, 2e-12, 1e-10         # s, farads, siemens
E_LEAK, E_AMPA, E_K = -0.060, 0.0, -0.085    # volts
G_BK_MAX, K_BK = 5e-10, 2e-6                 # siemens, molar
CA_FRACTION, CA_REST, TAU_CA = 0.06, 5e-8, 0.020
FARADAY, VOL, BUFFER = 96485.0, 1e-15, 0.01  # C/mol, litres, free fraction
KD_REL, HILL = 1.0e-6, 4.0
def a17_varicosity(g_trace):
    v, ca, out = E_LEAK, CA_REST, []
    for g in g_trace:                        # glutamate conductance, siemens
        g_bk = G_BK_MAX * ca / (ca + K_BK)   # calcium switches the brake on
        i_ampa = g * (v - E_AMPA)            # negative is inward
        i_tot = G_LEAK * (v - E_LEAK) + i_ampa + g_bk * (v - E_K)
        v += (-i_tot / C_M) * DT
        ca += ((-CA_FRACTION * i_ampa * BUFFER) / (2 * FARADAY * VOL)
               - (ca - CA_REST) / TAU_CA) * DT
        ca = max(ca, CA_REST)
        out.append(ca ** HILL / (ca ** HILL + KD_REL ** HILL))
    return out
print("peak release: %.4f" % max(a17_varicosity([0.0]*50 + [4e-10]*300 + [0.0]*400)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron in the body is a thousand independent computers strung along threads of glass.

An axonless cell whose beads take glutamate in and push GABA out at the same spot, driven by calcium coming through the glutamate receptor itself, is an A17.

CHAPTER 211. DOPAMINERGIC AMACRINE CELLS (Day-Mode Switching Neuron) (COG)

Perhaps twenty thousand of these cells, in an eye holding well over a hundred million neurons, decide whether the retina runs in daytime mode or night-time mode.

Dopaminergic is a transmitter barcode, naming the chemical in the cell's vesicles rather than the job the chemical does.

Day-Mode names the state the cell installs, because its output uncouples the electrical junctions of the night circuitry and tunes horizontal and bipolar cells for bright, high-acuity, colour-rich vision.

Switching names the act of changing the retina between two whole operating regimes rather than carrying a picture, and the switch is thrown both by ambient light and by an internal circadian clock that this cell helps reset.

Neuron marks it as the sole source of dopamine in the entire retina, driven in part by the melanopsin ganglion cells of the innermost layer, so the signal travels backwards through the sheet.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is the retina's own dopamine factory, dopamine being the signalling chemical the midbrain loses in Parkinson's disease.

It behaves less like a wire and more like a gland, spreading dopamine to thousands of cells it never touches, after which gap junctions close, receptive fields shrink, the rod pathway switches off, the cone pathway switches on, and the eye's growth is restrained.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Imagine a fishing net cast over the whole retina, woven from only a few thousand cells.

Two or three thick branches leave a large cell body into a dense plexus hugging stratum 1, the outermost stratum of the inner plexiform layer, and the signature is the ring: processes wrap in necklaces around AII amacrine cell bodies.

SIZE:

The cell body is 10 to 15 micrometres across, at the large end for an amacrine cell.

The dendritic field spans 400 to 1500 micrometres with total process length in millimetres, so few cells cover enormous ground and overlap heavily, giving a coverage factor in the tens.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Cells staining strongly for tyrosine hydroxylase, the enzyme that makes dopamine, are called TH1 and form the classic stratum 1 plexus, while weakly staining TH2 cells are sparser and poorly understood.

A second split is positional, between cells in the inner nuclear layer and those displaced into the ganglion cell layer, and a third is functional, since some also reach the outer plexiform layer and count as interplexiform cells.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies lie at the inner border of the inner nuclear layer, at its interface with the inner plexiform layer, with a minority displaced into the ganglion cell layer.

The plexus sits in stratum 1 of the inner plexiform layer, ascending processes cross to the outer plexiform layer where photoreceptors meet bipolar and horizontal cells, and density is highest near the centre of gaze and parafovea.

NUMBER:

Human whole-mount counts give 10 to 30 cells per square millimetre, about 18 in healthy controls per Ortuno-Lizaran and colleagues in 2020, so 10,000 to 30,000 per eye at moderate confidence from few samples.

That is 0.03 to 0.1 percent of the eye's amacrine cells and about 0.00005 percent of the 86 billion neurons in the nervous system, one of the rarest named neuron types in the body.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Unusually for an amacrine cell this one fires true action potentials, the sharp all-or-nothing pulses used by long-range neurons.

It is a pacemaker, ticking at 3 to 10 spikes per second in complete darkness with no input at all and rising several-fold in light, with a slow calcium-activated potassium current after each spike as the metronome.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Glutamate arrives from ON bipolar cells and from melanopsin-containing intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells, a rare case of a ganglion cell signalling backwards into the retina.

Most output is not synaptic: dopamine diffuses to D1 receptors on horizontal cells, cone terminals and AII cells, and to D2 and D4 receptors on photoreceptors and on itself.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Strictly there is no axon, but long beaded processes leave the plexus, travel a millimetre or more, carry action potentials and release transmitter along the way, unmyelinated and conducting well under one metre per second, because slow wide spread is the point.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Dopamine, built from tyrosine by tyrosine hydroxylase, the same rate-limiting enzyme used by the midbrain neurons that die in Parkinson's disease.

Most of these cells also release GABA, and dopamine output follows a daily rhythm peaking by day and opposing melatonin at night.

MYELINATION:

None, as for every retinal neuron, because myelin is opaque and the retina must stay clear.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High and distinctive: the cell spikes day and night and runs a synthesis pathway needing oxygen, iron and the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin, while dopamine oxidises into damaging by-products that demand constant antioxidant defence.

PLASTICITY:

Dopamine synthesis rises over hours in bright light and falls in darkness, and tyrosine hydroxylase expression is under circadian control.

Bright outdoor light raises retinal dopamine in children, the leading explanation for why time outdoors slows short-sightedness.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Muller glia here carry the transporters and enzymes that destroy dopamine, so they set how far each molecule travels and are the physical medium of the signal rather than bystanders.

Microglia, the resident immune cells, cluster around these processes early in Parkinson's disease and their activation tracks the loss of the plexus.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the retina loses its day and night gearbox, leaving horizontal and AII amacrine cells permanently coupled so receptive fields stay blurry in sunlight.

Contrast sensitivity drops, light adaptation turns sluggish, photoreceptor renewal drifts, and in a growing child the eye elongates into myopia.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its main output is volume transmission, chemical broadcast into tissue rather than point-to-point synapses, so a synapse-only model misses almost everything it does.

It is intrinsically rhythmic, receives a signal from a ganglion cell against the usual direction of flow, gates gap junctions across three other cell classes within minutes, runs on a circadian clock, spans two plexiform layers, and takes part in emmetropisation, the loop matching the eye's length to its optics.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from ON bipolar and melanopsin ganglion cells, 0 to 1 normalised with irradiance logarithmic; GABA from amacrine cells; circadian phase, 0 to 24 hours.

• OUTPUTS: spikes, 0 to about 30 hertz, and a dopamine field of nanomolar to low micromolar reaching horizontal cells, cone terminals, AII and A8 amacrine cells, outer segments and the retinal pigment epithelium.

• STATE: membrane voltage, afterhyperpolarisation, calcium, vesicular dopamine store, tyrosine hydroxylase activity.

• PARAMETERS: dark rate 3 to 10 hertz, light rate 10 to 30 hertz, dendritic field 400 to 1500 micrometres, density 10 to 30 cells per square millimetre.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 30 milliseconds, afterhyperpolarisation 300 milliseconds, dopamine clearance tens of seconds, uncoupling minutes, growth effects weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: in Parkinson's disease these cells fall by 26 to 58 percent by region and contacts onto AII cells drop about 60 percent, and patients lose contrast sensitivity and colour discrimination and sleep badly.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to run the dopaminergic amacrine cell as a self-ticking pacemaker whose rate rises in light and whose dopamine builds slowly in the surrounding tissue.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value negative 0.055.
Create a number variable called afterhyperpolarisation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dopamine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called push with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
For each light sample in the irradiance stream, perform the following operations.
    Set push to the difference of negative 0.055 and voltage.
    Set push to the sum of push and 0.030.
    Set push to the sum of push and the product of light sample and 0.010.
    Set push to the difference of push and afterhyperpolarisation.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the product of push and 0.0333.
    Set afterhyperpolarisation to the difference of afterhyperpolarisation and the product of afterhyperpolarisation and 0.0033.
    Check if voltage is greater than or equal to negative 0.040.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set voltage to negative 0.060.
        Set afterhyperpolarisation to the sum of afterhyperpolarisation and 0.006.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set dopamine to the sum of dopamine and 0.01.
    End the conditional block.
    Set dopamine to the difference of dopamine and the product of dopamine and 0.001.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C: a whole-retina model runs this pacemaker for thousands of cells every millisecond. */
#include <stdio.h>
#define DT          0.001    /* seconds per step */
#define V_REST     -0.055
#define V_TH       -0.040    /* volts, threshold */
#define V_RESET    -0.060
#define TAU_M       0.030    /* seconds */
#define TAU_AHP     0.300    /* seconds, the metronome */
#define AHP_STEP    0.006    /* volts of brake per spike */
#define DRIVE       0.030    /* volts of intrinsic drive */
#define LIGHT_GAIN  0.010    /* volts per unit melanopsin drive */
static int run(double light, double seconds)
{
    double v = V_REST, ahp = 0.0, drive = DRIVE + LIGHT_GAIN * light;
    int spikes = 0, k, steps = (int)(seconds / DT);
    for (k = 0; k < steps; k++) {
        v += (((V_REST - v) + drive - ahp) / TAU_M) * DT;
        ahp -= (ahp / TAU_AHP) * DT;
        if (v >= V_TH) { v = V_RESET; ahp += AHP_STEP; spikes++; }
    }
    return spikes;
}
int main(void)
{
    printf("darkness: %.1f Hz\n", run(0.0, 20.0) / 20.0);
    printf("daylight: %.1f Hz\n", run(1.0, 20.0) / 20.0);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Stain a whole human retina for tyrosine hydroxylase and almost nothing lights up, because there are only tens of thousands of these cells in a sheet of well over a hundred million.

What appears is a delicate net wearing rings around other cells' bodies, and a large sparse spontaneously spiking amacrine cell that makes dopamine and follows a daily rhythm can be nothing else.

CHAPTER 212. POLYAXONAL AMACRINE CELLS (Self-Motion Cancelling Neuron) (COG)

Almost every neuron inside the retina is a whisperer, but this one fires real nerve impulses that ripple outward for millimetres like a stone dropped in a pond.

Polyaxonal describes anatomy in Greek, meaning many axons, and leaves the purpose invisible.

Self-Motion names the thing the cell detects, motion sweeping across the whole visual field at once, which is overwhelmingly caused by the observer's own eye and head movements rather than by anything in the world.

Cancelling names the service, because these wide-field spiking cells pool rectified input from bipolar terminals across the surround and then suppress object-motion-sensitive ganglion cells whenever background and object move together, so the retina reports only genuine differential motion.

Neuron marks it as the cell that keeps a moving object visible while the smear produced by your own eyes is subtracted away before the signal ever leaves the eye.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A polyaxonal amacrine cell is an inhibitory retinal interneuron, a cell that stays inside the eye, which breaks the amacrine rule by growing four to ten axons, an axon being the long output fibre a neuron uses to send signals over distance.

It spots a sudden change in one small patch of the image and delivers a wave of the calming chemical gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) to distant patches milliseconds later, which is how the retina tells object motion apart from motion caused by your own eye.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A compact bushy dendritic tree gathers input from bipolar cells within a small circle, while long fine beaded axons leave that circle and run outward across the retina.

Signals travel inward along the dendrites but not along the axons, so the axons are true one-way cables.

SIZE:

The cell body is 10 to 15 micrometres across and the dendritic field of the classic A1 type in monkey is about 400 micrometres, roughly the width of a full stop on this page.

The axonal field spreads up to 4 to 5 millimetres, so the output territory is about a hundred times the area of the input territory.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The best characterised is A1, whose dendrites sit in stratum 3, the middle of the inner plexiform layer, and which answers both brightening and dimming; rabbit work adds a family labelled PA1 to PA5.

Greschner and colleagues in 2014 recorded polyaxonal cells from macaque retina on multielectrode arrays and found several populations each tiling the retina, so treat the human count as at least three and probably five or more.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit at the inner border of the inner nuclear layer, at the interface with the inner plexiform layer, with a minority displaced into the ganglion cell layer.

A1 dendrites occupy stratum 3 at the ON and OFF boundary, the axons run in strata 2 to 4 crossing under other cells' territories without synapsing on them, and the type thins near the centre of gaze.

NUMBER:

A 400 micrometre dendritic field at a coverage factor of one to two implies 10 to 30 cells per square millimetre, so 10,000 to 30,000 cells of one polyaxonal type per eye and 50,000 to 200,000 across the class, at low confidence because this is inferred from field size rather than counted in human tissue.

The class is 0.2 to 0.7 percent of the eye's 30 million amacrine cells and around 0.0002 percent of the 86 billion neurons in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

This cell fires full sodium action potentials, rare among amacrine cells, starting them near the cell body and propagating outward along every axon at once, slowly, because the axons are thin and bare.

Light responses are ON and OFF, strongly transient, sparse, and strikingly coordinated across neighbours when the whole image changes.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input is glutamate from both ON and OFF bipolar cells onto the dendritic arbor, plus inhibition from other amacrine cells that builds an antagonistic surround.

Output is GABA from thousands of axonal varicosities onto distant bipolar terminals, amacrine cells and ganglion cell dendrites, and same-type neighbours are joined by gap junctions, direct pores between cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Four to ten unmyelinated beaded axons per cell, each 0.2 to 0.5 micrometres thick, conducting at a fraction of a metre per second so that distance becomes delay.

That delay is the point: it lets the retina compare what is happening here now with what happened there a few milliseconds ago.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA in the large wide-field types such as A1, and glycine, the other main inhibitory chemical of the inner retina, in some smaller polyaxonal cells.

MYELINATION:

None, because myelin is white and opaque and would sit in the light path, so the retina buys transparency at the cost of slow conduction.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate to high for an interneuron, since spiking costs sodium pumping and the cell must maintain more than 20 millimetres of thin bare membrane, with mitochondria concentrated in the axonal varicosities.

PLASTICITY:

Gap-junction coupling between neighbours is modulated by dopamine and nitric oxide, so the synchronised group changes size between day and night, and transient response strength adapts to recent contrast over hundreds of milliseconds.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Human retinal astrocytes live almost entirely in the nerve fibre layer and hardly touch this cell, so its partner is the Muller cell, the tall radial glia spanning the retina.

Two Muller jobs matter here: clearing potassium along an axon that dumps it into a very narrow space over millimetres, and taking up GABA at the distant varicosities so inhibition stays where it was aimed.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Take this cell away and the retina loses its sense of elsewhere, because every other inner retinal circuit compares a point with its immediate neighbourhood and only this one compares a point with somewhere millimetres away.

An object moving against a still background would then look identical to the whole world sliding because your eye moved.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The signature computation is a travelling wave, so a point-neuron model cannot represent it and the cell must be simulated as a cable with delay.

Input and output are spatially separated, gap junctions synchronise neighbours into a sheet-wide alarm, fine patterns averaging to zero still drive it because summation is nonlinear, and it enforces one-way conduction without myelin.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from ON and OFF bipolar cells within the dendritic field, 0 to 1 normalised; GABA and glycine from surrounding amacrine cells; gap-junction current from neighbours, in picoamperes.

• OUTPUTS: sparse transient spikes, 0 to 60 hertz in a burst, and GABA at thousands of varicosities up to 2.5 millimetres away.

• STATE: somatic voltage, refractory timer, position of every spike travelling on every axon, calcium per varicosity.

• PARAMETERS: dendritic field 400 micrometres, axonal field up to 5 millimetres, 4 to 10 axons, segment length 100 micrometres, conduction about 0.5 metres per second, refractory period 10 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 milliseconds, axonal delay 0.2 milliseconds per 100 micrometres, contrast adaptation 100 to 300 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: if long-range inhibition fails the retina reports self-generated motion as world motion, and in advanced glaucoma and post-degeneration remodelling these cells fire spontaneous synchronised bursts, a likely source of flickering phantom images.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire a spike when local contrast changes and then carry it outward along several axons, releasing inhibition at each varicosity as the wave passes.
Create a number variable called steps since spike with initial value 1000.
Create a number variable called release count with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called travelling spikes with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called spike position with initial value 0.
For each drive sample in the bipolar input stream, perform the following operations.
    Set steps since spike to the sum of steps since spike and 1.
    Check if both drive sample is greater than 0.5 and steps since spike is greater than 100 are true.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set steps since spike to 0.
        Repeat the following steps exactly 4 times.
            Add a new spike record with segment 0 and countdown 2 to the end of travelling spikes.
        End the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Set spike position to 0.
    For each spike record in travelling spikes, perform the following operations.
        Set the countdown of spike record to the difference of the countdown of spike record and 1.
        Check if the countdown of spike record is greater than 0.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set spike position to the sum of spike position and 1.
            Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
        End the conditional block.
        Set release count to the sum of release count and 1.
        Set the segment of spike record to the sum of the segment of spike record and 1.
        Set the countdown of spike record to 2.
        Check if the segment of spike record is greater than or equal to 20.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Remove the item at position spike position from travelling spikes.
        Otherwise, perform the following actions.
            Set spike position to the sum of spike position and 1.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
End the loop.
Display release count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the propagating spike is naturally a small list of moving markers.
DT, SEG_LENGTH, VELOCITY = 1e-4, 100e-6, 0.5   # s, metres, metres per second
N_SEG, N_AXONS = 20, 4                         # 2 mm of reach on 4 axons
THRESHOLD, REFRACTORY = 0.5, 0.010             # drive to fire, seconds
DELAY = int(round(SEG_LENGTH / VELOCITY / DT)) # steps to cross one segment
def polyaxonal(drive_trace):
    last, pending = -1.0, []                   # (arrival step, axon, segment)
    release = [[0.0] * N_SEG for _ in range(N_AXONS)]
    for step, drive in enumerate(drive_trace):
        if drive > THRESHOLD and step * DT - last > REFRACTORY:
            last = step * DT
            for axon in range(N_AXONS):
                pending.append((step + DELAY, axon, 0))   # launch on all axons
        moving = []
        for arrival, axon, seg in pending:
            if arrival == step:
                release[axon][seg] += 1.0      # wave passes, GABA goes out
                if seg + 1 < N_SEG:
                    moving.append((step + DELAY, axon, seg + 1))
            else:
                moving.append((arrival, axon, seg))
        pending = moving
    return release
out = polyaxonal([0.0] * 100 + [1.0] * 5 + [0.0] * 400)
print("varicosities released:", sum(1 for a in out for x in a if x > 0))
print("time to the rim: %.1f ms" % (N_SEG * DELAY * DT * 1e3))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Lay retina on a grid of electrodes and watch: most cells light one electrode, but this one lights an expanding ring over several milliseconds.

An amacrine cell with a small bushy input tree, several long thin output axons, real sodium spikes and a receptive field far smaller than its projective field is a polyaxonal amacrine cell.

CHAPTER 213. INTERPLEXIFORM CELLS (Inner-To-Outer Return Neuron) (COG)

Information in the retina is supposed to flow one way, from light to brain, and the interplexiform cell is the smuggler that carries messages back up the river.

Interplexiform is an address, saying only that the cell sits between the two synaptic layers.

Inner-To-Outer names the direction of travel, which is the cell's whole defining oddity, since retinal traffic otherwise runs outward-to-inward from photoreceptor to ganglion cell and this is the one class that carries information the other way.

Return names the act of sending a report back to the first synaptic layer, where the signal modulates horizontal cell receptive field size and light responsiveness, adjusting how the retina samples its own input.

Neuron marks it as a cell whose direction and destination are both firmly established, the name deliberately not overclaiming a single computation because the transmitter and the exact role differ between species.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An interplexiform cell is defined purely by address: it has branches in both of the retina's wiring layers, the outer plexiform layer where photoreceptors hand over to bipolar and horizontal cells, and the inner plexiform layer where bipolar cells hand over to ganglion cells.

Every other retinal interneuron works in one layer, so this is the retina's only internal feedback line from the deep retina back to the first synapse in vision, and it carries a state signal rather than an image.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body sits among the amacrine cells at the inner edge of the inner nuclear layer, so at first glance it looks ordinary.

The giveaway is one to three thin ascending processes that climb across the whole thickness of that layer and spread in the outer plexiform layer, and both arbors are beaded and both release transmitter.

SIZE:

The cell body is about 8 to 12 micrometres across, and the ascending processes cross a human inner nuclear layer roughly 20 to 40 micrometres thick.

Each arbor is wide-field, several hundred micrometres to more than a millimetre across.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Macaque retina, the best guide to human, holds at least two chemically distinct populations, one staining for tyrosine hydroxylase, the enzyme that makes dopamine, the other for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the main inhibitory chemical.

Other vertebrates add glycine-releasing and somatostatin-releasing forms, so the human total is probably two to four subtypes and is unsettled; in fish the dopaminergic form is huge and dominant, which is why textbook pictures overstate its prominence in humans.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell body in the inner nuclear layer at its interface with the inner plexiform layer, descending arbor usually in stratum 1 alongside the dopaminergic plexus.

Ascending processes cross the entire inner nuclear layer and end in the outer plexiform layer among horizontal cell dendrites and cone pedicles, so the cell occupies the interface between outer and inner retina and is the only human retinal neuron defined by spanning it.

NUMBER:

There is no published direct count in human retina, and that must be said plainly rather than papered over.

The dopaminergic subset is a fraction of the 10,000 to 30,000 dopaminergic amacrine cells per eye and the GABAergic form is called sparse in every primate study, so a defensible upper bound is 50,000 per eye with a central estimate of 5,000 to 20,000, under 0.1 percent of the eye's amacrine cells and about 0.00003 percent of the 86 billion neurons in the nervous system, at low confidence.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The dopaminergic form fires slow sustained action potentials at a few hertz in darkness and faster in light, while the GABAergic form is thought to respond in a graded way with smooth voltage changes and no spikes.

Both are sustained rather than transient, fitting a cell that reports the average state of the retina over seconds to minutes.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Almost all input arrives in the inner plexiform layer from amacrine and bipolar cells and, in some species, from centrifugal fibres entering the eye from the brain.

Outer-layer output goes chiefly to horizontal cells, switching on D1-type dopamine receptors that raise cyclic adenosine monophosphate and close their gap junctions, shrinking a wide electrical sheet into something local and sharpening every nearby bipolar surround.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Not Applicable in the strict sense, because these cells have no classical axon with a myelinated trunk and a distant terminal field.

The ascending process is functionally axon-like, being thin, directional and ending in a releasing arbor, but it lacks an axon initial segment and is only tens of micrometres long.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Dopamine in the tyrosine hydroxylase positive subset, acting mostly by volume transmission, meaning diffusion to receptors on cells the process never touches, and GABA in the other subset at conventional synapses onto horizontal cells and bipolar dendrites.

MYELINATION:

None, in common with every retinal neuron, because the retina must stay optically clear and myelin is opaque.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Moderate, though the dopaminergic subset carries the same expensive synthesis and antioxidant burden as dopaminergic amacrine cells, and the long thin ascending processes depend on transport from the cell body, so they fail first under energy stress.

PLASTICITY:

This cell is a plasticity device in its own right, since its purpose is to change other cells' properties, and its output rises in sustained bright light and falls after prolonged darkness over hours.

In fish the number of its outer-layer synapses measurably changes within hours of a light and dark switch, with evidence for slower turnover in mammals.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Muller cells form the sleeves through which the ascending processes travel, so the glia physically define the route between the two plexiform layers.

They also clear dopamine and GABA from the outer plexiform layer, and because that layer has a small extracellular volume the glial clearance rate sets how far and how long the signal spreads.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove interplexiform cells and the outer retina goes deaf to the inner retina, so the first synapse in vision is tuned only by its own local light level.

Horizontal cells stay broadly coupled, bipolar surrounds stay wide, edges look softer, and the retina adapts to a sudden change in ambient light more slowly and less completely.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The defining feature is retrograde information flow inside a sensory sheet, which no integrate-and-fire model captures because such models have no notion of direction reversal.

It uses volume transmission, its main effect is to change a target's gap-junction conductance rather than to signal through it, it works through the second messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate so effects outlast the stimulus, and in some species it is the target of centrifugal fibres from the brain.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate and GABA from amacrine and bipolar cells in the inner plexiform layer, 0 to 1 normalised; ambient light integrated over seconds as log illuminance.

• OUTPUTS: dopamine or GABA into the outer plexiform layer onto horizontal cells, cone pedicles and bipolar dendrites, and into stratum 1 of the inner plexiform layer onto AII and other amacrine cells.

• STATE: membrane voltage, transmitter store in each of two arbors, cyclic adenosine monophosphate level in target horizontal cells.

• PARAMETERS: arbor diameter 300 to 1200 micrometres per layer, 1 to 3 ascending processes, ascending path 20 to 40 micrometres, half-maximal uncoupling dopamine in the high nanomolar range.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane tens of milliseconds, outer-layer clearance seconds, gap-junction uncoupling 30 seconds to several minutes, light and dark cycle effects hours.

• FAILURE MODE: losing this line removes state-dependent control of the first visual synapse, and in Parkinson's disease, where the dopaminergic population shrinks by a quarter to a half, patients show the predicted loss of contrast sensitivity and poor adaptation to changing light.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to read the overall light level in the inner retina, release dopamine into the outer plexiform layer, and use it to close the gap junctions between horizontal cells.
Create a number variable called dopamine with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called coupling with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called target coupling with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called half point with initial value 0.5.
Create a list variable called coupling trace with initial value empty list.
For each luminance sample in the ambient light stream, perform the following operations.
    Set dopamine to the sum of dopamine and the product of 0.0017 and the difference of luminance sample and dopamine.
    Set target coupling to the quotient of half point divided by the sum of half point and dopamine.
    Set coupling to the sum of coupling and the product of 0.01 and the difference of target coupling and coupling.
    Check if coupling is less than 0.05.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set coupling to 0.05.
    End the conditional block.
    Add coupling to the end of coupling trace.
End the loop.
Display coupling to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

// JavaScript: this slow feedback loop is small, self-contained and often demonstrated live in a browser.
const DT = 0.05;              // seconds per step, the loop is deliberately slow
const TAU_DA = 30.0;          // seconds, dopamine rise and fall
const TAU_GJ = 5.0;           // seconds, junctions follow dopamine with a lag
const G_MAX = 1.0;            // maximum horizontal cell coupling
const KD = 0.5;               // dopamine giving half maximal uncoupling
function interplexiform(luminanceTrace) {
  let dopamine = 0.0, coupling = G_MAX;
  const out = [];
  for (const lum of luminanceTrace) {              // 0 at night, 1 at noon
    dopamine += ((lum - dopamine) / TAU_DA) * DT;
    const target = G_MAX * (KD / (KD + dopamine)); // D1 receptors close junctions
    coupling += ((target - coupling) / TAU_GJ) * DT;
    out.push(coupling);
  }
  return out;
}
const night = new Array(2000).fill(0.0);           // 100 seconds of darkness
const day = new Array(2000).fill(1.0);             // then 100 seconds of daylight
const trace = interplexiform(night.concat(day));
console.log("coupling at night:", trace[1999].toFixed(3));
console.log("coupling at noon :", trace[3999].toFixed(3));

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Fill one retinal cell with dye: if the dye reaches both plexiform layers from a single cell body, you are looking at an interplexiform cell, and nothing else in the human retina does that.

It is the only neuron here defined by an address rather than a shape, a transmitter or a response, and the only one that carries information deliberately backwards.

CHAPTER 214. MIDGET GANGLION CELLS, ALSO CALLED P CELLS OR PARVOCELLULAR CELLS (Fine-Detail Red-Green Neuron) (COG)

Read this sentence and you are using midget cells: eight of every ten fibres in your optic nerve belong to this one type, and at the centre of your gaze each listens to exactly one cone.

The old label is part size description and part address, because P and parvocellular simply name the small-celled layers of a relay station in the thalamus where these cells happen to terminate, which teaches a destination rather than a job.

Fine-Detail names the achievement, since in and near the fovea each of these cells is fed by a single cone through a single midget bipolar cell, a non-diverging chain often called the private line, so the grain of the image is carried to the brain without blurring.

Red-Green names the second thing the same wiring buys, because drawing the centre from one long-wavelength or medium-wavelength cone against a mixed surround makes the cell report the red-green difference that carries most everyday colour discrimination.

Neuron rather than cell keeps it in step with the family, and the name is worth the space because this one type makes up roughly eighty percent of all human retinal ganglion cells.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A midget ganglion cell is an output neuron of the retina, one of the few retinal cells whose fibre leaves the eye for the brain, and it is the smallest and commonest of them.

At the centre it runs a private line, one cone to one midget bipolar cell to one midget ganglion cell, so nothing is pooled and nothing is blurred, and the same wiring gives colour opponency, meaning the cell reports the difference between two kinds of cone rather than the amount of light.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Imagine a tiny bush no wider than a few cells, sitting on a long thin cable that runs out of the back of the eye.

The cell body lies in the ganglion cell layer and a single stout dendrite rises into the inner plexiform layer into one small dense tuft whose depth sets polarity, inner making an ON cell that fires to brightening and outer an OFF cell that fires to dimming.

SIZE:

The cell body is 10 to 15 micrometres across and the axon is 0.5 to 1 micrometre thick, while the dendritic tuft is only about 5 to 10 micrometres wide at the centre of gaze and grows to 100 to 300 micrometres in the far periphery.

Dacey and Petersen showed in human retina in 1992 that a parasol tuft is about ten times wider at three degrees out and about three times wider in the far periphery.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The primary division is ON-centre and OFF-centre, two mosaics that each tile the retina completely, with human ON fields 30 to 50 percent wider than OFF fields.

A second division is by cone input, long-wavelength centre against medium-wavelength surround and the reverse, and a third is positional, between foveal cells with one-to-one cone input and peripheral cells that pool a dozen or more cones and lose most colour selectivity.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies occupy the ganglion cell layer across the whole retina, stacked up to six deep in the ring around the foveal pit and scattered singly in the periphery.

Dendrites lie in the inner plexiform layer, sublamina b for ON and sublamina a for OFF, axons run in the nerve fibre layer through the lamina cribrosa, the sieve-like collagen plate in the sclera, and end in parvocellular layers 3 to 6 of the lateral geniculate nucleus, the visual relay in the thalamus.

NUMBER:

Human retinas hold roughly 0.7 to 1.5 million ganglion cells, about 1.2 million as a working figure from Curcio and Allen in 1990, and midget cells are about 80 percent overall, near 90 percent centrally and 40 to 45 percent in the far periphery.

That gives about 950,000 per eye and 1.9 million across both eyes at high confidence, roughly 0.002 percent of the 86 billion neurons in the nervous system, so almost everything you consciously see arrives on fewer than two million wires.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Midget cells fire true action potentials and their response is sustained, so a steady stimulus gives a steady change in rate on a maintained discharge of 10 to 20 spikes per second.

Contrast gain is low and keeps growing with contrast instead of saturating early, and temporal resolution falls away above roughly 10 to 20 flickers per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation is glutamate from midget bipolar cells, exactly one in the fovea and a handful in the periphery, and inhibition is GABA and glycine from amacrine cells.

The antagonistic surround originates upstream in horizontal cells feeding back onto cones and is inherited through the bipolar cell, and output goes to relay neurons in the parvocellular layers with a small projection to the pretectum.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single unbranched axon of 0.5 to 1 micrometre travels up to 40 millimetres inside the eye completely unmyelinated, a bare stretch that is metabolically brutal because sodium pumps must run along its whole length.

Magnocellular signals reach the lateral geniculate nucleus about 3 milliseconds before parvocellular ones and the cortex about 5 milliseconds earlier.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the nervous system's main excitatory chemical, with no significant co-transmitter established in the human midget cell.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated inside the eye and myelinated outside it, with an abrupt transition at the lamina cribrosa, because oligodendrocytes, the cells that make myelin, are absent from the retina and first appear just behind that plate.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high per unit volume in the unmyelinated intraretinal axon, which is packed with mitochondria to pay for continuous ion pumping.

The papillomacular bundle, the midget axons from the macula, has the thinnest fibres and least reserve, which is why in Leber hereditary optic neuropathy and dominant optic atrophy, both mitochondrial diseases, these fibres fail first and produce a central blind spot.

PLASTICITY:

Adult midget cells hold their partners and the one-to-one foveal wiring is set in development, with short-term plasticity appearing as contrast adaptation over hundreds of milliseconds.

In human glaucoma the dendrites shrink and their mitochondria fragment before the cell dies.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes are unusual in the retina in living almost exclusively in the nerve fibre layer, where their whole job is to scaffold these unmyelinated axons, buffer potassium and shuttle lactate as fuel, a service they perform for no other retinal neuron.

At the optic disc the astrocytes of the lamina cribrosa form a load-bearing mesh whose failure under pressure is thought to strangle the axons in glaucoma.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete midget cells and acuity collapses from reading the bottom line of an eye chart to something near legal blindness, and red and green become indistinguishable because the whole red-green channel is carried here.

What remains is motion, flicker, coarse shape and blue-yellow colour, so the world would look like fast grey weather.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The defining computation is a subtraction performed by wiring rather than arithmetic: one cone in the centre, different cones in the surround, and the answer is a colour difference.

Dendritic geometry sets acuity so morphology must be modelled explicitly, the unmyelinated axon is an energy-hungry liability that must be modelled because it is where the cell dies, mitochondrial trafficking there runs over hours, and the cell releases nitric oxide and helps match local blood flow to local activity.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from 1 midget bipolar cell centrally rising to 5 to 30 in the far periphery, 0 to 1 normalised; GABA and glycine from amacrine cells; an inherited horizontal cell surround of opposite sign.

• OUTPUTS: spikes to parvocellular layers 3 to 6 of the lateral geniculate nucleus, 0 to about 150 hertz, resting near 10 to 20 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage, centre filter state, surround filter state, contrast adaptation level, spike threshold.

• PARAMETERS: dendritic field 5 micrometres centrally to 300 peripherally, soma 10 to 15 micrometres, axon 0.5 to 1 micrometre, surround weight 0.6 to 0.8 of centre.

• TIME CONSTANTS: centre 20 milliseconds, surround 60 milliseconds, contrast adaptation hundreds of milliseconds, dendritic remodelling in disease weeks to months.

• FAILURE MODE: in glaucoma the dendritic tree shrinks before death and central sensitivity falls, in mitochondrial optic neuropathies the thin papillomacular axons fail first and give a dense central blind spot, and in age-related macular degeneration these cells survive but lose their cones.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the sustained colour-opponent firing rate of one foveal midget ganglion cell that sees one cone in its centre and different cones in its surround.
Create a number variable called centre with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called surround with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called opponent with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called rate with initial value 0.
For each time step in the stimulus stream, perform the following operations.
    Set centre to the sum of centre and the product of 0.05 and the difference of the long wavelength cone signal and centre.
    Set surround to the sum of surround and the product of 0.0167 and the difference of the medium wavelength cone signal and surround.
    Set opponent to the difference of centre and the product of surround and 0.75.
    Set rate to the sum of 12 and the product of opponent and 90.
    Check if rate is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if rate is greater than 150.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set rate to 150.
    End the conditional block.
    Display rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the midget computation is two filters and one subtraction, and it reads like the biology.
DT = 0.001                                # seconds per step
TAU_CENTRE, TAU_SURROUND = 0.020, 0.060   # seconds, cone centre and slower surround
W_CENTRE, W_SURROUND = 1.0, 0.75          # surround never quite cancels the centre
GAIN, BASE_RATE, MAX_RATE = 90.0, 12.0, 150.0     # spikes per second
def midget(l_cone, m_cone):
    centre, surround, rates = 0.0, 0.0, []
    for l_signal, m_signal in zip(l_cone, m_cone):
        centre += ((l_signal - centre) / TAU_CENTRE) * DT
        surround += ((m_signal - surround) / TAU_SURROUND) * DT
        opponent = W_CENTRE * centre - W_SURROUND * surround
        rate = BASE_RATE + GAIN * opponent
        rates.append(min(MAX_RATE, max(0.0, rate)))   # rectify and saturate
    return rates
steps = 1000                              # one second, long enough to settle
red, dark = [0.3] * steps, [0.0] * steps  # red drives L cones, spares M cones
white = [0.3] * steps                     # white drives both cone types equally
print("rate to red   : %.1f Hz" % midget(red, dark)[-1])
print("rate to white : %.1f Hz" % midget(white, white)[-1])

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Nothing else in the human body is a neuron with a dendritic tree five micrometres wide receiving a synapse from exactly one sensory cell.

A small ganglion cell with a single primary dendrite, one compact monostratified tuft, a sustained response and red-green opponency is a midget cell.

CHAPTER 215. PARASOL GANGLION CELLS, ALSO CALLED M CELLS OR MAGNOCELLULAR CELLS (Rapid-Motion Contrast Neuron) (COG)

Something moves at the edge of your vision and you turn before you know why: a parasol cell just fired, and its message reached your brain about five milliseconds before anything the midget cells had to say.

Parasol describes the umbrella spread of the dendrites, and M or magnocellular again names only the large-celled thalamic layers these axons reach, so neither tells a student what the cell is for.

Rapid-Motion names the speed the cell owns, since it answers transiently and follows high temporal frequencies, and destroying the magnocellular layers in macaques severely damages flicker-fusion thresholds and the seeing of fast-moving stimuli.

Contrast names its sensitivity, since it fires to small differences in luminance against the background rather than to colour.

Neuron marks it as a cell carrying a scale lesson, because these are only about ten percent of ganglion cells, with the on-answering and off-answering kinds each near six percent in central retina, so a tenth of the optic nerve carries most of the sense of movement.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A parasol ganglion cell is a large output neuron of the retina, the alarm channel that reports change, movement and faint differences in brightness, and does it fast.

It is colour-blind by design, adding cone signals together instead of subtracting them, which buys the contrast gain that lets it answer brightness differences of only one or two percent, several times more sensitive than a midget cell, as Kaplan and Shapley first quantified in the early 1980s.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The name comes from the shape, a broad flat radiating canopy of dendrites on a thick stalk, like a parasol seen from above.

The large cell body sits in the ganglion cell layer, three to six thick primary dendrites branch into a wide sparse arbor confined to one narrow depth of the inner plexiform layer, inner for ON and outer for OFF, and the axon is noticeably thick.

SIZE:

The cell body is 20 to 30 micrometres across, twice the diameter and up to eight times the volume of a midget cell body, and the axon is 1 to 2 micrometres thick.

The canopy runs from roughly 50 micrometres centrally to 400 micrometres or more peripherally, and human parasol fields exceed macaque ones by about 20 percent in the periphery and as much as 90 percent at five degrees, which matters to anyone porting monkey data into a human model.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

ON-centre and OFF-centre parasol cells form two independent mosaics, and the OFF mosaic is denser with smaller cells, matching the fact that natural scenes hold more dark patches than bright ones.

Human ON fields are 30 to 50 percent wider than OFF fields, and there is no accepted chromatic subdivision since the type is achromatic, though a weak blue-cone input to the surround has been reported.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies lie in the ganglion cell layer across the whole retina and, unlike midget cells, stay at reasonable density even in the far periphery.

Dendrites occupy the inner plexiform layer, sublamina b for ON and sublamina a for OFF, axons run in the nerve fibre layer through the lamina cribrosa, the sieve-like plate in the sclera, and terminate in magnocellular layers 1 and 2 of the lateral geniculate nucleus and in the superior colliculus, the midbrain structure driving reflexive eye movements.

NUMBER:

Parasol cells are roughly 8 to 10 percent of retinal ganglion cells, about 5 percent centrally and about 20 percent in the far periphery.

Against a total of about 1.2 million that gives 100,000 to 130,000 per eye and 200,000 to 260,000 across both eyes at moderate to high confidence, about 0.0003 percent of the 86 billion neurons in the nervous system, so the entire fast-motion alarm system of human vision runs on about a quarter of a million cells.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Parasol cells fire fast, above 100 spikes per second in a burst, and the response is transient, decaying within 50 to 100 milliseconds even while the stimulus continues, following flicker up to roughly 50 to 60 cycles per second.

They answer at twice the frequency of a fine contrast-reversing grating whose average brightness never changes, which reveals that their input is rectified in small subunits before pooling.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation is glutamate from dozens of diffuse bipolar cells, chiefly type DB3 in the OFF pathway and DB4 or DB5 in the ON pathway, each terminal behaving as a small rectifying subunit.

Inhibition is GABA and glycine from many amacrine cells including the polyaxonal cells that supply long-range inhibition, and output lands on magnocellular relay neurons and on neurons of the superior colliculus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single thick axon of 1 to 2 micrometres, two to four times the cross-sectional area of a midget axon, unmyelinated inside the retina and myelinated immediately past the lamina cribrosa.

Because of that calibre and heavier myelin, parasol signals reach the lateral geniculate nucleus about 3 milliseconds ahead of midget signals and the cortex about 5 milliseconds ahead.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate at all output synapses, with no significant co-transmitter established in the human parasol cell.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated within the retina and heavily myelinated beyond the lamina cribrosa, with thicker sheaths and longer internodes than midget axons carry, since the retina excludes oligodendrocytes entirely so nothing opaque sits in the light path.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Among the highest of any retinal neuron, because a large cell body, wide canopy, thick unmyelinated intraretinal axon and high firing rates add up, so these axons are dense in mitochondria.

Their large energy requirement at the optic nerve head is the leading explanation for why they are hit early when perfusion or pressure goes wrong.

PLASTICITY:

Contrast gain control is the signature adaptive process: within about 50 milliseconds of a rise in contrast the cell divides down its own gain to stay in range.

In experimental glaucoma the canopy shrinks and the axon narrows before death, which is now thought to explain much of the historic claim that large cells are lost first.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The astrocytes of the nerve fibre layer wrap these thick unmyelinated axons and supply them with lactate, a job unique in the retina to ganglion cell axons.

At the optic nerve head the specialised astrocytes of the lamina cribrosa bear the mechanical load of the pressure difference across the eye wall, and because parasol axons are the thickest fibres passing the largest pores they sit where strain is greatest.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove parasol cells and vision becomes a series of still photographs: you keep acuity and colour and can still read, but you lose the sense of things moving, the ability to see a faint shape in poor light, and the reflexive glance towards something appearing at the edge of vision.

Flicker above about twenty cycles per second vanishes, and the superior colliculus loses most of its retinal drive, so the eye movements that point the fovea at whatever just moved become slow and inaccurate.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is the standard example in vision science of nonlinear subunit pooling: each bipolar input is rectified separately and then summed, so a pattern averaging to nothing still drives the cell.

It performs divisive contrast gain control on a fifty millisecond timescale, back-propagating action potentials help synchronise the arbor, neighbours are weakly coupled through amacrine cells, it helps widen nearby capillaries when busy, and its fate is decided mechanically at the lamina cribrosa by pressure, matrix stiffness and axonal transport.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from roughly 20 to 100 diffuse bipolar cells, each a separately rectified subunit, 0 to 1 normalised; GABA and glycine from local and polyaxonal amacrine cells; ambient luminance as log illuminance.

• OUTPUTS: spikes to magnocellular layers 1 and 2 of the lateral geniculate nucleus and to the superior colliculus, 0 to about 200 hertz in a burst, resting near 5 to 20 hertz.

• STATE: membrane voltage, per-subunit filter states, pooled drive, contrast gain state, refractory timer.

• PARAMETERS: dendritic field 50 micrometres centrally to over 400 peripherally, soma 20 to 30 micrometres, axon 1 to 2 micrometres, contrast sensitivity several times that of a midget cell.

• TIME CONSTANTS: subunit filter 15 milliseconds, contrast gain control 50 milliseconds, transient decay 50 to 100 milliseconds, luminance adaptation seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: in glaucoma these cells shrink and are lost early and patients first lose low-contrast flicker and motion detection in the mid-peripheral field, which is why frequency-doubling and flicker tests catch the disease before standard charts do.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to pool many separately rectified bipolar subunits into one transient parasol response and then divide that response by a slow measure of recent contrast.
Create a number variable called pooled with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gain state with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called rate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called subunit values with initial value empty list.
Repeat the following steps exactly 12 times.
    Add 0 to the end of subunit values.
End the loop.
For each time step in the stimulus stream, perform the following operations.
    Set pooled to 0.
    For each subunit in subunit values, perform the following operations.
        Set subunit to the sum of subunit and the product of 0.0667 and the difference of the local contrast for that subunit and subunit.
        Check if subunit is less than 0.
        If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
            Set pooled to the difference of pooled and subunit.
        Otherwise, perform the following actions.
            Set pooled to the sum of pooled and subunit.
        End the conditional block.
    End the loop.
    Set pooled to the quotient of pooled divided by 12.
    Set gain state to the sum of gain state and the product of 0.02 and the difference of pooled and gain state.
    Set gain to the quotient of 1 divided by the sum of 1 and the product of 4 and gain state.
    Set rate to the sum of 8 and the product of 250 and the product of gain and pooled.
    Display rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C: every parasol cell pools dozens of subunits every millisecond, so this loop must be cheap. */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
#define N_SUB      12       /* rectified bipolar subunits in one canopy */
#define DT         0.001    /* seconds per step */
#define TAU_SUB    0.015    /* seconds, transient subunit filter */
#define TAU_GAIN   0.050    /* seconds, contrast gain control */
#define GAIN_K     4.0      /* strength of the divisive gain control */
#define OUT_GAIN   250.0    /* spikes per second per unit pooled drive */
#define BASE       8.0      /* maintained spikes per second */
static double parasol_step(const double *contrast, double *sub, double *gainstate)
{
    int i; double pooled = 0.0, g;
    for (i = 0; i < N_SUB; i++) {
        sub[i] += ((contrast[i] - sub[i]) / TAU_SUB) * DT;
        pooled += fabs(sub[i]);                /* rectify before pooling */
    }
    pooled /= N_SUB;
    *gainstate += ((pooled - *gainstate) / TAU_GAIN) * DT;
    g = 1.0 / (1.0 + GAIN_K * (*gainstate));   /* strong contrast divides gain down */
    return BASE + OUT_GAIN * g * pooled;
}
int main(void)
{
    double sub[N_SUB] = {0.0}, gainstate = 0.0, c[N_SUB], rate = 0.0;
    int i, k;
    for (i = 0; i < N_SUB; i++) c[i] = (i % 2 == 0) ? 0.2 : -0.2;  /* mean zero grating */
    for (k = 0; k < 500; k++) rate = parasol_step(c, sub, &gainstate);
    printf("rate to a mean zero grating: %.1f Hz\n", rate);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Show the retina a fine striped pattern whose average brightness never changes and then reverse it: a midget cell shrugs, and a parasol cell fires twice per reversal.

A large ganglion cell with a wide radiating canopy, a thick axon, a transient achromatic response and a terminal in the magnocellular layers of the thalamus is a parasol cell and nothing else in the human eye.

CHAPTER 216. SMALL BISTRATIFIED GANGLION CELLS, ALSO CALLED K CELLS OR KONIOCELLULAR CELLS (Blue-Yellow Opponent Neuron) (COG)

This is the cell that lets the sky look blue rather than merely bright.

Small bistratified describes only that the dendrites sit in two layers, and koniocellular, meaning dust-like cells, is a stain-based address in the thalamus.

Blue-Yellow names the comparison the cell exists to make, since its inner dendritic tier is excited by short-wavelength blue-sensitive cones through the dedicated blue-cone bipolar cell while the outer tier is inhibited by the medium and long wavelength cones that the eye reads as yellow.

Opponent is the technical word made plain, since the cell reports the difference between two colour signals rather than the amount of either.

Neuron marks it as a ganglion cell whose wiring shows the effort of balance, because bipolar input to the inner tier is about fourfold greater than to the outer tier, compensating for the sparseness of blue cones, which are only around five to ten percent of all cones.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

It is a retinal ganglion cell, an output neuron of the eye whose long fibre reaches the brain, and its job is subtraction.

It adds the signal from short-wavelength cones, which prefer blue-violet light near 440 nanometres, and subtracts the combined long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cone signal, giving blue-ON, yellow-OFF colour opponency.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Bistratified means its dendrites, the branching antennae that collect signals, form two separate flat sheets instead of one.

The larger inner sheet lies at stratum 5 of the inner plexiform layer, the wiring band where light-increase circuits run, and the smaller outer sheet at stratum 1, the light-decrease half, so one cell owns a physical plus and a physical minus.

SIZE:

The cell body is 12 to 20 micrometres across and the axon about 1 micrometre thick.

The inner sheet spans 20 to 30 micrometres near the fovea, the pinhead-sized pit of sharpest vision, and 300 to 600 micrometres in the far periphery, about 10 percent wider than a parasol cell beside it.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

A large bistratified cell shares the blue-ON polarity with a wider spread, a further distinct blue-ON type was reported in primate retina in 2020, and blue-OFF cells exist but are midget-like rather than bistratified.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in the ganglion cell layer from the foveal slope outwards, scarce in the central 100 micrometres because that patch holds almost no short-wavelength cones, with dendrites straddling strata 1 and 5 at the interface between the two halves of the inner plexiform layer.

The axon leaves the retina at the lamina cribrosa, a sieve-like collagen plate, and runs through the optic chiasm to koniocellular layers K1 to K6 of the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus, named from the Greek for dust, with minor branches to superior colliculus and pretectum.

NUMBER:

They are about 1 percent of ganglion cells in the fovea and 6 to 10 percent in the periphery, so 5 to 8 percent overall, giving 60,000 to 90,000 per eye and 120,000 to 180,000 across both eyes.

Confidence is moderate because the counts come mainly from macaque, and this is about two ten-thousandths of one percent of the roughly 86 billion neurons in the human nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

It idles at a few spikes per second, reaches 50 to 100 for strong blue light, is sluggish in time and coarse in space, and receives its short-wavelength input 10 to 20 milliseconds later than its long and middle wavelength input.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The inner sheet takes glutamate, the main excitatory messenger, from the blue cone bipolar cell; the outer sheet takes glutamate from diffuse OFF bipolar cells; both take gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine from amacrine cells, the retina's local interneurons.

Its targets are koniocellular relay cells, which feed the cytochrome oxidase blobs of layer 3 and the top of layer 1 of primary visual cortex.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

At about 1 micrometre it conducts faster than a midget cell and slower than a parasol cell over a path of roughly 50 millimetres.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Output is glutamate throughout, and inputs are glutamate, GABA, glycine and diffusely released dopamine that sets day-night gain.

MYELINATION:

Inside the retina the axon is bare, because myelin, the fatty insulating wrap that speeds conduction, would scatter light before it reached the photoreceptors; oligodendrocytes begin wrapping immediately behind the lamina cribrosa.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The bare intraretinal segment pumps ions without myelin's savings, so it is dense with mitochondria, and the retina burns more oxygen per gram than almost any tissue in the body.

PLASTICITY:

Learning-related strengthening is absent; what changes is gain, rescaled across orders of magnitude of background light and retuned by dopamine between night and day.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Müller cells, giant radial glia spanning the whole retina, clear spent glutamate, buffer potassium through Kir4.1 channels and supply lactate, while astrocytes appear only in the nerve fibre layer.

One detail is special: the inner sheet sits in the deepest stratum among rod bipolar terminals, so a single Müller sheath serves a colour circuit and a night-vision circuit micrometres apart.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and the retina still reports edges, motion and red-green difference, but the whole blue-yellow dimension of colour disappears, and blue lips would look like ordinary pallor, as though the world were printed with the cyan ink removed.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Two dendritic sheets in two wiring layers give one cell an internal plus and minus, so the subtraction is done by geometry rather than chemistry, and a built-in delay makes it compare blue now against yellow a moment ago.

Dendritic sodium channels carry spikes backwards into both sheets, gap junctions couple it weakly to amacrine cells, and dopamine released into the fluid rather than at a synapse, called volume transmission, resets its gain over minutes.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Blue cone bipolar glutamate on the inner sheet, normalised contrast minus one to plus one.

◦ Diffuse OFF bipolar glutamate on the outer sheet, same range.

◦ Amacrine GABA and glycine, 0 to 10 nanosiemens, and dopamine as a gain scalar of 0.5 to 1.5.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to 100 spikes per second to koniocellular layers K1 to K6, plus superior colliculus and pretectum.

• STATE: membrane potential, twelve-step delay buffer of recent blue contrast, slow adaptation term, refractory countdown.

• PARAMETERS: opponent gain about 140 spikes per second per unit contrast, baseline 2 to 5, ceiling 90 to 100, inner sheet 20 to 600 micrometres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds, synaptic smoothing 30 milliseconds, blue delay 10 to 20 milliseconds, adaptation seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: among the first casualties of glaucoma, giving blue-yellow (tritan) loss that short-wavelength automated perimetry detects before standard fields change, with further decline in diabetes and ageing.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the firing rate of a small bistratified ganglion cell from blue cone contrast and yellow cone contrast.
Create a number variable called delayed_blue with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called smoothed with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called blue_history with initial value empty list.
Create a boolean variable called buffer_is_full with initial value false.
For each frame in the cone_input_stream, perform the following operations.
    Add the blue cone contrast of the frame to the end of blue_history.
    Check if the total number of items in blue_history is greater than 12.
    Set buffer_is_full to the result of that check.
    If buffer_is_full is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set delayed_blue to the item at position 1 in blue_history.
        Remove the item at position 1 from blue_history.
    End the conditional block.
    Set smoothed to the sum of smoothed and the product of 0.033 and the difference of the difference of delayed_blue and the yellow cone contrast of the frame and smoothed.
    Set firing_rate to the sum of 4 and the product of 140 and smoothed.
    Display firing_rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python was chosen because a colour-opponent filter needs no libraries and must stay readable to anyone auditing the colour science.

# Small bistratified cell: blue-ON, yellow-OFF, with a delayed blue path.
DT, TAU, DELAY = 0.001, 0.030, 12    # step s, smoothing s, blue lag in steps
GAIN, BASE, CEIL = 140.0, 4.0, 95.0  # spikes/s per unit contrast, floor, ceiling
buffer = [0.0] * DELAY               # delay line for the blue path
v = 0.0                              # smoothed opponent signal

def step(blue, yellow):
    global v
    buffer.append(blue)
    delayed = buffer.pop(0)          # ON drive, inner dendritic sheet
    v += ((delayed - yellow) - v) * (DT / TAU)   # subtract, then smooth
    return max(0.0, min(CEIL, BASE + GAIN * v))

for ms in range(300):
    b = 0.6 if 100 <= ms < 200 else 0.0    # blue-isolating step of contrast
    if ms % 50 == 0:
        print("t=%3d ms  rate=%5.1f Hz" % (ms, step(b, 0.0)))
    else:
        step(b, 0.0)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other ganglion cell puts a large sheet in the deepest ON stratum and a small sparse one in the outermost OFF stratum, and no other cell in the eye both fires for blue and falls silent for yellow.

CHAPTER 217. INTRINSICALLY PHOTOSENSITIVE RETINAL GANGLION CELLS (IPRGCS) (Daylight-Sensing Clock-Setting Neuron) (NON-COG)

A few thousand cells in each eye see without any help from the rods and cones, and they are why some blind people still keep a twenty-four hour day.

The existing label is accurate but is a committee phrase reduced to an acronym, and intrinsically photosensitive tells the reader a mechanism, that the cell holds its own pigment melanopsin and needs no rod or cone, without telling them why that matters.

Daylight-Sensing names what the pigment is tuned for, a slow, sustained measure of how much blue-rich ambient light is falling on the eye, which is the honest signal of day versus night rather than of shape or edge.

Clock-Setting names the destination and the purpose, since these axons drive the suprachiasmatic nucleus that sets the twenty-four hour rhythm, and also the olivary pretectal nucleus that narrows the pupil.

Neuron marks it as a tiny minority, roughly nought point four to one point five percent of human ganglion cells, yet blind people lacking image vision can still entrain their sleep cycle through them.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cell (ipRGC) is an output neuron of the retina that is itself a light detector, carrying its own light-absorbing protein, called melanopsin.

Its business is not shape but total light averaged over minutes, which sets the body clock, holds the pupil small, suppresses the sleep hormone melatonin, raises alertness and pushes mood.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is large and the dendritic tree is enormous, flat and sparsely branched, which is why one variant is called the giant sparse cell.

Melanopsin sits along the dendrites themselves, so the whole net is the light-catching surface, and in displaced forms the cell body slips out into the inner nuclear layer while the dendrites reach back inwards.

SIZE:

Dendritic fields span 400 to 1200 micrometres, the giant sparse variant reaching about 1 millimetre, with some of the largest cell bodies in the retina.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Mouse work defines six types, M1 to M6, with M1 in the OFF stratum carrying the most pigment, M2 in the ON stratum, M3 bistratified, and M4 to M6 carrying less and behaving more like ordinary vision cells.

Human retina holds M1, displaced M1, gigantic M1, displaced gigantic M1 and M2 cells, and unlike the mouse the displaced form is the majority of human M1 cells.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies occupy the ganglion cell layer, and in displaced forms the inner edge of the inner nuclear layer, so the type straddles that interface, with dendrites in stratum 1 for M1 and stratum 5 for M2.

Density peaks just outside the fovea at 15 to 40 cells per square millimetre, falls below 5 at 10 millimetres out, and is zero in the fovea itself.

Axons run in the retinohypothalamic tract to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus, the master body clock, and also to olivary pretectal nucleus, intergeniculate leaflet, ventrolateral preoptic nucleus, habenula, superior colliculus and koniocellular lateral geniculate nucleus.

NUMBER:

Human counts run from about 4,000 to over 7,000 per eye, which is 0.4 to 1.5 percent of the roughly 1.07 to 1.2 million ganglion cells in an eye, so call it 3,000 to 8,000 per eye and 6,000 to 16,000 across both.

Confidence is fair for the order of magnitude and poor for the exact figure, because faint subtypes are easily missed in post-mortem tissue, and this is roughly one neuron in seven million in the human nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The intrinsic response is famously slow, taking seconds to begin at threshold, holding steady while the light lasts, and continuing many seconds after it stops.

Firing rates are low, a few to a few tens of spikes per second, and melanopsin is far less sensitive than rod or cone pigment, so these cells stay quiet below daylight levels.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

They also take glutamate from ON bipolar cells carrying the rod and cone estimate of brightness plus GABA and glycine from amacrine cells, summing that fast estimate with their own slow one.

They release glutamate, M1 cells additionally release the peptide pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP) onto clock neurons, and some keep branches inside the retina contacting dopamine-releasing amacrine cells.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Medium calibre and slow conducting, which does not matter for a message about the hour of the day, and often branching so one cell reaches clock and pupil nuclei at once.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is primary, with PACAP co-released by M1 cells, and incoming chemistry is glutamate, GABA, glycine and dopamine.

MYELINATION:

Bare inside the retina like every ganglion cell, then myelinated by oligodendrocytes from the lamina cribrosa onwards.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Modest, because firing rates are low, but unusual in being continuous, since the cell runs day and night with its light-detecting cascade burning energy whenever light is present.

PLASTICITY:

Sensitivity adapts to light history over hours and days, melanopsin is bistable so long-wavelength light resets a spent pigment molecule without rebuilding it, and about 31 percent of these cells are lost in healthy people over 70.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Müller glia do the usual glutamate and potassium housekeeping and no specialised glial partner is known, so nothing is special on the support side.

What is special is durability: these cells outlast every other ganglion cell type after optic nerve injury and are relatively spared in Leber hereditary optic neuropathy and dominant optic atrophy.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and vision is untouched, which is what makes the loss so strange: the person reads and drives normally while sleep wanders around the day, melatonin arrives at the wrong hours, the pupil fails to hold small in bright light, and winter light therapy stops working.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell is photoreceptor, computer and transmitter in one: light activates melanopsin, then the G protein Gq, then the enzyme phospholipase C beta 4, which opens transient receptor potential canonical channels, mainly TRPC6 and TRPC7, with hyperpolarisation-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated channels recruited in non-M1 cells.

Because the pigment lives in the dendrites, a photon caught hundreds of micrometres away still makes current at the cell body, intraretinal branches form a backwards loop onto dopamine-releasing amacrine cells, and peptide release makes its message to the hypothalamus outlast its spikes by hours.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Melanopic irradiance near 480 nanometres, as log10 photons per square centimetre per second, useful range 10 to 16.

◦ Rod and cone driven ON bipolar glutamate, 0 to 1 normalised, dominant below daylight.

◦ Amacrine GABA and glycine, 0 to 5 nanosiemens.

• OUTPUTS: a sustained 0 to 20 spikes per second plus slow PACAP release to suprachiasmatic nucleus, olivary pretectal nucleus, intergeniculate leaflet, habenula, superior colliculus and koniocellular lateral geniculate nucleus.

• STATE: activated cascade level, available melanopsin fraction, long-term light history average, membrane potential.

• PARAMETERS: activation threshold near log10 irradiance 11, peak sustained rate 10 to 20 spikes per second, spectral peak about 480 nanometres, dendritic field 400 to 1200 micrometres.

• TIME CONSTANTS: rise 1 to 5 seconds, decay after light offset 10 to 30 seconds, pupil after-effect measurable from 1.8 seconds after offset, light history adaptation hours to days.

• FAILURE MODE: Alzheimer and Parkinson patients have 25 to 30 percent fewer of these cells than age-matched controls with matching circadian breakdown, advanced glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy destroy them, oversensitivity produces the light aversion of migraine, and dysfunction is implicated in seasonal affective disorder.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert steady light at the eye into the slow sustained signal an intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cell sends to the body clock.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called cascade_state with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called drive_is_negative with initial value false.
Create a boolean variable called light_is_rising with initial value false.
For each sample in the light_recording, perform the following operations.
    Set drive to the quotient of the difference of sample and 11 divided by 3.
    Check if drive is less than 0.
    Set drive_is_negative to the result of that check.
    If drive_is_negative is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if drive is greater than cascade_state.
    Set light_is_rising to the result of that check.
    If light_is_rising is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set cascade_state to the sum of cascade_state and the product of 0.0005 and the difference of drive and cascade_state.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set cascade_state to the sum of cascade_state and the product of 0.00005 and the difference of drive and cascade_state.
    End the conditional block.
    Set firing_rate to the product of cascade_state and 12.
    Display firing_rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C was chosen because a whole-body simulation must integrate this cascade at millisecond resolution across simulated days, hundreds of millions of steps, with no interpreter overhead.

#include <stdio.h>
/* ipRGC melanopsin cascade: quick to charge, very slow to discharge. */
/* Compile: cc iprgc.c -o iprgc */
int main(void) {
    const double dt = 0.001, tau_rise = 2.0, tau_fall = 20.0;
    const double thresh = 11.0, span = 3.0, rate_max = 12.0;
    double g = 0.0;                              /* cascade state, 0 to 1 */
    int step;
    for (step = 0; step < 600000; step++) {      /* 600 s simulated */
        double t = step * dt;
        double logI = (t >= 100.0 && t < 400.0) ? 14.0 : 8.0;  /* 300 s pulse */
        double drive = (logI - thresh) / span;
        if (drive < 0.0) drive = 0.0;
        if (drive > 1.0) drive = 1.0;
        g += (drive - g) * (dt / (drive > g ? tau_rise : tau_fall));
        if (step % 100000 == 0)
            printf("t=%6.1f s  cascade=%.3f  rate=%5.2f Hz\n", t, g, rate_max * g);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Kill every rod and cone, block all synaptic transmission with drugs, then shine blue light: the few cells that depolarise slowly and stay depolarised long after the light has gone are these.

CHAPTER 218. DIRECTION-SELECTIVE GANGLION CELLS (COG)

This cell fires hard when an object slides one way across the eye and falls almost silent when the same object slides back, and it decides that before any signal leaves the eyeball.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A direction-selective ganglion cell is a retinal output neuron that reports which way something moved, with a preferred direction that produces a burst and an opposite null direction that produces almost nothing.

The retina therefore sends the brain a ready-made motion vector rather than a movie, and in humans the main use is holding the image of the world still while head and body move.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

In primate retina the ON-OFF type is the recursive bistratified cell, with one flat dendritic sheet in the OFF half and one in the ON half of the inner plexiform layer, and the ON type is the recursive monostratified cell, with a single sheet in the ON half.

Recursive means some dendrites curl back towards the cell body, and in both types the dendrites run bundled along the narrow tracks used by starburst amacrine cells.

SIZE:

The recursive bistratified cell averages 388 micrometres across, standard deviation 82, enclosing about 119,892 square micrometres, and the recursive monostratified cell is comparable, lying at about 64 percent of the depth of the inner plexiform layer.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

ON-OFF direction-selective cells answer both brightening and darkening edges and form four populations tuned to four roughly cardinal directions, each tiling the retina separately.

ON direction-selective cells answer only brightening, prefer much slower motion, and in mouse form three populations whose preferred directions line up with the planes of the three semicircular canals of the inner ear, so the eye's motion detectors are pre-aligned with the balance organ.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies sit in the ganglion cell layer across the whole retina, denser along the horizontal midline in primates, and dendrites lie exactly in the two bands of the inner plexiform layer rich in choline acetyltransferase, at roughly 28 and 64 percent depth, so this type is defined by living at the interface with the starburst amacrine plexus.

Axons reach the nucleus of the optic tract and dorsal terminal nucleus of the accessory optic system, the hub that turns image slip into an eye-muscle command, plus pretectum, superior colliculus and in part the lateral geniculate nucleus.

NUMBER:

In macaque the recursive bistratified population is about 1.5 percent of peripheral ganglion cells and the recursive monostratified population 2.5 percent, standard deviation 0.54, so together about 4 percent.

That is roughly 48,000 per eye out of 1.2 million and about 96,000 across both eyes, one ten-thousandth of one percent of the human nervous system, with moderate confidence for macaque and low for human, where these cells are matched by molecule and shape rather than recorded directly.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Preferred-direction motion produces 30 to 100 spikes per second and null-direction motion a small fraction of that, measured as the direction selectivity index, preferred minus null divided by their sum, typically 0.3 to 0.8.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation is glutamate from bipolar cells plus untuned acetylcholine from starburst amacrine cells, while inhibition is GABA from those same starburst cells and is tuned, because the ganglion cell accepts GABA synapses only from starburst dendrites pointing along its null direction.

The starburst amacrine cell is a radial interneuron, unique in the nervous system for releasing one excitatory and one inhibitory transmitter, and each of its dendrites answers best to motion running outward from its own cell body.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Medium diameter and moderate conduction speed, with branches that let one cell address several midbrain targets at once.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The cell releases glutamate and receives glutamate, acetylcholine on nicotinic receptors, and GABA on type A receptors containing the alpha 2 subunit.

MYELINATION:

Unmyelinated inside the retina, myelinated by oligodendrocytes beyond the lamina cribrosa.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High during motion, because the cell is driven hard by acetylcholine while sustaining large chloride currents from GABA, and pumping that chloride back out costs energy continuously.

PLASTICITY:

The wiring asymmetry behind direction selectivity is built during development and is robust once set, although in young animals prolonged motion in one direction can reverse the preference, and the gene FRMD7 is required to build the horizontal asymmetry.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Müller cells do the usual housekeeping, but one point is specific: null-direction suppression stays sharp only if starburst GABA is cleared fast, and Müller cells carry the GABA transporter GAT-3 that does it, so here glial uptake protects a computation rather than merely tidying up.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the retina still reports every edge, colour and flicker, but the eye can no longer lock on to a moving world, so scenery seen from a train would smear instead of stepping cleanly past, the reflex that pins each patch and flicks back having no error signal.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Direction selectivity is computed in the dendrites, not the cell body: each patch of dendrite is separately vetoed by a starburst synapse timed to arrive with the passing edge, so the cell is a field of small detectors whose votes are summed.

That inhibition is largely shunting, opening a leak that drains excitation rather than pushing voltage down, which is division rather than subtraction, and recursive dendrites contact neighbours of the same type through gap junctions while back-propagating spikes sweep outward from the cell body.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Bipolar glutamate spread across the dendritic field, 0 to 1 normalised contrast.

◦ Starburst acetylcholine, untuned, 0 to 1, arriving with the leading edge.

◦ Starburst GABA from null-side dendrites only, 0 to 20 nanosiemens, timed to the edge.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to 100 spikes per second to nucleus of the optic tract and dorsal terminal nucleus, pretectum, superior colliculus and lateral geniculate nucleus.

• STATE: per-subunit excitation and inhibition, membrane potential, recent motion history for adaptation.

• PARAMETERS: preferred direction in radians, direction selectivity index 0.3 to 0.8, dendritic field about 388 micrometres, inhibition to excitation ratio about 3 to 1, eight to sixteen starburst subunits.

• TIME CONSTANTS: inhibition rise 5 to 20 milliseconds, cholinergic excitation 2 to 10 milliseconds, dendritic integration about 10 milliseconds, best image slip 1 to 10 degrees per second for ON types.

• FAILURE MODE: mutation of FRMD7 removes the asymmetric inhibition onto horizontally tuned cells, abolishes the horizontal optokinetic reflex and produces idiopathic infantile nystagmus, a lifelong involuntary side-to-side oscillation of the eyes.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the response of a direction-selective ganglion cell by subtracting starburst inhibition wired only to its null side.
Create a list variable called starburst_activation with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called wiring_weight with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called inhibition_saturated with initial value false.
Set starburst_activation to the eight measured starburst dendrite responses for this frame.
Set wiring_weight to the fixed list 0, 0, 0, 0.5, 1, 0.5, 0, 0 that is strongest on the null side.
While index is less than 8 remains true, repeat the following steps.
    Set inhibition to the sum of inhibition and the product of the item at position index in starburst_activation and the item at position index in wiring_weight.
    Set index to the sum of index and 1.
End the loop.
Set inhibition to the product of 3 and the quotient of inhibition divided by 8.
Check if inhibition is greater than 1.
Set inhibition_saturated to the result of that check.
If inhibition_saturated is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set inhibition to 1.
End the conditional block.
Set firing_rate to the product of 24 and the difference of 1 and inhibition.
Display firing_rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python was chosen because direction selectivity is vector geometry, which Python expresses in a form a reviewer can check by hand.

import math
# Direction-selective ganglion cell driven by asymmetric starburst inhibition.
PREFERRED, N_SAC = 0.0, 8   # preferred direction in radians; starburst inputs
BASE_EXC, ACH = 12.0, 1.0   # bipolar glutamate drive; untuned cholinergic boost
GABA = 3.0                  # null-side GABA, stronger than what it opposes

def response(motion_dir):
    exc = BASE_EXC * (1.0 + ACH)                # glutamate plus acetylcholine
    inh = 0.0
    for k in range(N_SAC):
        a = 2.0 * math.pi * k / N_SAC           # this starburst dendrite's heading
        # A starburst dendrite fires hardest for motion running outward along it.
        act = max(0.0, math.cos(motion_dir - a))
        # Only null-pointing starbursts synapse onto this ganglion cell.
        wiring = max(0.0, -math.cos(a - PREFERRED))
        inh += GABA * act * wiring
    inh = min(1.0, inh / N_SAC)                 # shunting inhibition divides drive
    return max(0.0, exc * (1.0 - inh))

pref, null = response(PREFERRED), response(PREFERRED + math.pi)
print("preferred %.1f Hz, null %.1f Hz" % (pref, null))
print("direction selectivity index %.2f" % ((pref - null) / (pref + null)))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Show it a bar moving right and it shouts; show it the same bar moving left and it barely whispers, and its dendrites hug the two acetylcholine-rich bands of the inner plexiform layer so tightly they look fused with them.

CHAPTER 219. SMOOTH MONOSTRATIFIED, LARGE SPARSE, BROAD THORNY, AND RECURSIVE BISTRATIFIED GANGLION CELLS (Wide-Field Rare-Type Output Neuron) (COG)

Nine tenths of the eye's output cables belong to two famous cell types; this entry is the strange, rare, wide-armed minority that carries the rest.

The existing heading is four morphological addresses strung together, each describing how the dendrites look under a microscope rather than what the cells do, and honesty requires admitting that the settled function of most of them is not yet known.

Wide-Field records the one firm shared anatomical fact, that all four spread far wider dendritic fields than the midget and parasol types and so pool over large patches of retina.

Rare-Type records the second firm fact, that together these types form only a few percent of the optic nerve, with the thorny group alone at about one percent, yet they carry their own separate messages to the superior colliculus and thalamus.

Output Neuron marks them as ganglion cells, and where evidence exists it is suggestive rather than settled, for example broad thorny cells answering bright or dark objects entering or leaving their field regardless of direction, which is why they have been proposed as a pursuit error signal.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are four of the roughly seventeen wide-field ganglion cell types of the primate retina, grouped because they all watch large patches of space and report what the two dominant types cannot.

The smooth monostratified cell reports fine texture inside a large area, the large sparse cell samples very wide regions thinly, the broad thorny cell reports that something is slipping across the middle of your gaze whichever way it slips, and the recursive bistratified cell reports direction of motion.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The smooth monostratified cell has one flat sheet of unusually smooth branches and the large sparse cell a very wide, thinly branched sheet.

The broad thorny cell has dendrites covered in fine spikes filling a thick slab through the middle of the wiring layer rather than one thin plane, while the recursive bistratified cell has two sheets with branches looping back towards the cell body.

SIZE:

The smooth monostratified cell averages 419 micrometres across in mid-peripheral retina, standard deviation 110, with a cell body of 16 plus or minus 2 micrometres and an axon of 1.06 plus or minus 0.22 micrometres, roughly half a parasol axon.

The large sparse cell in human retina averages 737 to 791 micrometres, the broad thorny cell 369 plus or minus 63 with a cell body of 18 plus or minus 2, and the recursive bistratified cell 388 plus or minus 82.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

The smooth monostratified cell has an inner ON form at 61 plus or minus 5 percent depth in the inner plexiform layer and an outer OFF form at 37 plus or minus 5 percent, each sharing the parasol plane to within one or two micrometres.

The large sparse cell also has inner and outer forms, and in macaque and human more than 80 percent of cells carrying the transcription factor Satb2 are large sparse cells, while broad thorny and recursive bistratified cells each form a single tiling population.

WHERE IT LIVES:

All four have cell bodies in the ganglion cell layer from central retina to far periphery, commoner peripherally, with broad thorny dendrites filling the slab between the ON and OFF starburst bands, so that cell lives at the interface between the layer's two halves rather than in either, and recursive bistratified dendrites lying on the starburst bands themselves.

Smooth monostratified cells were labelled from both lateral geniculate nucleus and superior colliculus in the same retinas, so one branching axon reaching both is likely; broad thorny cells project to koniocellular geniculate layers and superior colliculus; large sparse cells feed superior colliculus, pretectum and medial inferior pulvinar.

NUMBER:

Smooth monostratified cells are about 3 percent of peripheral ganglion cells, at roughly 9 per square millimetre at 7 to 8 millimetres eccentricity with a coverage factor of 1.7, large sparse cells 1.5 to 2 percent, broad thorny about 1 percent and recursive bistratified about 1.5 percent.

Against 1.2 million per eye that is roughly 36,000, 18,000 to 24,000, 12,000 and 18,000 respectively, so about 84,000 per eye and 168,000 across both eyes, of which the recursive bistratified cells are the same cells already listed as direction-selective and are counted once for the section total.

Confidence is fair for macaque and lower for human, and together they are about two ten-thousandths of one percent of the human nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The smooth monostratified cell peaks at 50 plus or minus 35 spikes per second to drifting gratings, prefers 13 plus or minus 5 hertz, and responds at 52 plus or minus 3 milliseconds when ON and 38 milliseconds when OFF.

The broad thorny cell is much slower, at 90 plus or minus 9 milliseconds ON and 69 plus or minus 6 OFF, and strongly transient, meaning it fires at a change then stops.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

All four take glutamate from bipolar cells and GABA and glycine from amacrine cells, and all release glutamate onto their brain targets.

The broad thorny cell is defined by its inhibition, with a surround suppression index of 0.86 plus or minus 0.04 for the ON phase and 0.62 plus or minus 0.09 for the OFF phase, so motion in the surround almost completely silences it.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The smooth monostratified axon at 1.06 micrometres is about half the parasol axon's 1.94 plus or minus 0.33 micrometres, so it conducts considerably more slowly, and the others are of medium calibre.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate for output in every case, with glutamate, GABA, glycine and acetylcholine arriving, and diffusely released dopamine as a shared gain control.

MYELINATION:

Bare inside the retina, myelinated by oligodendrocytes from the lamina cribrosa onwards, with speed set mainly by axon diameter.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Wide sheets mean a large membrane area to keep polarised, expensive even at rest, and the smooth monostratified cell's high firing rates add to that.

PLASTICITY:

None show classical learning-related plasticity; they adapt gain to background light and recent contrast over seconds, and their mosaics are refined by activity during development.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Müller glia handle glutamate clearance and potassium buffering as everywhere, but one point is specific: these receptive fields are built from many small independent subunits, which works only if glutamate at one bipolar terminal does not spill onto the next, so tight Müller ensheathment of individual terminals is what keeps the subunits separate and the cell nonlinear.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these four and the retina keeps sharp vision, colour and simple motion but loses its coarse alarm system: the shimmer of leaves would stop registering at all, and the eye would lose its automatic notice that a tracked object has begun to slip, so gaze would drift off moving targets without the brain being told.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The smooth monostratified cell rectifies before it sums, each patch of dendrite listening to one bipolar cell, discarding the negative half of that signal and only then passing it on, so a fine grating averaging to zero across the whole field still produces a large response.

The evidence is quantitative, since it answers at twice the stimulus frequency out to 5 plus or minus 1 cycles per degree while its linear response dies at 1 plus or minus 0.2, a four to one ratio, and the broad thorny cell instead answers edges crossing its centre at 4 to 12 degrees per second while staying silent for a full-field drifting plaid, exactly the arithmetic for saying the target slipped rather than the world moved.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Bipolar glutamate at 8 to 32 spatial subunits per receptive field, each 0 to 1 normalised contrast.

◦ Wide-field amacrine GABA carrying the surround, 0 to 20 nanosiemens, dominant in broad thorny cells.

◦ Starburst acetylcholine and GABA, for the recursive bistratified cell only.

• OUTPUTS: 0 to 100 spikes per second to magnocellular and koniocellular geniculate layers, superior colliculus, pretectum and medial inferior pulvinar.

• STATE: per-subunit rectified drive, membrane potential, transient adaptation variable, surround suppression level.

• PARAMETERS: receptive field centre 280 to 600 micrometres, subunit count 8 to 32, surround suppression index 0.6 to 0.9, preferred temporal frequency 13 plus or minus 5 hertz, latency 38 to 90 milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: subunit rectification effectively instantaneous, membrane about 10 milliseconds, transient adaptation 50 to 200 milliseconds, surround delay 10 to 20 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: these large, wide-field cells are disproportionately vulnerable in glaucoma, where big cells die first, so the earliest losses are of coarse peripheral motion and texture rather than reading acuity, which is why patients notice nothing until much of the field is gone.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the response of a smooth monostratified ganglion cell whose receptive field is built from many small rectified subunits.
Create a list variable called subunit_signal with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called subunit_weight with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called linear_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called rectified_total with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called this_signal with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called index with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called count with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called signal_is_positive with initial value false.
Set subunit_signal to the contrast in each bipolar subunit of the receptive field.
Set subunit_weight to the weight of each subunit measured from the field centre.
Set count to the total number of items in subunit_signal.
While index is less than count remains true, repeat the following steps.
    Set this_signal to the item at position index in subunit_signal.
    Set linear_total to the sum of linear_total and the product of this_signal and the item at position index in subunit_weight.
    Check if this_signal is greater than 0.
    Set signal_is_positive to the result of that check.
    If signal_is_positive is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set rectified_total to the sum of rectified_total and the product of this_signal and the item at position index in subunit_weight.
    End the conditional block.
    Set index to the sum of index and 1.
End the loop.
Display linear_total to the console.
Display the product of 90 and the quotient of rectified_total divided by count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C was chosen because a full retinal simulation evaluates tens of subunits for each of tens of thousands of these cells on every video frame, and that inner loop is the hot path.

#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>
/* Smooth monostratified cell: rectify each subunit first, then sum. */
/* Compile: cc smooth.c -o smooth -lm */
#define NSUB 16
int main(void) {
    const double rf = 300.0, period = 120.0, contrast = 0.5, gain = 90.0;
    const double sigma = rf / 2.0, spacing = 2.0 * rf / NSUB;
    double x[NSUB], w[NSUB];
    int i, step;
    for (i = 0; i < NSUB; i++) {                  /* lay subunits across the field */
        x[i] = -rf + (i + 0.5) * spacing;
        w[i] = exp(-(x[i] * x[i]) / (2.0 * sigma * sigma));
    }
    for (step = 0; step < 8; step++) {
        double phase = 2.0 * M_PI * step / 8.0, lin = 0.0, rect = 0.0, s;
        for (i = 0; i < NSUB; i++) {
            s = contrast * sin(2.0 * M_PI * x[i] / period + phase);
            lin  += w[i] * s;                     /* a linear cell would see this */
            rect += w[i] * (s > 0.0 ? s : 0.0);   /* this cell rectifies first */
        }
        printf("phase %d: linear %7.3f rectified %7.3f rate %6.2f Hz\n",
               step, lin, rect, gain * rect / NSUB);
    }
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Show a drifting grating too fine for the cell to resolve and a linear cell says nothing while the smooth monostratified cell answers steadily at twice the drift frequency.

No other ganglion cell has thorn-covered dendrites filling a thick slab through the middle of the wiring layer, the large sparse cell is the widest thin net in the human retina, and the recursive bistratified cell is the one whose branches turn back on themselves.


PART TWELVE: OLFACTORY SYSTEM - SMELL

CHAPTER 220. OLFACTORY SENSORY NEURONS (NON-COG)

This is the only nerve cell in your body that touches open air, at the roof of your nose.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

An olfactory sensory neuron catches an airborne molecule and turns it into an electrical pulse.

It is detector and messenger at once, using one of about 400 working human odorant receptor genes.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is bipolar, meaning two processes leave opposite ends of the cell body.

One ends in a knob bearing ten to thirty cilia, hair-like filaments in mucus that hold every receptor.

SIZE:

The cell body is 5 to 8 micrometres wide, a micrometre being a thousandth of a millimetre.

Cilia run 30 to 200 micrometres, and the axon, 0.1 to 0.7 micrometres thick, is among the body's thinnest.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

About 400 receptor-defined classes exist, one per intact gene, beside some 400 dead pseudogene versions.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The olfactory epithelium of the olfactory cleft, at the roof of each nasal cavity, on superior turbinate and upper septum.

Axons form 15 to 20 fila olfactoria and pierce the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone.

That plate is the interface, air on one side and brain on the other, and the axons end in the bulb's glomerular layer.

NUMBER:

Six to twelve million in total, with 6 to 10 million per nasal cavity often quoted.

Confidence is moderate for the order of magnitude and poor for the exact value.

Ten million is about 0.01 percent of the body's 86 billion neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Input resistance reaches several gigaohms, so a whisper of current swings the voltage hard.

Rest is near minus 60 millivolts, and firing rarely passes 30 spikes per second.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

It receives no synapses at all, because its input is chemistry in the air.

Its terminals excite mitral tufts, tufted tufts, external tufted cells and periglomerular cells inside one glomerulus.

About 5,568 human glomeruli serve some 400 receptors, so roughly 14 to 16 belong to each.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated, meaning no fatty insulating sleeve, and slow at 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second.

It regrows from nose into brain throughout adult life, which almost no other axon can do.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the brain's main excitatory messenger, acting on AMPA and NMDA receptors.

MYELINATION:

None at all, which is the price of packing millions of hair-thin wires through a bony sieve.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High for its size, since the cilia run a constant cascade and ion pumps never rest.

Replacement is the hidden cost, because a 30 to 60 day lifespan means rebuilding the population yearly.

PLASTICITY:

There is no learning synapse here, so plasticity means survival and rewiring.

Activity keeps cells alive, the chosen receptor steers each new axon home, and basal cells regenerate the sheet.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Sustentacular cells are this neuron's private liver, using cytochrome P450 enzymes to destroy inhaled toxins.

They, not the neurons, carry the ACE2 protein used by SARS-CoV-2, which is why COVID-19 steals smell.

Olfactory ensheathing cells, a glia found nowhere else, escort the bare axons into the brain.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell and the nose becomes a humidifier.

Flavour collapses to sweet, salt, sour, bitter and umami, and gas leaks go unnoticed.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The real computation is in the cilia, where the receptor activates the G protein Golf and adenylyl cyclase type 3.

That enzyme makes cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP), which opens a cyclic-nucleotide-gated channel.

Calcium entering opens ANO2, a calcium-activated chloride channel, and hoarded chloride pours out, supplying up to 90 percent of the current.

Calmodulin then desensitises the channel while the NCKX4 exchanger clears calcium, which is why you stop smelling your own house.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: odorant concentration at the cilia, 1 nanomolar to 100 micromolar; sniff gain 0 to 1.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate at 0 to 30 hertz into one glomerulus, onto mitral, tufted, external tufted and periglomerular cells.

• STATE: bound receptor fraction, cyclic AMP, ciliary calcium, adaptation, membrane voltage, cell age.

• PARAMETERS: receptor identity 1 to 400; half-saturation 1 to 50 micromolar; conduction 0.2 to 0.5 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: transduction 150 to 500 milliseconds; adaptation 0.5 to 5 seconds; replacement 30 to 60 days.

• FAILURE MODE: viral loss of supporting cells causes anosmia, total loss of smell; injury shears axons at the cribriform plate.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert odour concentration into an olfactory sensory neuron firing rate.
Create a number variable called ciliary_calcium with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called rate_record with initial value empty list.
For each concentration in odour_time_series, perform the following operations.
    Set bound_fraction to the quotient of concentration divided by the sum of concentration and half_saturation.
    Set cyclic_amp to the difference of bound_fraction and adaptation.
    If cyclic_amp is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set cyclic_amp to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set cng_current to the product of cyclic_amp and cng_conductance.
    Set ciliary_calcium to the sum of the product of ciliary_calcium and calcium_decay and cng_current.
    Set total_current to the sum of cng_current and the product of ciliary_calcium and chloride_gain.
    Set firing_rate to the product of total_current and spike_gain.
    Add firing_rate to the end of rate_record.
    Set adaptation to the product of the sum of adaptation and the product of ciliary_calcium and adaptation_rate and adaptation_decay.
End the loop.
Return rate_record to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the model is a short loop over a numeric time series, where clarity beats speed.

def olfactory_sensory_neuron(concentrations):
    # Cyclic AMP cascade, ANO2 chloride amplifier, calcium adaptation.
    half_sat, cng_cond, cl_gain, spike_gain, max_rate = 5.0, 0.6, 4.0, 12.0, 30.0
    ca_decay, adapt_rate, adapt_decay = 0.90, 0.05, 0.98
    calcium, adaptation, rates = 0.0, 0.0, []
    for conc in concentrations:
        bound = conc / (conc + half_sat)     # receptor occupancy, 0 to 1
        camp = max(0.0, bound - adaptation)
        cng = camp * cng_cond                # cation current
        calcium = calcium * ca_decay + cng
        total = cng + calcium * cl_gain      # chloride amplification
        rates.append(min(max_rate, total * spike_gain))
        adaptation = (adaptation + calcium * adapt_rate) * adapt_decay
    return rates

if __name__ == "__main__":
    trace = [0.0] * 20 + [20.0] * 100 + [0.0] * 80   # odour on, then clean air
    out = olfactory_sensory_neuron(trace)
    print("peak", round(max(out), 2), "adapted", round(out[119], 2))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron exposed to open air, replaced every month or two, wired straight into the brain.

A bipolar cell with cilia in mucus, one receptor gene, and six weeks to live can be nothing else.

CHAPTER 221. MITRAL CELLS (Late-Reporting Odor Output Neuron) (COG)

Named for the bishop's mitre their triangular bodies resemble, these carry every smell you will ever have out of the bulb.

Mitral describes a bishop's hat, a shape word that says nothing about the message.

Late-Reporting names the dimension that separates it from its partner cell, because it has a higher spike threshold, a longer latency after the start of a sniff and a lower firing rate than the tufted cell, and it carries a strong inhibitory surround so that structurally different odorants activating neighbouring clusters actively suppress it, which sharpens contrast at the cost of speed.

Odor names the content of the message, one glomerulus and therefore in effect one receptor channel per cell.

Output Neuron names the job, because this is the cell that carries smell out of the olfactory bulb along the lateral olfactory tract to the whole of olfactory cortex, so nothing about a smell reaches the rest of the brain except through cells of this kind and their tufted partners.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A mitral cell is a large excitatory projection neuron, meaning it excites its targets and wires out of the region.

It listens to exactly one glomerulus, and so to one receptor type, then broadcasts that channel to olfactory cortex.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A plump triangular body sits in a sheet one to a few cells thick, with one thick apical dendrite.

That dendrite ends in a tuft filling a single glomerulus, and long lateral dendrites spread sideways and release transmitter themselves.

SIZE:

The cell body is large by brain standards, more than 20 micrometres across and often 20 to 30 in humans.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Type I cells run lateral dendrites deep in the external plexiform layer, while displaced type II cells sit higher.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The mitral cell layer of the olfactory bulb, between the external plexiform layer above and the granule cell layer below.

Its tuft sits at the interface with the glomerular layer, where bulb tissue meets incoming nose axons.

Axons run in the lateral olfactory tract to anterior olfactory nucleus, olfactory tubercle, piriform cortex, cortical amygdala and lateral entorhinal cortex.

NUMBER:

Human counts give about 51,000 per bulb at age 25, 33,000 at 60 and 15,000 at 95.

Across both bulbs, 60,000 to 100,000 is a fair adult figure, with moderate confidence from few specimens.

That is under 0.001 percent of all neurons, so ten million nose cells funnel into under a hundred thousand outputs.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Rest is near minus 60 millivolts, and the cell flips between a quiet downstate and an active upstate.

In the upstate it rings with intrinsic subthreshold oscillations at 10 to 50 hertz, from persistent sodium current opposed by potassium.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Glomerular drive comes partly from nose terminals but largely through external tufted cells in a multistep path.

Granule cells inhibit it at reciprocal dendrodendritic synapses, where two cells face each other and each releases onto the other.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

A single myelinated axon of 1 to 3 micrometres, conducting at several metres per second and branching widely.

Olfactory cortex is reached in one synaptic step with no thalamic relay, which is unique among the senses.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, at both the axon terminals and the lateral dendrites.

MYELINATION:

Yes, by oligodendrocytes once the axon joins the lateral olfactory tract.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high, because the cell keeps a huge dendritic tree charged and pumps ions from axon and dendrites alike.

PLASTICITY:

Long-term potentiation and depression at the granule cell synapse make lateral inhibition learnable.

Adults never replace these cells, so all plasticity here is synaptic rather than cellular.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes wrap the reciprocal synapses so tightly that their glutamate clearance sets how far spillover travels.

That fixes the width of lateral inhibition, and bulb microglia stay unusually active because this is a front line for inhaled pathogens.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove mitral cells and the bulb becomes a beautifully organised machine with no exit.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The apical tuft fires local spikes that travel to the soma and back, making it a semi-independent computer.

Back-propagating action potentials run along lateral dendrites and trigger glutamate release, turning an output spike into a sideways broadcast.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glomerular glutamate at 0 to 100 hertz; GABA from periglomerular and granule cells; cortical feedback; acetylcholine and noradrenaline.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate at 0 to 80 hertz to anterior olfactory nucleus, olfactory tubercle, piriform cortex, cortical amygdala, entorhinal cortex.

• STATE: somatic voltage, tuft voltage, oscillation phase, lateral dendrite calcium, adaptation current, sniff phase.

• PARAMETERS: soma 20 to 30 micrometres; one glomerulus per cell; oscillation 10 to 50 hertz; threshold about minus 45 millivolts.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 30 milliseconds; oscillation 20 to 100 milliseconds; dendrodendritic inhibition 50 to several hundred milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: alpha-synuclein reaches bulb and anterior olfactory nucleus at Braak stage 1 of Parkinson's disease, and smell fails years before tremor.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide when a mitral cell fires by combining glomerular drive with an intrinsic oscillation and granule cell inhibition.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called oscillation_phase with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called inhibition with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spike_times with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called step_index with initial value 0.
While step_index is less than total_steps, repeat the following steps.
    Set drive to the item at position step_index in glomerular_input.
    Set oscillation_phase to the sum of oscillation_phase and phase_increment.
    Set oscillation to the product of oscillation_amplitude and the sine of oscillation_phase.
    Set leak to the product of leak_rate and the difference of membrane_voltage and resting_voltage.
    Set membrane_voltage to the difference of the sum of membrane_voltage and the sum of drive and oscillation and the sum of leak and inhibition.
    If membrane_voltage is greater than spike_threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Add step_index to the end of spike_times.
        Set membrane_voltage to reset_voltage.
        Set inhibition to the sum of inhibition and granule_feedback_strength.
    End the conditional block.
    Set inhibition to the product of inhibition and inhibition_decay.
    Set step_index to the sum of step_index and 1.
End the loop.
Return spike_times to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python with the standard maths library is chosen because the model needs only a sine oscillator and a loop.

import math

def mitral_cell(drive_series, dt=0.001):
    # A 40 Hz intrinsic subthreshold oscillation gates spike timing.
    v, v_rest, v_thresh, v_reset = -60.0, -60.0, -45.0, -65.0
    leak_rate, osc_hz, osc_amp = 0.05, 40.0, 2.0
    fb_strength, fb_decay = 3.0, 0.97   # granule cell feedback inhibition
    inhibition, phase, spikes = 0.0, 0.0, []
    for i, drive in enumerate(drive_series):
        phase += 2.0 * math.pi * osc_hz * dt
        v += drive + osc_amp * math.sin(phase) - leak_rate * (v - v_rest) - inhibition
        if v > v_thresh:
            spikes.append(i * dt)
            v = v_reset
            inhibition += fb_strength
        inhibition *= fb_decay
    return spikes

if __name__ == "__main__":
    out = mitral_cell([0.6] * 500)   # 500 ms of steady glomerular drive
    print(len(out), "spikes")
    if out:
        print("first spike at", round(out[0], 3), "seconds")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Look for a big triangular soma in a sheet one cell thick and one thick dendrite rising to exactly one glomerulus.

No other human neuron combines a private sensory channel, a self-made 40 hertz metronome, and a one-synapse line to cortex.

CHAPTER 222. TUFTED CELLS (Early-Reporting Odor Output Neuron) (COG)

If the mitral cell files a considered report, the tufted cell is the wire-service reporter who gets the headline out first.

Tufted is again a shape word, describing the tuft of dendrites rather than the timing that makes this cell distinct.

Early-Reporting names the one dimension along which the pair differ, because tufted cells are more excitable, respond to olfactory sensory neuron stimulation at shorter latency and with higher firing rates, and are driven at odour concentrations too low to move mitral cells.

Odor and Output place this cell in the same job as its partner, since tufted cells are the second class of projection neuron leaving the olfactory bulb, though they aim mainly at nearby targets such as the anterior olfactory nucleus and the olfactory tubercle rather than the full extent of olfactory cortex.

Neuron marks it as the cell that says a smell is present while the other says what it is, since its responses adapt whereas mitral cell responses are sustained.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A tufted cell is a smaller excitatory projection neuron that also listens to one glomerulus and sends glutamate onward.

Its business is speed and sensitivity, firing at fainter odours and earlier in the sniff than a mitral cell.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A smaller, rounder body carries one apical dendrite ending in a tuft inside a single glomerulus.

Lateral dendrites are short and stay high in the external plexiform layer, and external tufted cells may have none.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 10 to 20 micrometres across, clearly smaller than the mitral cell's more than 20.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

External tufted cells sit at the rim of the glomerular layer, burst rhythmically and drive the glomerulus.

Middle tufted cells do most long-range projecting, internal tufted cells grade into mitral cells, and a superficial vasopressin group does not burst.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Throughout the external plexiform layer, with external tufted cells exactly at the interface between glomerular layer and external plexiform layer.

Axons run mainly to the anterior olfactory nucleus and olfactory tubercle, and some never leave the bulb at all.

NUMBER:

No reliable human count exists, and that gap is worth stating plainly.

In rodents tufted cells outnumber mitral cells two or three to one once external tufted cells are included.

Scaling gives roughly 200,000 to 400,000 across both bulbs, low confidence, a few percent of the bulb's ten million neurons.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Lower threshold and higher input resistance than mitral cells mean the same current yields more spikes.

External tufted cells burst at 1 to 8 hertz with no input, driven by persistent sodium and hyperpolarisation-activated currents.

Tufted cells fire tens of milliseconds earlier in the sniff than mitral cells, and that phase lead encodes odour strength.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Strong direct input from olfactory sensory neurons arrives at the tuft, more direct than mitral cells receive.

Output onto mitral cells of the same glomerulus makes the external tufted cell an obligatory relay in their excitation.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thinner and shorter in range than a mitral axon, myelinated in the lateral olfactory tract.

External tufted axons often stay inside the bulb, linking sister glomeruli on the opposite face.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, with the same dendritic release ability as mitral cells.

MYELINATION:

Yes for projecting axons, though with thinner sheaths than mitral axons.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High and unusually steady, because a bursting cell never rests.

PLASTICITY:

Nose synapses onto tufted cells show short-term depression, giving automatic gain control across successive sniffs.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Glomerular astrocytes wrap external tufted dendrites and soak up the potassium thrown out by their constant bursting.

That keeps the glomerulus from running away into seizure-like synchrony, and otherwise the glial support resembles a mitral cell's.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove tufted cells and the bulb loses its early warning system.

Faint odours go unreported, mitral cells lose most of their drive, and the sniff-locked rhythm collapses.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

External tufted cells are genuine intrinsic oscillators, so they compute time rather than merely relaying it.

One of them can trigger a population burst across every mitral cell in its glomerulus, seizing a whole odour channel.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: strong direct nose glutamate at 0 to 100 hertz; GABA and dopamine from periglomerular and short-axon cells.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate to same-glomerulus mitral cells, the sister glomerulus, anterior olfactory nucleus and olfactory tubercle, in bursts.

• STATE: membrane voltage, burst phase, persistent sodium activation, hyperpolarisation-activated current, short-term depression level.

• PARAMETERS: soma 10 to 20 micrometres; burst rate 1 to 8 hertz; three to ten spikes per burst.

• TIME CONSTANTS: burst period 125 to 1000 milliseconds; within-burst interval 5 to 20 milliseconds; depression recovery 200 to 1000 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: losing this channel raises the detection threshold, so a strong smell is named while a faint one goes unnoticed.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to generate the rhythmic bursting of an external tufted cell and pass each burst to its glomerulus.
Create a number variable called membrane_voltage with initial value -60.
Create a number variable called burst_countdown with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called depression with initial value 1.
Create a list variable called output_spikes with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called step_index with initial value 0.
While step_index is less than total_steps, repeat the following steps.
    Set sensory_drive to the product of the item at position step_index in nose_input and depression.
    Set leak to the product of leak_rate and the difference of membrane_voltage and resting_voltage.
    Set membrane_voltage to the difference of the sum of membrane_voltage and the sum of sensory_drive and pacemaker_current and leak.
    If burst_countdown is greater than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Add step_index to the end of output_spikes.
        Set burst_countdown to the difference of burst_countdown and 1.
        Set membrane_voltage to reset_voltage.
    Else if membrane_voltage is greater than burst_threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Set burst_countdown to spikes_per_burst.
        Set depression to the product of depression and depression_factor.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set depression to the sum of depression and the product of recovery_rate and the difference of 1 and depression.
    End the conditional block.
    Set step_index to the sum of step_index and 1.
End the loop.
Return output_spikes to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python again, for continuity with the mitral model, so both cells can run in one loop and be compared.

def external_tufted_cell(nose_input, dt=0.001):
    # Intrinsic burster: pacemaker drive plus a depressing sensory synapse.
    v, v_rest, v_reset, v_burst = -60.0, -60.0, -62.0, -45.0
    leak, pace = 0.02, 0.30          # pace = persistent sodium plus Ih
    spikes_per_burst = 5
    dep_factor, recovery = 0.75, 0.01
    countdown, depression, spike_times = 0, 1.0, []
    for i, drive in enumerate(nose_input):
        v += drive * depression + pace - leak * (v - v_rest)
        if countdown > 0:
            spike_times.append(i * dt)
            countdown -= 1
            v = v_reset
        elif v > v_burst:
            countdown = spikes_per_burst   # start a new burst
            depression *= dep_factor
        else:
            depression += recovery * (1.0 - depression)
    return spike_times

if __name__ == "__main__":
    out = external_tufted_cell([0.05] * 1000)   # one second of weak odour
    print(len(out), "spikes in one second, delivered in bursts of 5")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Look for a 10 to 20 micrometre soma in the external plexiform layer with one tuft in one glomerulus.

If it bursts rhythmically with no input and can single-handedly ignite every mitral cell in its glomerulus, it is an external tufted cell.

CHAPTER 223. PERIGLOMERULAR CELLS (One-Channel Volume-Setting Neuron) (COG)

Around every glomerulus stands a ring of the smallest neurons in the bulb, and their whole job is to say no.

The old name is an address, meaning only around the glomerulus, and teaches nothing about what the cell does.

One-Channel records the decisive anatomical fact turned into function, because these are largely uniglomerular cells, wiring into a single glomerulus and therefore into the single odorant receptor type whose axons converge there, so their inhibition never spreads to a neighbouring smell channel.

Volume-Setting names the work, which is gain control, exerted both presynaptically on the incoming sensory terminals and postsynaptically on the output cells, so that the same odour at a hundredfold higher concentration does not simply saturate the channel.

Neuron marks it as a juxtaglomerular interneuron rather than an output cell.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A periglomerular cell is a tiny inhibitory interneuron, a local cell that quietens neighbours and never wires away.

It guards the bulb's doorway, turning loud signals down and sharpening the contrast between neighbouring glomeruli.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

A small round body sits between glomeruli and sends one short bushy dendrite into a single glomerulus.

That dendrite is both ear and mouth, receiving glutamate and releasing GABA, and the axon is very short or absent.

SIZE:

The cell body is 5 to 10 micrometres across, the smallest neuron in the olfactory bulb.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

In rodents calretinin marks about 44 percent, tyrosine hydroxylase about 16 percent, calbindin about 14 percent, and the GABA-A alpha5 subunit about 13 percent.

By wiring there are type 1 cells touched directly by nose axons, and type 2 cells driven by external tufted cells.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The glomerular layer of the olfactory bulb, packed into the shell of tissue around each glomerulus.

That shell is the interface between the olfactory nerve layer, which is pure incoming axon, and the external plexiform layer of bulb circuitry.

NUMBER:

No human count exists, so the figure is inferred from rodent density and the 5,568 glomeruli measured per human bulb.

A defensible estimate is 1 to 2 million across both bulbs, at low confidence.

That is perhaps 10 to 20 percent of bulb neurons and about 0.002 percent of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Tiny surface area gives input resistance near one gigaohm, so a single synapse can fire the cell.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Inside the glomerulus it forms reciprocal dendrodendritic synapses with mitral and tufted tufts, taking glutamate and returning GABA at the same contact.

It also clamps the nose terminals themselves through GABA-B and dopamine D2 receptors.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Absent in many cells and extremely short where present, unmyelinated, confined to the glomerular layer.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA, the brain's main inhibitory messenger, in essentially all of them.

The tyrosine-hydroxylase-positive subset also releases dopamine, and in the bulb dopamine is made only here.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable in any real sense, because these cells have no long axon to insulate.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low in absolute terms, because the cells are minute.

The dopamine-making subset costs more, since tyrosine hydroxylase is expensive and its production tracks how much the nostril is used.

PLASTICITY:

Tyrosine hydroxylase switches off within days when a nostril is blocked, and returns when airflow resumes.

Rodents replace these cells for life, but carbon-14 birth dating shows human bulb neurons carry the carbon of their owner's birth year.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes here build a near-complete shell around each glomerulus, a chemical fence they build nowhere else.

That fence stops glutamate leaking between glomeruli, protecting the one-receptor-one-glomerulus code on which smell depends.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and the glomerular layer loses its volume control and its edges.

Strong smells would saturate every channel at once, so a rose and a bin would look alike to cortex.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

It can inhibit without firing a spike, because calcium in the dendritic tuft alone releases GABA.

It performs presynaptic inhibition, doing its computation on someone else's axon terminal before that terminal has spoken.

Its dopamine drifts through the shell by volume transmission, and gap junctions fuse the glomerulus into a partly single unit.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: nose glutamate for type 1 cells and external tufted glutamate for type 2, 0 to 100 hertz; basal forebrain GABA and acetylcholine.

• OUTPUTS: GABA onto mitral and tufted tufts; GABA and dopamine onto nose terminals, cutting their release.

• STATE: membrane voltage, dendritic calcium, GABA pool, dopamine pool, tyrosine hydroxylase expression level.

• PARAMETERS: soma 5 to 10 micrometres; input resistance about 1 gigaohm; presynaptic gain 0.1 to 0.9 as a multiplier.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane 10 to 20 milliseconds; GABA-A 10 to 30 milliseconds; GABA-B and D2 presynaptic inhibition 100 to 1000 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: in Parkinson's disease the dopamine-making bulb cells roughly double, over-suppressing input, a proposed cause of the hyposmia found in over 90 percent of patients.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to apply periglomerular gain control, dividing the nose signal entering a glomerulus by the local activity level.
Create a number variable called local_activity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called presynaptic_gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called dendritic_calcium with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called normalised_output with initial value empty list.
For each nose_drive in glomerular_input_series, perform the following operations.
    Set gated_drive to the product of nose_drive and presynaptic_gain.
    Set dendritic_calcium to the sum of the product of dendritic_calcium and calcium_decay and gated_drive.
    Set local_activity to the sum of the product of local_activity and activity_decay and gated_drive.
    Set presynaptic_gain to the quotient of 1 divided by the sum of 1 and the product of local_activity and inhibition_strength.
    If presynaptic_gain is less than minimum_gain, then perform the following actions.
        Set presynaptic_gain to minimum_gain.
    End the conditional block.
    Set tuft_output to the difference of gated_drive and the product of dendritic_calcium and release_gain.
    If tuft_output is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set tuft_output to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Add tuft_output to the end of normalised_output.
End the loop.
Return normalised_output to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because divisive normalisation is simple arithmetic, and the point is to show the feedback loop plainly.

def periglomerular_gain_control(nose_drive_series):
    # The glomerulus divides its own input by its own recent activity.
    ca_decay, act_decay = 0.85, 0.95
    inhib_strength = 2.0     # how hard GABA and dopamine clamp the terminal
    min_gain = 0.10          # presynaptic inhibition never shuts the door fully
    release_gain = 0.05      # dendritic calcium converted to GABA release
    calcium, activity, gain, out = 0.0, 0.0, 1.0, []
    for drive in nose_drive_series:
        gated = drive * gain
        calcium = calcium * ca_decay + gated
        activity = activity * act_decay + gated
        gain = max(min_gain, 1.0 / (1.0 + activity * inhib_strength))
        out.append(max(0.0, gated - calcium * release_gain))
    return out

if __name__ == "__main__":
    weak = periglomerular_gain_control([0.05] * 200)[-1]
    strong = periglomerular_gain_control([5.00] * 200)[-1]
    print(round(weak, 4), round(strong, 4))   # a 100-fold input gap is compressed

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the smallest neuron in the bulb, with one bushy dendrite in one glomerulus and often no axon at all.

If a cell inhibits an incoming sensory terminal from a dendrite rather than an axon, it is periglomerular.

CHAPTER 224. SHORT-AXON CELLS, INCLUDING SUPERFICIAL SHORT-AXON CELLS (Neighbour-Suppressing Contrast Neuron) (COG)

Their name is one of the great misnomers of neuroscience, because their wires run further than any other local cell in the bulb.

The existing label is an anatomical description that is close to false, because the superficial short-axon cell branches for up to one millimetre across the glomerular layer, which is long, not short, in a structure of that size.

Neighbour-Suppressing names what that reach is for, since these cells form the interglomerular circuit and release gamma-aminobutyric acid, known as GABA, together with dopamine onto external tufted cells and output cells in other glomeruli, so an active smell channel turns down the channels around it.

Contrast names the result, a global centre-surround inhibition that scales with the intensity of sensory input and decorrelates odour representations, so that similar smells become easier to tell apart.

Neuron marks it as an interneuron of the glomerular layer.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A short-axon cell is a local interneuron whose axon is short only beside a projection neuron's.

Superficial ones knit distant glomeruli into an interglomerular network, letting one odour channel rescale another.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

An oval body sits between glomeruli, and its dendrites pointedly stay outside glomeruli, which is the clearest way to tell it from a periglomerular cell.

Its axon runs sideways for a long way, dropping branches into many glomeruli on the route.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are 8 to 12 micrometres across, slightly larger than a periglomerular cell.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Superficial short-axon cells come in an oligoglomerular form contacting 5 to 12 glomeruli and a polyglomerular form contacting tens to hundreds.

Deep short-axon cells include Golgi, Van Gehuchten, horizontal and Blanes cells, the last firing persistently for minutes after a brief stimulus.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The interglomerular spaces of the glomerular layer, itself an interface, being the connective tissue between odour channels rather than inside any.

Deep types sit in the internal plexiform and granule cell layers, at the border just below the mitral cell layer.

NUMBER:

No human count exists, and in rodents these are a clear minority of glomerular layer neurons.

Scaling gives roughly 100,000 to 300,000 across both bulbs, at low confidence.

That is on the order of 1 to 3 percent of bulb neurons, well under 0.001 percent of the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Superficial cells fire tonically at a few hertz and follow odour input with sustained discharge.

Blanes cells flip into self-sustaining firing that outlasts a brief input by minutes, driven by a calcium-activated cation current.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Superficial cells are driven mainly by external tufted cells rather than by the nose directly.

Their output onto distant external tufted cells is biphasic, a fast GABA-A inhibition followed by slower dopamine D1-like excitation.

Blanes cells inhibit granule cells, and since granule cells inhibit mitral cells, the result is disinhibition, releasing an output cell by silencing its silencer.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Unmyelinated and thin, yet long by local standards at 0.5 to 2 millimetres.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA and dopamine released together from one cell onto one target, which is called co-transmission.

Because the two receptors differ in speed, a single presynaptic burst delivers two opposite instructions separated in time.

MYELINATION:

None, since these axons are thin and local.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Higher than most interneurons, because a millimetre of bare axon is costly to keep polarised.

PLASTICITY:

Dopamine synthesis rises and falls with how much the nostril is used.

The persistent state of a Blanes cell is itself a memory, since a brief input changes behaviour for minutes.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes in the interglomerular spaces are the main sink for dopamine here, because the bulb has few dopamine reuptake transporters.

Glial uptake therefore sets how far dopamine spreads, and so how many glomeruli one cell reaches chemically.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove them and every glomerulus becomes an island.

A strong smell would flood the output with no way to rescale, and background odours could never be subtracted.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Co-transmission with opposite signs is a real computation, writing a fast negative and a slow positive onto one wire.

Persistent firing in Blanes cells is a memory built from an intrinsic current rather than from any synapse.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from external tufted cells and mitral tufts, 0 to 100 hertz; basal forebrain acetylcholine and GABA; cortical glutamate for deep types.

• OUTPUTS: GABA and dopamine onto external tufted, periglomerular and mitral targets in 5 to several hundred distant glomeruli; GABA onto granule cells for Blanes cells.

• STATE: membrane voltage, calcium-activated cation current activation, GABA pool, dopamine pool, tonic rate.

• PARAMETERS: soma 8 to 12 micrometres; axon span 0.5 to 2 millimetres; glomeruli contacted 5 to several hundred; tonic rate 1 to 10 hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS: GABA-A 10 to 30 milliseconds; dopamine excitation onset 200 to 500 milliseconds; Blanes persistent firing tens of seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: without interglomerular normalisation a target odour cannot be found against a strong background, a common complaint in post-viral smell disorder.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the two-part effect of a short-axon cell on a distant external tufted cell.
Create a number variable called gaba_level with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dopamine_level with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called effect_record with initial value empty list.
For each source_rate in short_axon_firing_series, perform the following operations.
    Set gaba_level to the sum of the product of gaba_level and gaba_decay and the product of source_rate and gaba_release_gain.
    Set dopamine_level to the sum of the product of dopamine_level and dopamine_decay and the product of source_rate and dopamine_release_gain.
    Set inhibitory_effect to the product of gaba_level and gaba_receptor_strength.
    Set excitatory_effect to the product of dopamine_level and dopamine_receptor_strength.
    Set net_effect to the difference of excitatory_effect and inhibitory_effect.
    Add net_effect to the end of effect_record.
    If net_effect is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Display "target inhibited" to the console.
    Else if net_effect is greater than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Display "target excited" to the console.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Display "target unchanged" to the console.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Return effect_record to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the model is two leaky accumulators with different decay rates, clearest as plain arithmetic.

def short_axon_cotransmission(firing_series, dt=0.001):
    # Fast GABA then slow dopamine, released by the same presynaptic cell.
    gaba_decay, dopa_decay = 0.95, 0.9985     # about 20 ms and 700 ms
    gaba_gain, dopa_gain = 1.00, 0.02
    gaba_strength, dopa_strength = 1.0, 6.0   # GABA-A versus D1-like receptors
    gaba, dopa, net = 0.0, 0.0, []
    for rate in firing_series:
        gaba = gaba * gaba_decay + rate * gaba_gain
        dopa = dopa * dopa_decay + rate * dopa_gain
        net.append(dopa * dopa_strength - gaba * gaba_strength)
    return net

if __name__ == "__main__":
    volley = [1.0] * 20 + [0.0] * 1500        # a 20 ms burst, then silence
    trace = short_axon_cotransmission(volley)
    print("10 ms", round(trace[10], 3))       # inhibited
    print("800 ms", round(trace[800], 3))     # excited

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Look for a glomerular layer cell whose dendrites stay out of glomeruli while its axon crosses half the bulb.

If instead an interneuron deep in the granule layer keeps firing minutes after stimulation stops, that is a Blanes cell.

CHAPTER 225. OLFACTORY BULB GRANULE CELLS (COG)

The most numerous neuron in your olfactory bulb has no axon at all, and speaks entirely through knobs on one branch.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A granule cell is a small inhibitory interneuron supplying almost all the inhibition in the deeper bulb.

It quietens the mitral cell that just excited it and the neighbours around it, which sharpens odours and builds the bulb's gamma rhythm.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

One long apical dendrite climbs into the external plexiform layer studded with large spines called gemmules, and there is no axon whatsoever.

SIZE:

The body is 6 to 10 micrometres across and the apical dendrite climbs 300 to 600 micrometres.

Each gemmule head is one to two micrometres wide, which is large for a spine.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Superficially branching cells contact tufted cells, deeply branching ones contact mitral cells, and intermediates contact both.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The granule cell layer of the olfactory bulb, the deepest and thickest cellular layer, with stragglers in the internal plexiform and mitral layers.

Its gemmules work up in the external plexiform layer, so the cell straddles that interface, with body and business end in different layers.

NUMBER:

Granule cells outnumber mitral cells by 50 to 100 to one, giving roughly 2 to 4 million per bulb.

That is about 5 to 7 million across both bulbs, the large majority of the bulb's ten million neurons.

Confidence is moderate for the ratio and low for the total, since no modern human count exists.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Single gemmules fire local dendritic spikes using low-voltage-activated calcium channels and NMDA receptors, without the cell body doing anything.

A global spike travels up the dendrite and enables release at every gemmule at once, so the cell has local and global modes.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The defining contact is the reciprocal dendrodendritic synapse, where one gemmule presses on a mitral lateral dendrite and the two release onto each other.

Basal dendrites receive an enormous glutamate feedback projection from piriform cortex and anterior olfactory nucleus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Not Applicable, and this is a biological fact rather than missing information.

The cell is genuinely axonless, so every output is a dendritic release event.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

GABA, released from the gemmules on the apical dendrite.

MYELINATION:

None, and it could not be otherwise, since myelin sheathes axons and this cell has none.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low per cell, since each is small and usually silent.

PLASTICITY:

The reciprocal synapse supports long-term potentiation and depression, so lateral inhibition is rewritten by experience.

Rodents add new granule cells for life, but carbon-14 dating shows human bulb neurons carry the carbon of their owner's birth year.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes wrap the reciprocal synapses so closely that they set how long glutamate lingers, and thus how much GABA comes back.

The rostral migratory stream, the glial tube carrying new granule cells in rodents, is vestigial in adult humans.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove granule cells and the bulb loses both contrast and rhythm.

Gamma oscillations vanish, similar odours blur together, and cortical feedback arrives at an empty address.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This is the textbook neuron that computes with dendrites instead of axons, since each gemmule can take glutamate, spike locally and release GABA without the soma knowing.

Presynaptic NMDA receptors inside the gemmule admit the calcium that triggers that release, an arrangement almost unique in the brain.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from mitral and tufted lateral dendrites at the gemmules, 0 to 80 hertz; cortical feedback on basal dendrites; acetylcholine, noradrenaline, serotonin.

• OUTPUTS: GABA from gemmules onto mitral and tufted lateral dendrites, both recurrent and lateral; no axonal output of any kind.

• STATE: somatic voltage, per-gemmule voltage and calcium, NMDA activation per gemmule, asynchronous release pool, global spike flag.

• PARAMETERS: soma 6 to 10 micrometres; 50 to 100 granule cells per mitral cell; hundreds to thousands of gemmules per cell.

• TIME CONSTANTS: synchronous GABA within 10 milliseconds; asynchronous release 100 to 1000 milliseconds; gamma cycle 25 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: weakened granule inhibition widens odour tuning and is proposed to underlie parosmia, the distorted and phantom smells that follow viral injury.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to compute the inhibition one granule cell returns to a row of mitral cells through its reciprocal spines.
Create a list variable called spine_calcium_list with initial value empty list.
Create a list variable called inhibition_out with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called soma_charge with initial value 0.
Create a boolean variable called global_spike with initial value false.
Create a number variable called spine_index with initial value 0.
For each mitral_rate in mitral_activity_list, perform the following operations.
    Set spine_calcium to the product of mitral_rate and nmda_gain.
    Add spine_calcium to the end of spine_calcium_list.
    Set soma_charge to the sum of soma_charge and the product of spine_calcium and soma_coupling.
End the loop.
If soma_charge is greater than somatic_threshold, then perform the following actions.
    Set global_spike to true.
End the conditional block.
While spine_index is less than the total number of items in spine_calcium_list, repeat the following steps.
    Set local_calcium to the item at position spine_index in spine_calcium_list.
    If global_spike is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set release to the product of the sum of local_calcium and global_boost and release_gain.
    Else if local_calcium is greater than local_spike_threshold, then perform the following actions.
        Set release to the product of local_calcium and release_gain.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set release to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Add release to the end of inhibition_out.
    Set spine_index to the sum of spine_index and 1.
End the loop.
Return inhibition_out to the calling function.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the computation maps a list of spines onto a list of mitral partners, which Python lists express directly.

def granule_cell(mitral_rates):
    # One gemmule per mitral partner, with local and global release modes.
    nmda_gain, soma_coupling = 0.8, 0.9
    soma_threshold = 12.0     # global spike threshold
    local_threshold = 1.5     # local dendritic spike threshold per gemmule
    release_gain, global_boost = 0.5, 2.0
    spine_calcium = [r * nmda_gain for r in mitral_rates]
    global_spike = sum(spine_calcium) * soma_coupling > soma_threshold
    inhibition = []
    for ca in spine_calcium:
        if global_spike:
            inhibition.append((ca + global_boost) * release_gain)
        elif ca > local_threshold:
            inhibition.append(ca * release_gain)   # purely local release
        else:
            inhibition.append(0.0)
    return inhibition, global_spike

if __name__ == "__main__":
    quiet, g1 = granule_cell([0.2, 0.2, 4.0, 0.2, 0.2])   # one loud partner
    loud, g2 = granule_cell([4.0] * 5)                    # a whole odour
    print([round(x, 2) for x in quiet], g1)
    print([round(x, 2) for x in loud], g2)

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the most numerous neuron in the bulb, it has no axon, and its output synapses sit in giant spines.

If a neuron's inhibitory output is triggered by NMDA receptors on its own release site, it is an olfactory bulb granule cell.

CHAPTER 226. BLANES CELLS (COG)

One brief sniff can leave this cell talking to itself for minutes after the smell has gone.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A Blanes cell is a big inhibitory neuron, meaning one that quietens others, in the deepest layer of the olfactory bulb.

It keeps firing for minutes after a brief input stops, and since everything it silences is itself inhibitory, it works as a switch on the bulb's own volume control.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is a plump star, called stellate, with thick spine-covered dendrites, the branching antennae that gather signals, confined to the granule cell layer, while its single thin axon climbs into the external plexiform layer.

SIZE:

The cell body spans sixteen to twenty-three micrometres, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre, making it the largest of the four described deep short-axon cell types and two to three times wider than neighbouring granule cells.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Deep short-axon cells split three ways by where their axons end, in the glomerular, external plexiform or granule cell layer, and Blanes cells sit mostly in the middle group, with markers such as neuropeptide Y varying between them.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The granule cell layer of the main olfactory bulb, some in the internal plexiform layer, which is the interface between the bulb's inhibitory reservoir and its output layer, with the axon crossing into the external plexiform layer where output cells and granule cells meet.

NUMBER:

Nobody has counted them in a human, so confidence is low.

Each bulb holds about three and a half million neurons in men and six point nine million in women, and scaling the sparse rodent proportion gives twenty thousand to one hundred thousand across both bulbs, under one percent of bulb neurons and seven ten-thousandths of one percent of the body's eighty-six billion.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Rest is sixty-five millivolts negative inside, and a burst of spikes, the brief pulses neurons signal with, admits calcium that opens I-CAN, the calcium-activated non-selective cation current, whose lingering afterdepolarisation sustains firing at a few hertz until a hyperpolarising step switches it off.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Excitation arrives on axon collaterals of mitral and tufted cells, the bulb's output neurons, and paired recordings show direct inhibition of granule cells, so a firing Blanes cell frees mitral cells from restraint, an arrangement called disinhibition.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thin, unmyelinated and short, branching within about a millimetre and never leaving the bulb, so a conduction speed under one metre per second still costs under a millisecond.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Gamma-aminobutyric acid, abbreviated GABA, the brain's main inhibitory messenger, acting on GABA type A receptors, pores that admit chloride and hold the target below threshold, with peptide or nitric oxide co-release likely in some cells.

MYELINATION:

Not Applicable in the usual sense, and the reason matters: myelin is fatty insulation that buys speed on long axons, and these are short local cables with no speed problem, so they run bare.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Minutes of firing are expensive, since every spike is repaid by pumping sodium out and potassium back in, I-CAN admits a steady extra trickle, and calcium must be expelled, all burning adenosine triphosphate, abbreviated ATP, the cell's fuel.

PLASTICITY:

Plasticity here is intrinsic rather than synaptic, because leftover calcium from earlier bursts sets how easily the next barrage latches the cell on, and unlike granule cells, replaced for life from the ventricle wall, Blanes cells are born once.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Astrocytes face an unusual load, because a neuron firing for minutes sheds potassium continuously rather than in pulses and it must be siphoned off, and microglia stay busier here than elsewhere because this layer receives newborn neurons for life.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete it and the bulb loses its short-term memory for smell, inhibition becomes purely reactive, and the region can no longer fade out a steady odour while staying alert to a new one.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Its calcium-gated cation current makes the membrane itself bistable, storing one bit with no network loop, while spines give local chemical compartments, sustained firing likely drives local blood flow, and arriving newborn granule cells rebuild its synapses for life.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Glutamate from mitral and tufted collaterals at zero to sixty nanosiemens, acetylcholine and noradrenaline scaling peak I-CAN between zero point five and two, and GABAergic reset steps of five to twenty millivolts.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GABA onto granule cell dendrites at one to five nanosiemens per contact, in persistent trains of one to fifteen hertz.

• STATE.

◦ Voltage, internal calcium, I-CAN gate from zero to one, adaptation conductance, persistent-mode flag.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Rest minus sixty-five millivolts, threshold minus forty-five, reset minus sixty, peak I-CAN zero point six times leak, half-activation calcium zero point three five.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane twenty to thirty milliseconds, adaptation one hundred to two hundred milliseconds, calcium one to three seconds, persistent epoch up to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Weak I-CAN costs the bulb its odour memory and adaptation to background smells, plausibly feeding the early smell loss of Parkinson and Alzheimer disease, while over-active I-CAN silences granule cells and lets bulb output run away.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to latch a Blanes cell into persistent firing after a brief odour barrage.
Create a number variable called voltage with initial value -65.
Create a number variable called calcium with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 25.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called spikes with initial value empty list.
While [clock is less than 6000] remains true, repeat the following steps.
    If [clock is greater than or equal to 300] is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set drive to the product of 40 and the quotient of calcium divided by the sum of calcium and 0.35.
    End the conditional block.
    Set voltage to the sum of voltage and the quotient of the difference of drive and the sum of voltage and 65 divided by 50.
    Set calcium to the difference of calcium and the quotient of calcium divided by 3000.
    If [voltage is greater than or equal to -45] is true, then perform the following actions.
        Add clock to the end of spikes.
        Set voltage to -60.
        Set calcium to the sum of calcium and 0.12.
    End the conditional block.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 0.5.
End the loop.
Get the total number of items in spikes.
Display that count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: no libraries, and the lingua franca of computational neuroscience.
DT, V_REST, V_TH, V_RESET, TAU_M = 0.5, -65.0, -45.0, -60.0, 25.0
E_CAN, E_K, G_CAN, K_CA, TAU_CA = 0.0, -85.0, 0.6, 0.35, 1500.0
CA_STEP, TAU_AHP, AHP_STEP = 0.12, 150.0, 0.08
v, ca, ahp, t, spikes = V_REST, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, []
while t < 6000.0:
    drive = 25.0 if t < 300.0 else 0.0             # 300 ms odour barrage
    g = G_CAN * ca * ca / (ca * ca + K_CA * K_CA)  # calcium opens I-CAN
    v += (-(v - V_REST) + drive + g * (E_CAN - v) + ahp * (E_K - v)) / TAU_M * DT
    ca -= ca / TAU_CA * DT
    ahp -= ahp / TAU_AHP * DT
    if v >= V_TH:
        v, ca, ahp = V_RESET, ca + CA_STEP, ahp + AHP_STEP   # latch and brake
        spikes.append(t)
    t += DT
print("spikes:", len(spikes), "| last at", round(spikes[-1], 1), "ms")

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

A fat spiny star sixteen to twenty-three micrometres wide in the deepest bulb layer among tiny granule cells, still firing after a short depolarising pulse has ended, and switching off like a light when hyperpolarised.

CHAPTER 227. MIGRATORY GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE NEURONS (Nose-Born Migrating Neuron) (NON-COG)

Puberty begins in the nose, in a few thousand cells born in the lining of the nostril that then crawl into the brain.

The old label is a peptide barcode plus a committee minute, naming a hormone and a movement but no purpose.

Nose-Born records the startling and solid developmental fact, that these neurons arise in the nasal placode alongside the olfactory sensory cells and then crawl along vomeronasal and terminal nerve axons through the cribriform plate into the forebrain, which is why the same failure produces both anosmia and infertility in Kallmann syndrome.

Migrating names the journey itself, the only such crossing made by any neuron destined for the human forebrain.

Neuron marks it as one of the few thousand cells that complete the journey, whose pulsatile secretion into the pituitary portal blood is the switch that starts puberty and paces the reproductive cycle thereafter.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

Born outside the brain in the nasal placode, a thickened patch of skin-like tissue in the roof of the embryonic nose, this cell makes gonadotropin-releasing hormone, abbreviated GnRH, a ten amino acid chain called a decapeptide.

It migrates into the hypothalamus and releases GnRH in hourly pulses into a private blood supply feeding the pituitary gland, making these cells the master switch for puberty, the menstrual cycle and fertility.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is a thin spindle with one process from each end, a shape called bipolar, and its long process reaching the median eminence, the release zone under the hypothalamus, carries spines like a dendrite yet conducts and secretes like an axon, earning its own name, the dendron.

SIZE:

Adult human male cell bodies measure about thirty-seven micrometres long by fourteen wide, against twenty-eight by twelve in the rhesus monkey, while the dendron runs up to four millimetres in the mouse, which for a body that narrow is like a person with a two hundred metre arm.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Most cells settle in the preoptic area and infundibular region and project to the median eminence, while a minority stay stranded along the route; a separate one hundred and fifty thousand to two hundred thousand GnRH-producing cells in the human putamen are cholinergic interneurons, not this lineage.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Origin is the nasal placode, and the route follows the vomeronasal and terminal nerves, the latter also called cranial nerve zero, through the nasal septum, across the cribriform plate, the perforated bone dividing nose from brain, then turns at the nasal forebrain junction, the interface where peripheral tissue meets central nervous system.

Adult cell bodies scatter from the septal and preoptic region to the retromammillary region, including the diagonal band of Broca, lamina terminalis, periventricular nucleus and infundibular nucleus, the human name for the arcuate nucleus, with terminals in the median eminence and a few cells in the ganglion terminale on the olfactory bulb.

NUMBER:

About two thousand GnRH neurons run reproduction in an adult human hypothalamus, with good confidence in the order of magnitude and moderate confidence in the exact value.

How many set out from the nose has never been measured, so the honest bound is at least two thousand, which is two ten-millionths of one percent of the body's eighty-six billion neurons and a rounding error against this section's budget of twenty-two million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The cells fire slowly and irregularly at rest, under one spike per second, and every hour or two the population switches into a synchronised burst lasting minutes that releases a pulse of hormone.

Spikes begin not at the cell body but at one patch ninety micrometres out along the dendron, marked by the anchoring protein ankyrin-G.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The dominant input is kisspeptin from infundibular cells that also make neurokinin B and dynorphin, nicknamed KNDy neurons, whose mutual excitation and muting form the pulse generator itself.

The output is no classical synapse, because the dendron empties GnRH into portal capillaries, so the target is a blood vessel and, through it, the gonadotrophs of the anterior pituitary.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The projection is the dendron, thin and heavily branched near its end, conducting at a fraction of a metre per second, which is irrelevant for an output measured in pulses per hour.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The product is the GnRH decapeptide in dense core vesicles, released by calcium-triggered fusion during bursts, with galanin or glutamate as co-transmitters in some cells.

Pulses come every ninety-five minutes in the early follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, every sixty to seventy around ovulation, then every four to six hours in the luteal phase, and since fast pulses favour luteinising hormone and slow ones follicle-stimulating hormone, timing alone carries two instructions.

MYELINATION:

The dendron is unmyelinated, because myelin buys speed and speed is worthless to a system counted in pulses per hour, and although migrating cells travel with axons ensheathed by olfactory ensheathing cells, the GnRH cell itself is never myelinated.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Baseline demand is low, but migration is costly, since building and dismantling the leading process burns adenosine triphosphate, abbreviated ATP, and each pulse empties and rebuilds vesicles at terminals that sit outside the blood-brain barrier with direct access to glucose.

PLASTICITY:

Plasticity here is hormonal and structural, because across the menstrual cycle glia physically wrap and unwrap the terminals, opening and closing access to portal blood over days, while oestrogen and testosterone remodel synapses on the cell bodies.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Olfactory ensheathing cells escort the migrating neurons out of the nose, and in animals lacking them the neurons never arrive.

Tanycytes, elongated glia lining the third ventricle floor, wrap the terminals and physically retract to expose them when a surge is needed, a mechanical gate with no counterpart in the brain, while local astrocytes release prostaglandin E2 that directly triggers secretion.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove these cells and the hypothalamus loses time: temperature, hunger, thirst and sleep would still work perfectly, but the hourly rhythm vanishes, and with it the monthly cycle and the arc from puberty to menopause, leaving a person permanently prepubertal and infertile.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

One of very few neurons not born in the neural tube, so a simulation must model migration before electricity, it has an output process that is neither axon nor dendrite but both, a release site outside the blood-brain barrier, and scattered cell bodies that synchronise across millimetres by volume transmission, meaning signalling by diffusion through tissue rather than through synapses.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Kisspeptin pulses from KNDy neurons at zero point two to one per hour, glutamate, GABA and orexin synapses, circulating oestradiol, progesterone and testosterone, and in development anosmin-1 from the ANOS1 gene plus fibroblast growth factor 8 on receptor FGFR1.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ GnRH decapeptide into hypophyseal portal blood, targeting anterior pituitary gonadotrophs, the interval between pulses carrying the message.

• STATE.

◦ Migration position, then voltage, burst flag, releasable vesicle pool, time since last pulse, steroid feedback level.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Population about two thousand, spike initiation ninety micrometres out, dendron up to four millimetres, baseline under one hertz.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Burst one to five minutes, interpulse interval sixty to three hundred and sixty minutes, migration about ten weeks in the human embryo.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Failed migration gives Kallmann syndrome, anosmia plus congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, in one in thirty thousand males and one in one hundred and twenty-five thousand females, ANOS1 mutations behind roughly eight percent, and a nineteen-week X-linked fetus showed the neurons arrested in a tangle above the cribriform plate.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to walk a newborn gonadotropin releasing hormone neuron from the nose to the hypothalamus and report whether it arrived.
Create a number variable called position with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called anosmin_level with initial value 1.
Create a boolean variable called arrived with initial value false.
Create a number variable called day with initial value 0.
While [day is less than 70] remains true, repeat the following steps.
    Set position to the sum of position and the product of 2 and anosmin_level.
    If [both position is greater than or equal to 45 and anosmin_level is less than 0.5] is true, then perform the following actions.
        Display "stalled above the cribriform plate, the Kallmann pattern" to the console.
        Break out of the current loop immediately.
    End the conditional block.
    If [position is greater than or equal to 100] is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set arrived to true.
        Display "reached the hypothalamus, puberty can begin" to the console.
        Break out of the current loop immediately.
    End the conditional block.
    Set day to the sum of day and 1.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: the random module ships with the language, so this model runs anywhere.
import random
N_START, ROUTE, GATE, DAYS, ATTRITION = 10000, 100.0, 45.0, 70, 0.03

def migrate(anosmin, seed=7):
    rng = random.Random(seed)
    tally = {"arrived": 0, "stuck": 0, "lost": 0}
    for _cell in range(N_START):
        pos, fate = 0.0, "lost"
        for _day in range(DAYS):
            if rng.random() < ATTRITION:
                break                                      # dies or diverts
            pos += 2.0 * anosmin * rng.uniform(0.6, 1.4)   # grip on scaffold
            if pos >= GATE and anosmin < 0.5:
                fate = "stuck"                             # tangle on the bone
                break
            if pos >= ROUTE:
                fate = "arrived"
                break
        tally[fate] += 1
    return tally

for name, level in (("intact anosmin-1", 1.0), ("ANOS1 mutation", 0.4)):
    print(name, migrate(level))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

No other neuron is born outside the brain, walks in through holes in the skull, then spends eighty years releasing a ten amino acid hormone into a blood vessel once an hour.

Stain a hypothalamus for GnRH and a thin scatter of spindles appears along a line from septum to mammillary bodies, the fossilised path of an embryonic journey.


PART THIRTEEN: AUDITORY AND VESTIBULAR PERIPHERAL NEURONS

CHAPTER 228. TYPE I SPIRAL GANGLION NEURONS (Sound-Detail Reporting Neuron) (NON-COG)

Every word you have ever heard crossed into your brain along a bundle of roughly thirty thousand of these cells per ear, and each one of them listens to a single hair cell through a single synapse.

Type One is an alphanumeric series label that tells a student nothing, so the name has to carry the work instead.

Sound-Detail names the world these cells serve and the precision they serve it with, because every note, word and warning a person consciously hears travels along them and nowhere else, each myelinated cell listening to exactly one inner hair cell through a single ribbon synapse.

Reporting names the job, a faithful one-way dispatch to the brain.

Neuron marks it as the overwhelming bulk of the line, roughly ninety to ninety-five percent of all spiral ganglion cells, graded by spontaneous firing rate from near zero up to about one hundred and twenty spikes per second so that quiet whispers and loud shouts are split across separate channels.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is the first neuron in the hearing pathway, the cell that turns a mechanical event inside the ear into an electrical message the brain can read.

It is a sensory afferent, which means a neuron that carries information inward from a sense organ toward the brain.

Its job is to sit at one inner hair cell, the sensory cell that actually detects sound vibration, and to report every flicker of transmitter that hair cell releases.

Frequency is carried by which fibre fires, because each fibre is wired to one place along the coiled cochlea and each place responds best to one pitch.

Loudness is carried by how fast the fibre fires and by how many neighbouring fibres are recruited.

Timing is carried with astonishing precision, because these cells can lock their spikes to the peaks of a sound wave to within tens of millionths of a second.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is bipolar, meaning the cell body has exactly two processes leaving it on opposite sides, like a bead threaded on a string.

The peripheral process runs outward to the organ of Corti, the strip of sensory tissue inside the cochlea, and ends in one small unbranched swelling called a bouton pressed against one inner hair cell.

The central process runs inward through the internal auditory canal, the bony tunnel connecting ear to skull cavity, and ends in the cochlear nucleus of the brainstem.

The peripheral process is wrapped in myelin, a fatty insulating sheath, until it passes through the habenula perforata, a row of tiny holes in bone, where the myelin stops and the last stretch runs bare.

In humans, and unusually among mammals, the cell body itself is almost always unmyelinated and is instead draped in satellite glial cells, with several cell bodies often sharing one glial envelope.

Detailed human work by Rattay, Glueckert and colleagues describes three glial categories around the human cell body: myelinating Schwann cells, non-myelinating Schwann cells rich in laminin beta 2 and collagen four, and satellite glial cells.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly fifteen to thirty micrometres across, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre, which makes it a large neuron by peripheral standards.

The peripheral process is about one to three micrometres thick, thinning to well under one micrometre at the bare terminal.

The central axon is about two to four micrometres thick including its myelin.

The peripheral process is short, roughly zero point three to four millimetres depending on where in the spiral it starts.

The central axon is longer, on the order of fifteen to twenty five millimetres from ganglion to brainstem, a figure estimated from anatomy rather than measured fibre by fibre.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Single cell ribonucleic acid sequencing, a method that reads which genes are switched on in one cell at a time, splits these neurons into three molecular families called type one a, type one b and type one c.

Type one a cells are marked by high calretinin, type one b by calbindin and titin, and type one c by the genes Pou4f1 and Lypd1, with Runx1 shared by b and c.

These map roughly onto the older physiological classes of high, medium and low spontaneous rate fibres.

High rate fibres contact the pillar side of the hair cell, the side facing the outside of the spiral, and have low thresholds and small terminals with large synaptic ribbons.

Low rate fibres contact the modiolar side, facing the cochlear core, and have high thresholds and a wide dynamic range that keeps working in loud noise.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell bodies sit in Rosenthal canal, a spiral tunnel wound through the modiolus, which is the bony central pillar of the cochlea, inside the densest bone of the human body.

The peripheral terminals lie in the inner spiral plexus of the organ of Corti, directly beneath the inner hair cells, along the whole thirty two to thirty five millimetres of the human cochlear duct.

Two interfaces matter and must be modelled explicitly.

The first is the habenula perforata, where the fibre leaves bone and enters fluid filled sensory tissue and where myelin ends.

The second is the glial and Schwann junction, also called the Obersteiner and Redlich zone, which for the eighth cranial nerve sits unusually far out inside the internal auditory canal and marks the handover from Schwann cell myelin to oligodendrocyte myelin.

The central terminals occupy all three divisions of the cochlear nucleus: anteroventral, posteroventral and dorsal.

NUMBER:

Human temporal bone counts put thirty thousand to thirty five thousand spiral ganglion neurons in each ear, of which ninety to ninety five percent are type one.

That gives roughly twenty seven thousand to thirty three thousand per ear, so about fifty five thousand to sixty thousand across both ears, which fits inside the sixty thousand allotted to the spiral ganglion in this section.

Confidence is high, because the figure comes from repeated serial section counts in post mortem human ears rather than from extrapolation.

Against a whole nervous system of roughly eighty six billion neurons, this is about seven hundredths of a thousandth of one percent, which is to say seven neurons in every ten million.

Counts fall with age at roughly one hundred cells per year of life in human temporal bones, so a healthy ninety year old may have lost a third of them.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

The resting membrane voltage sits near minus sixty to minus seventy millivolts.

Spontaneous firing, meaning firing in complete silence, is bimodal across the population: one group whispers below one spike per second, another chatters at forty to eighty spikes per second, with the peak near sixty.

Sound drives an onset burst of several hundred spikes per second that settles within milliseconds to a sustained one hundred to two hundred fifty spikes per second.

The absolute refractory period, the dead time after a spike when no second spike is possible, is about zero point three to zero point seven milliseconds as measured with electrical stimulation in cochlear implant users.

Spikes lock to the phase of a pure tone up to about four to five kilohertz in cat, above which only the envelope is followed.

Modelling work indicates that wave one of the human auditory brainstem response, the first bump in the standard clinical hearing test, is generated largely by the unmyelinated cell body region of these neurons.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input is a single ribbon synapse, a specialised release site built around a protein bar that tethers dozens of transmitter packets ready for instant release.

Roughly eight to ten of these neurons converge on each of the approximately three thousand five hundred human inner hair cells, but each neuron takes input from one hair cell only, with no convergence at all on the receiving side.

The receiving receptors are alpha amino three hydroxy five methyl four isoxazolepropionic acid receptors, known as AMPA receptors, built from GluA2, GluA3 and GluA4 subunits.

The terminal also receives lateral olivocochlear efferent endings from the brainstem, which release dopamine, acetylcholine, gamma aminobutyric acid, calcitonin gene related peptide and enkephalins to trim the fibre gain and protect it.

Output is onto bushy cells of the anteroventral cochlear nucleus through the endbulb of Held, one of the largest synapses in the brain, plus collateral branches to the posteroventral and dorsal divisions.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The central axon is myelinated, tonotopically ordered so that neighbouring fibres carry neighbouring pitches, and it bifurcates on entering the cochlear nucleus into an ascending and a descending branch.

Conduction velocity is roughly ten to twenty metres per second in cat, and has never been measured directly in a living human, so the human value is inferred rather than known.

Spikes are initiated at the first heminode, the last insulated patch just inside the habenula perforata, not at the cell body.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The neuron itself releases glutamate, the standard excitatory transmitter of the brain, at the cochlear nucleus.

It receives glutamate from the inner hair cell, loaded into vesicles by vesicular glutamate transporter three, and mutations in that transporter cause deafness while leaving the hair cell bundle intact.

MYELINATION:

Schwann cells myelinate the peripheral and proximal central segments, and oligodendrocytes take over centrally.

The human cell body is the striking exception, sitting bare inside a satellite glial wrapping, which slows and delays the spike as it crosses the soma and is thought to add a distinct conduction step absent in cats and rodents.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

A fibre resting at sixty spikes per second never stops, so its sodium and potassium pumps run continuously and its terminals are packed with mitochondria.

Blood arrives only through the labyrinthine artery, an end artery with essentially no backup supply, so a few minutes of interruption is enough to silence the ear.

PLASTICITY:

This is not a learning synapse in the usual sense, but it remodels.

After loud noise the ribbon synapses can be destroyed while hair cells survive, a condition called cochlear synaptopathy or hidden hearing loss, and only some of those synapses regrow.

The fibres depend on brain derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin three supplied by hair cells and supporting cells, which is why they slowly die after the hair cells do.

They can nonetheless survive for decades after deafness, which is the entire reason cochlear implants work.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The glia here do two jobs that glia elsewhere do not.

Inner phalangeal and border cells, the supporting cells that hug the terminal, clear released glutamate with the transporter GLAST, and when that clearance fails the terminal swells and bursts in the classic picture of cochlear excitotoxicity.

The satellite glial clusters around the bare human cell bodies group several neurons into shared electrical compartments, an arrangement not seen in the cochleas of laboratory animals.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this one cell type and the cochlea becomes a perfect, exquisitely tuned mechanical instrument with nobody listening.

The travelling wave still runs, the hair cells still bend, the outer hair cells still amplify, and not one bit of it reaches the brain.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Coding here is fundamentally stochastic, meaning the timing of each spike depends on the random arrival of transmitter packets at one ribbon, so the fibre is a probability machine rather than a summing machine.

The bare human cell body behaves as a low pass filter and current sink, delaying the spike and, by that delay, generating the far field electrical signature clinicians record as wave one.

Because bare cell bodies are packed side by side in Rosenthal canal, ephaptic interaction, meaning direct electrical eavesdropping between neighbours without any synapse, is anatomically plausible in humans and is a real design question for any implant model.

The terminal signals backwards too, taking up neurotrophins and shipping them to the nucleus to keep survival genes switched on.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate release events from exactly one inner hair cell ribbon synapse, zero to about one thousand vesicles per second.

• INPUTS: efferent modulation from lateral olivocochlear fibres, modelled as a gain scalar between zero point five and one point two.

• OUTPUTS: action potentials onto the endbulb of Held on one anteroventral cochlear nucleus bushy cell, plus collaterals to posteroventral and dorsal divisions.

• STATE: membrane voltage, readily releasable vesicle pool occupancy, time since last spike, short term adaptation level.

• PARAMETERS: characteristic frequency between twenty hertz and twenty kilohertz, spontaneous rate class of zero point five, ten or sixty spikes per second, threshold between zero and forty decibels sound pressure level, saturation rate two hundred to three hundred spikes per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: refractory period zero point three to zero point seven milliseconds, rapid adaptation one to five milliseconds, short term adaptation forty to one hundred milliseconds, vesicle pool refill ten to fifty milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: noise or ageing destroys ribbon synapses, low spontaneous rate fibres go first, the audiogram stays normal, and the patient cannot follow speech in a noisy room.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert transmitter release at one ribbon synapse into a train of nerve impulses with the correct spontaneous rate, saturation and dead time.
Create a number variable called spontaneous rate with initial value 60.
Create a number variable called threshold decibels with initial value 5.
Create a number variable called sound decibels with initial value 40.
Create a number variable called time step with initial value 0.00001.
Create a number variable called vesicle pool with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called release credit with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called time since spike with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called driven rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike total with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 100000 times.
    Set time since spike to the sum of time since spike and time step.
    Set vesicle pool to the sum of vesicle pool and the product of 0.0005 and the difference of 1 and vesicle pool.
    Set driven rate to the product of 6 and the difference of sound decibels and threshold decibels.
    If driven rate is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set driven rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    If time since spike is less than 0.0007, then perform the following actions.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Set release credit to the sum of release credit and the product of vesicle pool and the product of time step and the sum of spontaneous rate and driven rate.
    If release credit is greater than or equal to 1, then perform the following actions.
        Set spike total to the sum of spike total and 1.
        Set release credit to the difference of release credit and 1.
        Set vesicle pool to the difference of vesicle pool and 0.15.
        Set time since spike to 0.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike total to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because its standard library gives clean pseudo random draws, so the genuinely stochastic ribbon synapse can be written the way the biology actually works.
import math, random
DT = 1e-5              # 10 microsecond step
ABS_REF = 0.7e-3       # absolute dead time after a spike, seconds
REL_TAU = 1.0e-3       # relative refractory recovery, seconds
SUBTYPES = {           # name: (spontaneous rate spikes/s, threshold dB SPL)
    "Ia_high": (60.0, 5.0),
    "Ib_med":  (10.0, 20.0),
    "Ic_low":  (0.5, 35.0),
}
def drive(level_db, threshold_db, sat=250.0, spread=30.0):
    """Sigmoid rate versus level curve for one fibre."""
    x = (level_db - threshold_db) / spread
    return sat / (1.0 + math.exp(-4.0 * x))
def run(subtype, level_db, seconds=1.0, seed=1):
    rng = random.Random(seed)
    spont, thr = SUBTYPES[subtype]
    target = spont + drive(level_db, thr)
    pool, refill = 1.0, 0.020        # readily releasable pool, 20 ms refill
    last, t, spikes = -1.0, 0.0, 0
    for _ in range(int(seconds / DT)):
        t += DT
        pool += (1.0 - pool) * DT / refill
        since = t - last
        if since < ABS_REF:
            continue
        recov = 1.0 - math.exp(-(since - ABS_REF) / REL_TAU)
        if rng.random() < target * pool * recov * DT:
            spikes += 1
            last = t
            pool = max(0.0, pool - 0.15)   # one release event empties part of the pool
    return spikes
for name in SUBTYPES:
    print(name, "silence:", run(name, -20.0), "spikes/s   at 40 dB:", run(name, 40.0))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron in the human body whose entire sensory existence hangs on one synapse with one cell, with no second opinion and no convergence to average the noise away.

Add to that a cell body that in humans, almost alone among mammals, refuses to wear myelin, and you have a cell no other type can be mistaken for.

CHAPTER 229. TYPE II SPIRAL GANGLION NEURONS (Ear-Damage Reporting Neuron) (NON-COG)

For a century this thin, silent minority fibre looked like a wiring mistake, and then somebody played a painfully loud sound and discovered the ear has a pain nerve.

Type Two is a serial number, and it hides the fact that this cell is not really part of hearing at all.

Ear-Damage names what it watches, because its thin unmyelinated fibres wander to the outer hair cells and the synapses there are so sparse and weak that ordinary conversational sound barely moves them, whereas outer hair cell injury and very loud sound do.

Reporting names the message, since these cells closely resemble the pain-sensing fibres of the dorsal root ganglion and are the leading candidate for the sensation of auditory pain.

Neuron marks it as a small minority, only about five to ten percent of spiral ganglion cells, which fits an alarm rather than a main line.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is the small, bare, slow second class of hearing nerve cell, making up only about one in twenty of the neurons in the spiral ganglion, the cluster of hearing nerve cell bodies inside the cochlea.

Unlike its type one cousin it ignores the inner hair cells and instead crawls out to the outer hair cells, the three rows of cells that act as the ear's mechanical amplifier.

It is almost deaf to ordinary sound.

Its evidence based job is to report tissue damage, because it fires when the cochlea is injured and hair cells spill their contents, and it is therefore best described as the cochlear nociceptor, a nociceptor being a neuron that reports harm rather than sensation.

A second proposed job, still contested, is to supply the sensory limb of the medial olivocochlear reflex, the brainstem loop that turns the ear's amplifier down in noise.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The cell body is small and round and, in humans, unmyelinated in over ninety seven percent of cases, along with both of its processes.

The peripheral process leaves the ganglion, crosses the floor of the tunnel of Corti, a fluid filled triangular gap running the length of the sensory strip, then turns towards the base of the cochlea.

It then spirals along the outer spiral bundle between the supporting Deiters cells for up to about one millimetre before branching.

Each branch makes small bouton endings on many outer hair cells, with reports ranging from about ten to as many as one hundred cells contacted by a single fibre.

The shape is therefore the opposite of the type one cell: one neuron, very many sensory partners, each contributing a tiny amount.

SIZE:

The cell body is roughly ten to fifteen micrometres across, clearly smaller than the type one soma beside it.

The processes are fine, well under one micrometre thick, in the range of unmyelinated pain fibres elsewhere in the body.

The spiralling peripheral segment is long for such a thin fibre, commonly zero point three to one millimetre before it starts branching.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Conductance based modelling combined with genetic labelling in mouse indicates more than one flavour within the type two population, differing in how readily they fire repeatedly.

They are also distinguished by position, since fibres in the base of the cochlea contact fewer outer hair cells than fibres in the apex.

Human subtype structure has not been established, so any simulation should treat human subtypes as an open question rather than a settled list.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell bodies sit in Rosenthal canal in the modiolus, scattered among the far more numerous type one cells and usually towards the edge of the ganglion.

The peripheral endings lie in the outer hair cell region of the organ of Corti, in the outer spiral bundles between Deiters cells.

The fibre crosses two interfaces: the tunnel of Corti, where it is exposed to a different fluid from the rest of the organ, and the habenula perforata, the bony pore where fibres enter the sensory epithelium.

Centrally the axon runs in the cochlear nerve and ends mainly in the granule cell domain, a shell of small cells wrapped around the cochlear nucleus.

NUMBER:

The classic estimate is five to ten percent of all spiral ganglion neurons, giving about one thousand five hundred to three thousand per ear.

Human immunostaining for peripherin, the protein filament that marks these cells, found only about two percent of counted human neurons to be positive, which would put the true human figure nearer six hundred to one thousand five hundred per ear.

For the purposes of this section, allow about three thousand across both ears, which together with the type one allocation keeps the spiral ganglion inside its sixty thousand budget.

Confidence is moderate at best, and the honest statement is that the human count is bounded between roughly one thousand and six thousand in total rather than known.

That is around three neurons in every hundred million in the nervous system as a whole.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These cells are electrically reluctant, with high input resistance but a high firing threshold and a strong tendency to fire once and then fall silent.

Because each outer hair cell contributes only a minute current, hundreds of inputs must arrive together before the fibre reaches threshold, so it stays quiet at ordinary sound levels.

Spontaneous activity is very low or absent.

When it does fire, the rate is modest, on the order of single figures up to a few tens of spikes per second, quite unlike the hundreds seen in type one fibres.

Conduction is slow, because the fibre is thin and bare, which places it in the same class as the slow unmyelinated pain fibres of the skin, although the exact human velocity has not been measured.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input one is glutamate released from outer hair cell ribbon synapses, small and few, summed across many cells.

Input two is adenosine triphosphate, abbreviated ATP, the cell's own energy molecule, which becomes a damage signal when injured tissue spills it into the extracellular space and which acts here on purinergic P2X receptors.

Input three is inhibitory, since lateral olivocochlear efferent neurons make gamma aminobutyric acid synapses directly onto these fibres, giving the brain a way to mute its own damage alarm.

Output is onto granule cells and small cells at the edge of the cochlear nucleus rather than onto the main relay neurons, which is why type two signals never produce a clean sound percept.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The axon is unmyelinated along essentially its entire length in humans, peripherally and centrally.

It runs with the type one axons in the cochlear nerve but conducts far more slowly, so its message arrives late.

It is tonotopically loose, because the long spiral along many outer hair cells blurs the fibre across a range of pitches instead of tying it to one.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The fibre itself is glutamatergic.

It expresses peripherin and, in several species, calcitonin gene related peptide and other peptides typical of small pain neurons elsewhere in the body, which is one of the strongest arguments for the nociceptor interpretation.

MYELINATION:

Not myelinated, and this is a defining feature rather than an accident.

The absence of myelin makes the fibre slow, cheap to run, and hard to record from, which is exactly why it took so long to understand.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Low, because the cell is small, rarely fires and has no myelin to maintain.

Its vulnerability is not energetic but chemical, since it sits in the outer hair cell region, the first part of the organ of Corti to be poisoned by aminoglycoside antibiotics and loud noise.

PLASTICITY:

Sensitivity to ATP falls after the onset of hearing, which fits the everyday observation that loud sound is uncomfortable rather than agonising in a healthy ear.

After noise damage these fibres sprout and their endings reorganise, and mice lacking their outer hair cell contacts show altered vulnerability to noise induced hearing loss.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The relevant glia here are not classical glia at all but Deiters cells, the goblet shaped supporting cells that cradle the outer hair cells and physically enclose the spiralling fibre.

Deiters cells clear potassium and glutamate from the outer hair cell region and mechanically stiffen the whole structure, so they set both the chemical and the mechanical environment of this fibre in a way no astrocyte does anywhere else.

Type two fibres also lack the satellite glial clustering that surrounds human type one cell bodies.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove it and the cochlea loses its sense of self preservation.

The ear would still hear, but nothing would tell the brain that the sound now arriving is destroying the organ that detects it, and the reflex that turns the amplifier down in noise would probably weaken as well.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

This cell is a spatial integrator over up to a millimetre of tissue, which is an unusual computation for a peripheral neuron and means its receptive field is a length of cochlea rather than a point.

It reads a chemical damage signal, ATP, not a mechanical one, so part of its input is pure biochemistry.

It receives direct inhibitory efferent control, so the brain can gate its own alarm.

Its role in the medial olivocochlear reflex is genuinely disputed: one study using peripherin knockout mice reported the reflex abolished, while a later re examination of the same mouse line concluded the reflex was intact, and a good simulation should expose this as a switchable assumption rather than hard code it.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: summed glutamate from ten to one hundred outer hair cells, each contributing a small conductance.

• INPUTS: extracellular ATP concentration in the outer hair cell region, treated as zero in health and rising sharply with tissue damage.

• INPUTS: gamma aminobutyric acid from lateral olivocochlear efferents, an inhibitory gain term.

• OUTPUTS: sparse action potentials to granule cell and small cell regions of the cochlear nucleus.

• STATE: membrane voltage, refractory timer, cumulative damage signal.

• PARAMETERS: number of outer hair cells contacted between ten and one hundred, membrane time constant twenty to forty milliseconds, firing threshold several times the maximum sound driven input.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane twenty to forty milliseconds, long refractory tens of milliseconds, damage signal rise and fall over seconds to minutes.

• FAILURE MODE: if it fails, painfully loud sound stops feeling painful, the protective reflexes weaken, and the person keeps exposing an ear that is already being destroyed.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide when a type two fibre fires, by summing tiny inputs from many outer hair cells and adding a damage signal.
Create a number variable called outer hair cell count with initial value 60.
Create a number variable called per cell input with initial value 0.004.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called time since spike with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called total input with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 4000 times.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 0.0005.
    Set time since spike to the sum of time since spike and 0.0005.
    Set total input to the product of outer hair cell count and per cell input.
    If clock is greater than 1, then perform the following actions.
        Set per cell input to 0.01.
        Set total input to the sum of total input and 1.5.
    End the conditional block.
    If time since spike is less than 0.05, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to 0.
        Skip to the next iteration of the loop.
    End the conditional block.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the product of 0.0167 and the difference of total input and membrane voltage.
    If membrane voltage is greater than or equal to 1, then perform the following actions.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and 1.
        Set membrane voltage to 0.
        Set time since spike to 0.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because this cell is essentially a slow summing device polled over many inputs and many small time steps, which is exactly the tight fixed step loop C was built for.
#include <stdio.h>
#define N_OHC    60      /* outer hair cells contacted by one fibre */
#define DT       0.0005  /* 0.5 ms step */
#define TAU      0.030   /* 30 ms membrane time constant, deliberately slow */
#define THRESH   1.0     /* firing threshold, arbitrary units */
#define REFRACT  0.050   /* long dead time after each spike */
#define ATP_GAIN 1.5     /* purinergic drive once tissue is damaged */
int main(void) {
    double v = 0.0, sum, t, last = -1.0, per_cell;
    int i, step, spikes = 0, damaged;
    for (step = 0; step < 4000; step++) {   /* 2 seconds of simulated time */
        t = step * DT;
        damaged = (t > 1.0);                /* damage begins at one second */
        per_cell = damaged ? 0.010 : 0.004; /* each hair cell gives very little */
        sum = 0.0;
        for (i = 0; i < N_OHC; i++) sum += per_cell;   /* spatial summation */
        if (damaged) sum += ATP_GAIN;       /* spilled ATP is the alarm signal */
        if (t - last < REFRACT) { v = 0.0; continue; }
        v += DT * (sum - v) / TAU;
        if (v >= THRESH) { v = 0.0; last = t; spikes++; }
    }
    printf("spikes in 2 s: %d\n", spikes);  /* silent for 1 s, then fires */
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the fibre that is bare, slow, small, nearly silent, and wired backwards compared with every other hearing neuron, taking a whisper from a hundred cells instead of a shout from one.

If you find a neuron in the cochlea that spirals for a millimetre past dozens of outer hair cells, carries peripherin, ignores ordinary sound and wakes up only when the tissue is being hurt, there is nothing else it can be.

CHAPTER 230. VESTIBULAR GANGLION NEURONS, ALSO CALLED SCARPA GANGLION NEURONS (NON-COG)

You are never aware of these cells, and yet they are firing about ninety times a second right now, and if they stopped the world would appear to slide off its hinges.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

These are the primary balance neurons, the first cells in the pathway that tells the brain which way your head is turning and which way is down.

They are sensory afferents, meaning neurons that carry information inward from a sense organ, and they connect the balance organs of the inner ear to the brainstem.

Their most important trick is that they never stop firing.

Because they idle at a high background rate, they can signal motion in both directions with the same fibre, speeding up for one direction and slowing down for the other, which no silent neuron could do.

They report head rotation from the three semicircular canals, which are fluid filled rings, and head tilt and linear acceleration including gravity from the two otolith organs, which are patches of sensory cells loaded with tiny crystals.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Each is bipolar, with one process going out to the balance organ and one going in to the brainstem, and a cell body sitting between them in the bony tunnel of the internal auditory canal.

The peripheral ending is what distinguishes vestibular from cochlear afferents, because it comes in three shapes.

A calyx ending is a large chalice of membrane that completely engulfs a type one hair cell like a hand closing round an egg, and no other synapse in the human body wraps its partner so completely.

A bouton ending is a small conventional swelling on a type two hair cell.

A dimorphic ending has both, one or more calyces plus a spray of boutons, and this is the commonest arrangement.

The cell bodies are grouped into a superior and an inferior part, together called the vestibular ganglion or Scarpa ganglion after the Italian anatomist Antonio Scarpa.

SIZE:

Cell bodies span roughly fifteen to thirty five micrometres, a micrometre being one thousandth of a millimetre, with a wide spread that correlates with function.

Axons are among the thickest in the eighth cranial nerve, commonly two to ten micrometres including myelin, and the largest calyx bearing fibres sit at the top of that range.

A single calyx ending is about ten to fifteen micrometres tall, large enough to be seen easily under a light microscope.

The whole cell spans perhaps ten to twenty millimetres from hair cell to brainstem.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

By ending: calyx only, bouton only, and dimorphic.

By target organ: canal afferents from the three cristae, which are the sensory ridges inside the canals, and otolith afferents from the utricular and saccular maculae, which are the sensory patches of the otolith organs.

By division: the superior division serves the utricle, the superior canal, the lateral canal and a small strip of the saccule, while the inferior division serves the rest of the saccule and, through the singular nerve, the posterior canal.

By discharge pattern: regular and irregular, two classes so distinct that they are treated separately as the next two entries in this book.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell bodies sit inside the internal auditory canal in the petrous part of the temporal bone, packed alongside the facial nerve and the cochlear nerve.

The peripheral endings occupy five sensory epithelia per ear: the cristae of the superior, lateral and posterior semicircular canals, and the maculae of the utricle and saccule.

Within each epithelium there are two zones that matter, the central zone, called the striola in the maculae and the crest in the cristae, and the surrounding peripheral or extrastriolar zone.

Two interfaces must be modelled.

The first is the hair cell and calyx cleft, a sealed twenty to thirty nanometre gap in which ions accumulate, which behaves like a chemical and electrical microcompartment rather than an ordinary synapse.

The second is the glial and Schwann junction, the Obersteiner and Redlich zone, which for the vestibular nerve lies unusually far out inside the internal auditory canal and is the site from which almost all vestibular schwannomas grow.

Centrally the axons reach the four vestibular nuclei in the medulla and pons, and a substantial minority run straight past them into the cerebellum.

NUMBER:

Unbiased stereological counting of microdissected human ganglia gave an average of about twenty three thousand six hundred neurons per side in people with normal balance function.

Classic serial section studies of one hundred and six temporal bones from seventy five people describe a steady linear fall from birth towards one hundred years of age, with the superior division losing more than the inferior.

Take about twenty thousand per side as the working figure, which is forty thousand across both ears and fits the vestibular allocation of this section exactly.

Confidence is good for the order of magnitude and fair for the exact value, since counting methods differ by several thousand.

That is roughly five neurons in every ten million in a nervous system of about eighty six billion.

Fibre counts fall measurably from the fifth decade of life and reach about forty percent loss by seventy five to eighty years.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting membrane voltage is around minus sixty millivolts.

Background firing without any head movement is high, roughly sixty to one hundred spikes per second in mammals, with values up to about one hundred and fifteen spikes per second recorded in macaque monkeys and as low as thirteen in a stingray.

Head movement modulates this rate up or down, with sensitivity typically a fraction of a spike per second for each degree per second of head rotation.

Firing cannot go below zero, so a fast head turn in the inhibitory direction silences the fibre completely, which is the cellular reason that the ear on the side being turned away contributes less information, an asymmetry first described by Ewald.

Peak driven rates reach several hundred spikes per second.

Firing regularity is set largely by low voltage activated potassium currents, principally KCNQ, also called Kv7, and Kv1 channels, together with persistent and resurgent sodium currents.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input is glutamate from vestibular hair cells at ribbon synapses, arriving at boutons, at calyces, or at both.

At the calyx there is a second, extraordinary input channel called non quantal transmission, in which potassium leaving the hair cell accumulates in the sealed cleft and depolarises the afferent directly, with no vesicles involved at all.

Efferent input arrives from cholinergic brainstem neurons and acts on nicotinic receptors on hair cells and on muscarinic receptors on the calyx itself, where it closes KCNQ channels and raises excitability.

Output is onto the superior, lateral, medial and inferior vestibular nuclei, and directly onto cerebellar targets in the flocculus, nodulus and uvula.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Thickly myelinated and fast, because balance reflexes are the fastest in the body and cannot wait.

Axon diameter correlates with function, with the thickest axons belonging to the irregular calyx bearing afferents of the central zone.

Each axon typically branches to serve one epithelium only, preserving a clean map of which canal or macula is reporting.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The neuron releases glutamate onto vestibular nucleus neurons.

It receives glutamate from hair cells, acetylcholine from efferents, and, at the calyx, a direct potassium mediated signal that is not a transmitter at all.

MYELINATION:

Heavily myelinated by Schwann cells peripherally and by oligodendrocytes centrally, with the handover far out in the internal auditory canal.

The peripheral process loses its myelin just before the ending, so the last stretch and the calyx itself are bare.

Human vestibular ganglion cell bodies are wrapped by satellite glial cells, and reports differ on how much myelin remains over the soma, so a model should treat somatic myelination here as uncertain rather than assumed.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Very high and permanently so, because a cell that fires ninety times a second for a lifetime never gets to rest its ion pumps.

Blood supply comes through the labyrinthine artery, usually a branch of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery, with no meaningful collateral supply.

PLASTICITY:

The most important plasticity is not in this cell but downstream, and it is the reason people recover from vestibular injury.

When one ear is lost, its silent partner fibres leave the vestibular nuclei permanently unbalanced, and central compensation over days to weeks re tunes the nuclei to the new resting asymmetry.

Peripherally, calyces can retract from damaged hair cells and can partially re form, and in mammals a limited amount of hair cell regeneration follows damage.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

The specialised glia of this system are the vestibular supporting cells, which sit shoulder to shoulder with the hair cells and take up potassium and glutamate from the epithelium.

Inside the calyx there is a further specialisation, because the calyx membrane itself is studded with potassium channels and transporters arranged in molecular microdomains, so the afferent partly does its own housekeeping in a space too small for any glial cell to enter.

Schwann cells at the Obersteiner and Redlich zone are unusual in one clinically enormous way: they are the origin of vestibular schwannoma, the common benign tumour also known as acoustic neuroma.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the inner ear still detects motion perfectly and tells nobody.

The immediate cost is not falling over, it is that vision becomes useless during movement, because the reflex that holds your gaze steady while your head moves has no input, and the world jitters with every footstep, a symptom sufferers call oscillopsia.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Non quantal transmission at the calyx is a genuine second physics, in which the afferent is driven by the electrical potential and the potassium concentration in a sealed cleft rather than by transmitter binding, and it is fast enough to explain reflex latencies as short as five milliseconds.

The same sealed cleft allows ephaptic coupling, meaning direct electrical influence between hair cell and afferent without any synapse.

Glutamate spillover within the cleft produces slow responses on top of the fast ones, so one ending runs two timescales at once.

The high resting rate is itself a computation, since it converts a one directional sensor into a two directional signal.

Efferent modulation of KCNQ channels lets the brainstem change the cell's regularity and gain on the fly, for instance during voluntary head movements it has itself commanded.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from hair cell ribbon synapses at calyx and bouton endings, scaled by hair bundle deflection.

• INPUTS: potassium concentration and electrical potential in the calyx cleft, only for calyx bearing cells, driving non quantal transmission.

• INPUTS: acetylcholine from brainstem efferents acting on calyx muscarinic receptors, modelled as a KCNQ conductance reduction.

• OUTPUTS: action potentials to superior, lateral, medial and inferior vestibular nuclei and direct cerebellar targets.

• STATE: membrane voltage, KCNQ and Kv1 activation, cleft potassium concentration, spike adaptation level, time since last spike.

• PARAMETERS: resting rate sixty to one hundred spikes per second, rotational sensitivity zero point two to two spikes per second per degree per second, saturation about three hundred to four hundred spikes per second, floor of zero.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane one to ten milliseconds, cupula time constant about four to six seconds for canal afferents, otolith response essentially sustained, central compensation days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: sudden unilateral loss, as in vestibular neuritis, leaves the two sides unbalanced and produces violent spinning vertigo, nausea and involuntary eye movement until the brainstem rebalances.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn a head rotation profile into the firing rates of a left and right canal afferent pair, including the slow fading of the canal signal and the hard floor at zero spikes per second.
Create a number variable called resting rate with initial value 90.
Create a number variable called gain with initial value 0.4.
Create a number variable called decay factor with initial value 0.99881.
Create a number variable called canal signal with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called previous velocity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called head velocity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called left rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called right rate with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 6000 times.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 0.005.
    Set head velocity to 0.
    If clock is less than 20, then perform the following actions.
        Set head velocity to 120.
    End the conditional block.
    Set canal signal to the product of decay factor and the sum of canal signal and the difference of head velocity and previous velocity.
    Set previous velocity to head velocity.
    Set left rate to the sum of resting rate and the product of gain and canal signal.
    Set right rate to the difference of resting rate and the product of gain and canal signal.
    If left rate is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set left rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    If right rate is less than 0, then perform the following actions.
        Set right rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display left rate to the console.
Display right rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

Python is chosen because the interesting content here is the shape of a signal over thirty seconds of simulated time, and Python lets that be written and probed in a few readable lines.
import math
DT    = 0.005     # 5 ms step
REST  = 90.0      # resting discharge, spikes per second
GAIN  = 0.4       # spikes per second per degree per second of head rotation
SAT   = 400.0     # ceiling on sustained firing
TAU_C = 4.2       # cupula time constant, seconds, human estimate
def simulate(profile):
    """profile is a list of head angular velocities in degrees per second."""
    a = math.exp(-DT / TAU_C)     # per step decay of the canal signal
    canal, prev, out = 0.0, 0.0, []
    for v in profile:
        # the canal is a high pass filter: it follows a change, then fades
        canal = a * (canal + v - prev)
        prev = v
        left  = min(SAT, max(0.0, REST + GAIN * canal))
        right = min(SAT, max(0.0, REST - GAIN * canal))
        out.append((left, right))
    return out
steps   = int(30.0 / DT)
profile = [120.0 if i * DT < 20.0 else 0.0 for i in range(steps)]  # spin, then stop
res     = simulate(profile)
for probe in (0.0, 1.0, 5.0, 19.9, 20.1, 25.0):
    left, right = res[int(probe / DT)]
    print("t=%5.1f s   left %6.1f   right %6.1f   spikes/s" % (probe, left, right))
# note the reversal after 20 s: stopping a long spin feels like turning the other way

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron in the human body that swallows its sensory partner whole inside a chalice of its own membrane, and one of very few that talks to that partner by leaking ions into a sealed pocket instead of by releasing a transmitter.

Add a background rate of ninety spikes per second that never pauses from before birth until death, and there is nothing else it could be.

CHAPTER 231. REGULAR-FIRING VESTIBULAR AFFERENTS (Even-Firing Slow-Sway Neuron) (NON-COG)

Set a metronome ticking ninety times a second and let it run for eighty years without missing a beat, and you have this neuron, the most reliable clock in the human body.

The old label describes the spike train's statistics rather than what the cell is for, so the new name keeps the clock but adds the purpose.

Even-Firing records the one hard fact the old name held, a metronomic resting discharge of around ninety spikes per second with very little jitter between intervals.

Slow-Sway names the motion it is built for, because these fine bouton-ending fibres from the outer rim of the sensory patch respond almost perfectly linearly to head velocity, at roughly half a spike per second for every degree per second of turn, and they hold their firing through sustained tilts and slow constant currents that their irregular cousins cannot sustain.

Neuron marks it as a cell that keeps a calm, unbroken running account of where the head is going.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is one of the two great functional classes of balance nerve fibre, defined not by where it lives or what it looks like but by the astonishing evenness of its firing.

Regularity is measured with the coefficient of variation, written CV, which is simply the standard deviation of the gaps between spikes divided by the average gap, so a value of zero means a perfect metronome.

These fibres have a normalised coefficient of variation below about zero point one, which means the gap between one spike and the next varies by less than one part in ten.

Their job is to carry a faithful, low distortion running commentary on head position and slow head movement.

Because their spike timing is so predictable, a small change in rate stands out clearly against the background, which is why they transmit on average about twice as much information per fibre as their irregular counterparts despite being far less sensitive.

They are the fibres that keep your eyes locked on a target while you walk, and they are the main drive for the vestibulo ocular reflex, abbreviated VOR, the automatic eye movement that counter rotates your eyes when your head turns.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

Regular fibres are bipolar vestibular ganglion neurons like all the others, but with a characteristic ending.

The most regular of all are bouton only afferents, which make many small conventional swellings on type two hair cells and never form a calyx.

The rest are dimorphic afferents that happen to carry a large number of bouton endings alongside their calyces, and the more boutons a dimorphic fibre has, the more regular it becomes.

Their terminal fields are broad, spreading over many hair cells in the outer part of the sensory patch, so each fibre averages over a wide area.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are at the smaller end of the vestibular ganglion range, roughly fifteen to twenty five micrometres across.

Axons are thin by vestibular standards, typically two to five micrometres including myelin, which makes them somewhat slower than irregular fibres.

Their peripheral terminal fields can spread over a hundred micrometres or more of sensory epithelium.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Bouton only regular afferents, found almost exclusively in the peripheral or extrastriolar zone, are the extreme case with a coefficient of variation below zero point one.

Bouton rich dimorphic regular afferents are commoner and sit at slightly higher variability.

Canal regular afferents and otolith regular afferents differ in their dynamics, since canal fibres inherit the slow fading of the cupula while otolith fibres hold a steady rate during a sustained tilt.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell bodies lie in the superior and inferior parts of the vestibular ganglion inside the internal auditory canal.

The peripheral endings occupy the peripheral zone of the three cristae, the sensory ridges of the semicircular canals, and the extrastriolar zone of the utricular and saccular maculae, which is the belt of tissue surrounding the central striola.

The important interface is the boundary between striola and extrastriola, an abrupt change in hair cell type, supporting cell chemistry and afferent behaviour that occurs over a few tens of micrometres.

Centrally they end in the vestibular nuclei, with a strong projection to the medial and superior nuclei that serve eye movement.

NUMBER:

These are not additional neurons; they are a subset of the vestibular ganglion population already counted, so nothing is added to this section's budget.

Across mammalian recordings, regular afferents make up roughly half of the vestibular nerve, with intermediate fibres about a quarter and irregular fibres about a quarter.

On a working figure of twenty thousand ganglion cells per side, that is around ten thousand regular afferents per side and about twenty thousand across both ears, all drawn from the forty thousand already allocated.

Confidence is moderate, because the proportions come from animal recordings rather than from human counts, and no one has ever classified a human vestibular nerve fibre by discharge regularity in a living person.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Background rate is high and steady, in the range of sixty to one hundred spikes per second.

The normalised coefficient of variation is below zero point one, so interspike intervals cluster tightly around the mean.

Sensitivity to head rotation is low, commonly in the region of zero point two to zero point five spikes per second per degree per second at one to two hertz.

Their response is tonic, meaning it tracks the stimulus itself rather than its rate of change, and it adapts slowly.

Detection thresholds are excellent despite the low gain, with angular velocity thresholds around half those of irregular fibres, roughly four degrees per second against eight.

The cellular basis is a sustained firing pattern with only a small low voltage activated potassium conductance, so the cell recovers smoothly and predictably after each spike instead of being pushed around by noise.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input is glutamate at many small bouton synapses from type two hair cells, so each individual input is tiny and the total is an average over many independent sources, which is itself a noise reduction strategy.

Efferent cholinergic input from the brainstem is present but produces weaker effects here than in irregular fibres.

Output is onto vestibular nucleus neurons, especially those of the three neuron arc that drives the eye muscles, and onto vestibulospinal neurons for postural control.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Myelinated, moderately thick, and reliably conducting.

Because the fibre is thinner than an irregular fibre, its central spike arrives a fraction of a millisecond later, which matters for the timing of the fastest reflexes.

Terminal arbours in the vestibular nuclei are broad and diffuse.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is released centrally.

Glutamate is received peripherally from type two hair cells, with no significant non quantal component because a bouton has no sealed cleft in which ions can build up.

MYELINATION:

Present and unremarkable, with Schwann cells peripherally, oligodendrocytes centrally, and the usual loss of myelin at the ending.

Nothing about this fibre's myelin distinguishes it, and that is worth stating plainly so it is not mistaken for a forgotten detail.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Constant and high, since the cell fires roughly eight million spikes per day and never stops.

There is no rest period, no sleep related pause and no adaptation to silence, so the sodium and potassium pumps run at full duty cycle for life.

PLASTICITY:

The fibre itself changes little, but the synapses it makes in the vestibular nuclei are the substrate of vestibular compensation and of motor learning in the vestibulo ocular reflex.

That learning is the reason a person adapts to new spectacles within days, and the regular afferents supply the steady, low noise signal on which that recalibration depends.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Extrastriolar supporting cells differ from striolar ones in their potassium handling and in the composition of the gel and crystal layer above them, so this fibre sits in a chemically distinct neighbourhood from its irregular neighbour a hundred micrometres away.

Because bouton endings are small and open, potassium and glutamate clearance here is done conventionally by supporting cells, unlike the enclosed calyx where the afferent does much of the work itself.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the regular afferents and the balance organ keeps its alarm system and loses its narrator.

Sudden head jolts would still be detected, but the smooth, quiet, continuous report of where the head is and how it is drifting would vanish, and with it the steady gaze and steady posture that make walking feel effortless.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Regularity is an active computation, not an absence of noise, and it is produced by a particular mix of ion channels that includes small low voltage activated potassium currents and specific persistent and resurgent sodium currents that shape the recovery after each spike.

Averaging over many bouton inputs performs a spatial noise reduction that no single synapse could achieve.

The high resting rate plus low variability gives the downstream neuron a very precise reference, so that a change of only one or two spikes per second is statistically detectable within a few tens of milliseconds.

Efferent modulation can shift the operating point without destroying the regularity, so gain and reliability are controlled independently.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: glutamate from many type two hair cell bouton synapses in the extrastriolar or peripheral zone.

• INPUTS: weak cholinergic efferent drive from the brainstem, modelled as a small excitatory offset.

• OUTPUTS: highly regular spike trains to medial and superior vestibular nuclei and to vestibulospinal neurons.

• STATE: membrane voltage, adaptation level, time since last spike, running list of recent interspike intervals for regularity measurement.

• PARAMETERS: resting rate sixty to one hundred spikes per second, coefficient of variation below zero point one, rotational gain zero point two to zero point five spikes per second per degree per second, membrane time constant about ten milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane about ten milliseconds, adaptation hundreds of milliseconds, canal cupula about four to six seconds, central compensation days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE: selective loss of type two hair cells or of these fibres degrades low frequency and static balance signalling, producing unsteadiness and drift that is worst in the dark, when vision cannot substitute.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to generate a regular spike train from a tonic drive and then measure its regularity with the coefficient of variation.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called resting drive with initial value 1.49.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called last spike time with initial value 0.
Create a list variable called intervals with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called interval sum with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called interval count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called mean interval with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 50000 times.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 0.0001.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the product of 0.01 and the difference of resting drive and membrane voltage.
    If membrane voltage is greater than or equal to 1, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to 0.
        If last spike time is greater than 0, then perform the following actions.
            Add the difference of clock and last spike time to the end of intervals.
        End the conditional block.
        Set last spike time to clock.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
For each interval in intervals, perform the following operations.
    Set interval sum to the sum of interval sum and interval.
End the loop.
Set interval count to the total number of items in intervals.
Set mean interval to the quotient of interval sum divided by interval count.
Display the quotient of 1 divided by mean interval to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

JavaScript is chosen because this is a short spiking and statistics demonstration that a reader can paste straight into any browser console with no toolchain at all.
const DT = 0.0001;          // 100 microsecond step
const TAU = 0.010;          // 10 ms membrane time constant
const V_TH = 1.0;           // spike threshold
const NOISE = 0.02;         // deliberately small: regular afferents are quiet
const DRIVE_REST = 1.49;    // tonic drive that sets about 90 spikes per second
const GAIN = 0.004;         // extra drive per degree per second of head rotation
function run(headVelocity, seconds) {
  let v = 0.0, t = 0.0, last = null;
  const isis = [];
  const drive = DRIVE_REST + GAIN * headVelocity;
  const steps = Math.round(seconds / DT);
  for (let i = 0; i < steps; i++) {
    t += DT;
    const noise = NOISE * (Math.random() - 0.5) * 2;
    v += (DT / TAU) * (drive + noise - v);
    if (v >= V_TH) {
      v = 0.0;
      if (last !== null) isis.push(t - last);
      last = t;
    }
  }
  const n = isis.length;
  const mean = isis.reduce((a, b) => a + b, 0) / n;
  const varr = isis.reduce((a, b) => a + (b - mean) * (b - mean), 0) / n;
  // CV below 0.1 is the textbook definition of a regular afferent
  return { rate: (1 / mean).toFixed(1), cv: (Math.sqrt(varr) / mean).toFixed(3) };
}
console.log("at rest        ", run(0, 5));
console.log("head +50 deg/s ", run(50, 5));
console.log("head -50 deg/s ", run(-50, 5));

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

Look at the gaps between its spikes.

If they are so nearly identical that the variation is under one part in ten, at a rate near ninety per second, in a fibre that ends only in small boutons out at the edge of a balance organ, you are looking at a regular afferent and at nothing else in the human nervous system.

CHAPTER 232. IRREGULAR-FIRING VESTIBULAR AFFERENTS (Uneven-Beat Sudden-Jolt Neuron) (NON-COG)

This is the nervous system's emergency line: sloppy, noisy, wildly sensitive, and fast enough to move your eyes before you know your head has moved.

Like its partner the old label reports only the scatter of the spike intervals, which is true but stops short of the function.

Uneven-Beat preserves that measured fact, a resting discharge whose intervals vary widely, and pairs it against the even-firing cell so a reader sees the single dimension separating the two.

Sudden-Jolt names the work, because these fibres, fed largely by calyx endings on type one hair cells in the central zone, are fast adapting high-pass detectors whose gain climbs with frequency, and otolith fibres of this class are the ones picked out by roughly five hundred hertz vibration in the clinic.

Neuron marks it as the fibre class most changed by the brain's own outgoing efferent supply, so a jolt is not merely detected but detected under central control.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is the second great functional class of balance nerve fibre, and it is the mirror image of the regular afferent in almost every respect.

Its spikes come at uneven intervals, with a normalised coefficient of variation, meaning the spread of the gaps between spikes divided by the average gap, above about zero point one and often above zero point three.

That untidiness is not a defect.

It goes with very high sensitivity to fast movement, so where a regular fibre changes its rate a little, an irregular fibre changes it a lot, and it does so preferentially for quick jolts rather than slow drifts.

Its job is to detect transients: the stumble, the head impulse, the sudden loud thud transmitted through the skull, the fast unexpected tilt.

It drives the fastest protective reflexes in the body, including the vestibulo collic reflexes that snap the neck muscles into action, and it is the fibre class that clinical tests such as the vestibular evoked myogenic potential, abbreviated VEMP, actually measure.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The defining structure is the calyx, a goblet of afferent membrane that engulfs an entire type one hair cell.

Calyx only afferents form one or a few calyces and no boutons at all, and these are the most irregular fibres of all.

Dimorphic afferents with only a few boutons alongside their calyces are also irregular, and regularity rises as the number of boutons rises.

The terminal fields are compact and concentrated in the central zone of the sensory epithelium, so this fibre samples a small patch intensely rather than a large area gently.

SIZE:

Cell bodies are at the large end of the vestibular ganglion range, roughly twenty five to thirty five micrometres across.

Axons are the thickest in the vestibular nerve, commonly four to ten micrometres including myelin, which makes them the fastest conductors in the eighth cranial nerve.

A single calyx is about ten to fifteen micrometres tall, and the sealed gap between calyx and hair cell is only about twenty to thirty nanometres wide, a nanometre being one millionth of a millimetre.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Calyx only afferents, restricted almost entirely to the striola of the maculae and the central crest of the cristae.

Bouton poor dimorphic afferents, which are irregular but less extremely so.

Canal versus otolith irregular afferents, which differ in their preferred stimulus but share the phasic, high gain behaviour.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The cell bodies lie in the superior and inferior parts of the vestibular ganglion inside the internal auditory canal.

The peripheral endings occupy the striola of the utricular and saccular maculae and the central crest of the three cristae, which are the sensory ridges of the semicircular canals.

The critical interface is the calyx cleft itself, a sealed twenty to thirty nanometre pocket between hair cell and afferent membrane which behaves as a chemical and electrical compartment in its own right, too small for any glial cell to enter.

A second interface is the striolar boundary, the sharp transition to the surrounding extrastriolar zone where regular afferents take over.

Centrally these axons target the vestibular nuclei with a bias towards neurons driving neck and body reflexes, and they project strongly to the cerebellum.

NUMBER:

Like the regular class, these are a subset of the vestibular ganglion neurons already counted, so they add nothing to this section's budget.

Animal recordings put irregular fibres at roughly a quarter to a third of the vestibular nerve, with calyx only fibres a small minority within that.

On twenty thousand ganglion cells per side, that is about five thousand to six thousand five hundred per side, so roughly ten thousand to thirteen thousand across both ears, all drawn from the forty thousand already allocated.

Confidence is moderate, since the proportions come from cat, chinchilla and monkey recordings and have never been established in a human being.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Background rate is similar to the regular class, around sixty to one hundred spikes per second, but the intervals scatter widely.

The normalised coefficient of variation is above zero point one and can exceed zero point five.

Rotational sensitivity is high and rises with frequency, so the fibre is a high pass filter that responds to how fast the stimulus is changing rather than to the stimulus itself.

Responses adapt quickly, dying away within tens to hundreds of milliseconds during a sustained stimulus.

The cellular cause is a large low voltage activated potassium conductance, principally KCNQ, also called Kv7, together with Kv1 channels, which makes the cell phasic, meaning it prefers to fire once at the start of a change rather than to fire steadily.

Detection thresholds for slow rotation are worse than for regular fibres, around eight degrees per second against four, which is the price paid for speed.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

Input arrives through two channels at once at the calyx.

The first is ordinary quantal transmission, in which the hair cell releases packets of glutamate onto the calyx membrane.

The second is non quantal transmission, in which potassium flowing out of the hair cell accumulates in the sealed cleft and depolarises the afferent directly, partly by an almost instantaneous change in cleft voltage and partly by a slower change in the potassium equilibrium potential, with no vesicles involved.

Non quantal transmission avoids the delay of chemical release entirely and is the best explanation for reflex latencies as short as five milliseconds and for the very short latency vestibular evoked potentials.

Efferent cholinergic input acts on muscarinic receptors on the calyx, closing KCNQ channels and sharply raising excitability, and this class is far more strongly modulated by efferents than the regular class.

Output is onto vestibular nucleus neurons serving neck, trunk and limb reflexes, and onto cerebellar targets.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The thickest and fastest axons in the vestibular nerve, which is the whole point, because the reflexes they serve cannot tolerate delay.

Central terminal fields are focused rather than diffuse.

Conduction velocity has not been measured in humans, so the human value should be treated as inferred from animal data rather than known.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is released centrally onto vestibular nucleus neurons.

Peripherally the fibre receives glutamate, and also receives a direct potassium mediated signal that is not a neurotransmitter at all, which makes this one of the very few places in the human nervous system where a synapse works partly by physics rather than by chemistry.

MYELINATION:

Thickly myelinated by Schwann cells peripherally and oligodendrocytes centrally, with myelin ending just before the calyx.

The first heminode, the last insulated patch of membrane before the bare ending, sits immediately outside the calyx and is where the spike is actually launched, which is why the calyx can be electrically driven so quickly.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

High, both because of the constant background firing and because the large calyx membrane is expensive to maintain and is crowded with ion channels and transporters.

The calyx also has to manage the ionic composition of its own sealed cleft, which is metabolic work no ordinary nerve ending performs.

PLASTICITY:

Calyces retract from damaged hair cells and can partially re extend, and this retraction is one of the earliest signs of aminoglycoside injury.

The fibre's gain is under continuous efferent control, which is a fast, reversible form of plasticity operating over seconds.

Downstream, the loss of irregular input drives central compensation in the vestibular nuclei over days and weeks.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Striolar supporting cells differ from those in the surrounding zone in their potassium handling and in the thinner, differently structured layer of crystals above them.

The truly unusual arrangement is inside the calyx, where the afferent membrane itself carries potassium channels, glutamate transporters and calcium pumps arranged in molecular microdomains, so the neuron performs its own ion housekeeping in a space no glial process can reach.

That is a genuine departure from the rest of the nervous system, where such clearance is a glial monopoly.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove the irregular afferents and the balance organ becomes calm, accurate and too slow.

Steady posture and smooth gaze would survive, but the sharp involuntary catch that stops you falling when you trip, and the reflexes that tests such as the head impulse test and the VEMP probe, would be gone, and a stumble would become a fall.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Non quantal transmission is the headline: this fibre is partly driven by ephaptic and resistive coupling, meaning direct electrical influence through a shared confined space, rather than by any released molecule.

The sealed cleft doubles as a glutamate trap, so spillover within it generates slow responses layered on top of the fast ones, and one ending therefore encodes two timescales simultaneously.

Adaptation is active, produced by potassium conductances rather than by synaptic depletion, so the fibre resets quickly and is ready for the next transient.

Efferent control of KCNQ channels means the brainstem can retune this fibre's gain and even its regularity within a second, for instance during a voluntary head turn it has itself commanded, so the cell's transfer function is not a constant.

The high resting rate lets the fibre report movement in both directions, but its high gain means it silences completely during strong inhibitory movements, which makes the paired opposite ear indispensable.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: quantal glutamate release from type one hair cells at the calyx.

• INPUTS: cleft potassium concentration and cleft electrical potential, driving fast non quantal depolarisation.

• INPUTS: acetylcholine from brainstem efferents on calyx muscarinic receptors, modelled as a reduction in KCNQ conductance.

• OUTPUTS: irregular, high gain spike trains to vestibular nuclei serving neck and body reflexes and to the cerebellum.

• STATE: membrane voltage, KCNQ activation, cleft potassium concentration, spike driven adaptation variable, high pass filtered stimulus estimate.

• PARAMETERS: resting rate sixty to one hundred spikes per second, coefficient of variation above zero point one, rotational gain roughly two to five times that of regular fibres and rising with frequency, membrane time constant two to five milliseconds.

• TIME CONSTANTS: membrane two to five milliseconds, non quantal transmission well under one millisecond, adaptation twenty to two hundred milliseconds, canal cupula four to six seconds.

• FAILURE MODE: aminoglycoside antibiotics such as gentamicin concentrate in type one hair cells and cause calyx retraction, and after such treatment most afferents fail to modulate at all while their resting rate looks normal, so the patient loses fast balance responses and suffers oscillopsia while simple clinical tests may look unremarkable.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to generate an irregular, phasic spike train that responds strongly to a sudden head movement and then fades.
Create a number variable called membrane voltage with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called filtered head signal with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called previous head velocity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called head velocity with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called noise seed with initial value 7.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called clock with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike count with initial value 0.
Repeat the following steps exactly 100000 times.
    Set clock to the sum of clock and 0.0001.
    If clock is greater than or equal to 5, then perform the following actions.
        Set head velocity to 100.
    End the conditional block.
    Set filtered head signal to the product of 0.998 and the sum of filtered head signal and the difference of head velocity and previous head velocity.
    Set previous head velocity to head velocity.
    Set noise seed to the sum of the product of noise seed and 1103515245 and 12345.
    Set noise seed to the remainder of noise seed divided by 2147483648.
    Set drive to the sum of 1.6 and the sum of the product of 0.01 and filtered head signal and the product of 0.3 and the difference of the quotient of noise seed divided by 2147483648 and 0.5.
    Set adaptation to the difference of adaptation and the product of adaptation and 0.005.
    Set membrane voltage to the sum of membrane voltage and the product of 0.025 and the difference of the difference of drive and adaptation and membrane voltage.
    If membrane voltage is greater than or equal to 1, then perform the following actions.
        Set membrane voltage to 0.
        Set adaptation to the sum of adaptation and 0.35.
        Set spike count to the sum of spike count and 1.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Display spike count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

C is chosen because showing genuine spike timing jitter needs a hundred thousand time steps and a repeatable pseudo random sequence, and C delivers both instantly.
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <math.h>
#define DT        0.0001   /* 100 microsecond step */
#define TAU       0.004    /* fast, phasic membrane */
#define TAU_ADAPT 0.020    /* spike driven adaptation */
#define TAU_HP    0.050    /* high pass filter on head velocity */
#define VTH       1.0      /* spike threshold */
#define NOISE     0.30     /* large: irregular afferents are noisy on purpose */
#define GAIN      0.010    /* drive per degree per second of head rotation */
int main(void) {
    double v = 0, w = 0, hp = 0, prev = 0, drive, head, t, last = -1;
    double sum = 0, sumsq = 0, isi, mean, var;
    int i, n = 0, burst = 0, steps = 100000;   /* 10 seconds */
    srand(7);
    for (i = 0; i < steps; i++) {
        t = i * DT;
        head = (t >= 5.0) ? 100.0 : 0.0;          /* head starts turning at 5 s */
        hp = exp(-DT / TAU_HP) * (hp + head - prev);  /* phasic: reacts to change */
        prev = head;
        drive = 1.60 + GAIN * hp + NOISE * ((double)rand() / RAND_MAX - 0.5);
        w -= DT * w / TAU_ADAPT;                  /* adaptation decays */
        v += DT * (drive - w - v) / TAU;
        if (v >= VTH) {
            v = 0.0;
            w += 0.35;                            /* each spike adapts the cell */
            if (last > 0.0 && t > 1.0 && t < 5.0) { isi = t - last; sum += isi; sumsq += isi * isi; n++; }
            if (t >= 5.0 && t < 5.1) burst++;
            last = t;
        }
    }
    mean = sum / n;
    var = sumsq / n - mean * mean;
    printf("resting rate %.1f spikes/s, CV %.3f\n", 1.0 / mean, sqrt(var) / mean);
    printf("spikes in the first 100 ms of the head turn: %d\n", burst);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only afferent in the body that swallows its sensory cell whole and then talks to it by leaking potassium into the sealed pocket between them, faster than any chemical synapse could manage.

Find a thick, noisy, quick adapting fibre ending in a calyx at the very centre of a balance organ, with spike intervals that scatter by more than a tenth, and you have found it.


PART FOURTEEN: TASTE AND OTHER CRANIAL SENSORY NEURONS

CHAPTER 233. GENICULATE GANGLION NEURONS (Front-Mouth Flavor Neuron) (NON-COG)

Every time a strawberry tastes sweet, the reason you know it is a few thousand cells the size of dust grains, buried in the bone beside your ear.

Geniculate means little knee and describes only the bend the facial nerve makes in the temporal bone, so the old label is an address rather than a job.

Front-Mouth names the territory these cells own, the taste buds of the fungiform papillae on the forward two thirds of the tongue, reached by the chorda tympani nerve, and the taste buds of the soft palate, reached by the greater superficial petrosal nerve.

Flavor names the work, and it is deliberately broader than taste, because these same fibres also report touch and cooling from the tongue surface, so what they deliver upward is a blended mouth report rather than a pure chemical one.

Neuron marks it as a first-order sensory cell whose palate duty is exact, contacting one hundred percent of soft palate taste buds while covering only about thirty five to fifty percent of those on the tongue itself.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is a pseudounipolar sensory neuron, meaning one stalk leaves the cell body and immediately splits in two, so the cell has no branching dendrites at all.

It carries taste from the front two thirds of the tongue along the chorda tympani nerve and from the soft palate along the greater petrosal nerve.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The round cell body is wrapped by satellite glial cells, helper cells forming a jacket one cell thick, and its single stalk forks at a T shaped junction.

At its far end the peripheral branch splits into a small tree of naked fibres that squeeze through the base of a taste bud and lie against the taste cells.

SIZE:

Cell bodies measure roughly 20 to 40 micrometres across, about half the width of a human hair, and the whole ganglion is only about 1 millimetre wide.

One peripheral arbor typically serves one to three taste buds.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Gene surveys sort these cells into a sweet best class marked by Spon1 and a sour best class marked by Penk, with umami depending on Cdh4, bitter on Cdh13 and salt on Egr2 neurons.

A separate non taste class carries touch and temperature and is marked by Piezo2, a mechanically gated pore, rather than by Phox2b, the master gene of the taste cells here.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The ganglion sits at the genu, the sharp first bend of the facial nerve, inside the facial canal of the petrous temporal bone, exactly at the interface between the labyrinthine and tympanic segments of that nerve.

Its endings lie in fungiform papilla taste buds on the anterior tongue, in the soft palate and in a patch of external ear canal skin, and its central terminals reach the rostral gustatory division of the nucleus of the solitary tract in the medulla.

NUMBER:

No reliable modern human count exists, and that must be said plainly rather than dressed up.

The regional budget allots fewer than 5,000 per side, and rodent counts of a few hundred to two thousand taste neurons support a working estimate of 2,000 to 4,000 per side, so 4,000 to 8,000 in total, with low confidence.

Against about 87 billion neurons in the whole nervous system that is roughly one neuron in every 15 million.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage sits near negative 55 to negative 60 millivolts, and many cells carry Nav1.8 and Nav1.9 sodium channels that keep working when the classic blocker tetrodotoxin is applied.

A drop of sugar drives a burst of perhaps 20 to 60 spikes per second that fades within a second or two.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

There are no synapses on the cell body, because a pseudounipolar cell has no dendrites to receive them.

At the taste bud, type II cells push adenosine triphosphate, the cell's energy molecule used here as a messenger, through CALHM1 and CALHM3 channels onto P2X2 and P2X3 receptors, while type III sour cells release serotonin onto 5-HT3 receptors.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The peripheral branch runs in the chorda tympani, a thread of nerve that crosses the eardrum between the tiny ear bones before joining the lingual nerve.

Fibres are 0.5 to 3 micrometres wide and conduct at 2 to 20 metres per second, so taste reaches the brainstem in roughly 10 milliseconds.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The central branch releases glutamate onto second order cells of the nucleus of the solitary tract.

The somatosensory subset also carries the peptides substance P and calcitonin gene related peptide, abbreviated CGRP, while the taste subset is largely peptide free.

MYELINATION:

Myelin is the fatty insulating wrap that makes fibres fast, and here it is patchy: most taste fibres are thinly myelinated A delta fibres and a large minority are bare C fibres.

Schwann cells make the myelin outside the skull and oligodendrocytes take over inside the brainstem.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Energy use is modest because firing rates are low and the axon is short, but the terminal is packed with mitochondria to keep replacing receptors in a saliva bathed environment.

PLASTICITY:

Taste bud cells die and are replaced every ten days or so, so this neuron must keep rebuilding its contacts for a lifetime.

Cut the chorda tympani and the taste buds it served shrink away, patients report phantom tastes, and the transmitter release sites inside surviving taste cells are lost, because the nerve actively maintains them.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glia buffer potassium around the soma in the ordinary way.

The special partner is at the far end, where type I taste bud cells act as the local astrocyte, carrying the enzyme NTPDase2 that destroys adenosine triphosphate to end each taste signal quickly, without which the tongue would smear one mouthful into the next.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell type and the front of the tongue goes taste blind while touch and temperature survive perfectly.

Food becomes texture, warmth and smell only, and the spit out reflex to a bitter poison is lost from the part of the mouth that meets food first.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The peripheral ending is a chemical laboratory rather than a wire, sensing adenosine triphosphate, watching it be destroyed on a millisecond timescale, and sensing serotonin in parallel.

It collects brain derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin 4 at the taste bud and carries them backwards to switch on survival genes.

Because one arbor serves several buds, their signals are summed inside the axon before any spike is generated, which is genuine peripheral computation.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Adenosine triphosphate in the taste bud cleft, 0 to 50 micromolar, from type II cells.

◦ Serotonin in the cleft, 0 to 5 micromolar, from type III cells.

◦ Tongue surface temperature, 5 to 50 degrees Celsius.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spike train to the rostral nucleus of the solitary tract, 0 to 100 hertz, with glutamate released per spike.

• STATE.

◦ Membrane voltage, receptor occupancy per contact, accumulated charge per taste quality, refractory timer.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Capacitance about 30 picofarads, leak conductance about 5 nanosiemens, peak purinergic conductance about 2 nanosiemens, half activating adenosine triphosphate about 8 micromolar, threshold about negative 45 millivolts.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane about 4 milliseconds, receptor desensitisation about 200 milliseconds, adaptation about 1 second, taste bud turnover about 10 days.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Varicella zoster virus latent in this ganglion reactivates as Ramsay Hunt syndrome, about 5 cases per 100,000 per year, causing facial palsy, ear blisters and taste loss, and accounting for roughly 12 percent of non traumatic facial paralysis.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn the chemical signal from a taste bud into a labelled taste report from one geniculate ganglion neuron.
Create a list variable called contacts with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called membrane_millivolts with initial value negative 58.
Create a number variable called total_conductance with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called receptor_activation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called best_charge with initial value 0.
Create a text variable called best_quality with initial value "none".
For each contact in contacts, perform the following operations.
    Set receptor_activation to the quotient of the transmitter level of contact divided by the sum of the transmitter level of contact and 8.
    Set total_conductance to the sum of total_conductance and the product of receptor_activation and 2.
    Check if the accumulated charge of contact is greater than best_charge.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set best_charge to the accumulated charge of contact.
        Set best_quality to the taste quality of contact.
    End the conditional block.
End the loop.
Set membrane_millivolts to the sum of membrane_millivolts and the product of total_conductance and 6.
Check if membrane_millivolts is greater than or equal to negative 45.
If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
    Set spike_count to the sum of spike_count and 1.
    Display best_quality to the console.
Otherwise, perform the following actions.
    Display "no taste reported" to the console.
End the conditional block.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because dictionaries make the labelled line decision readable at a glance.
DT = 1e-4            # seconds per step
C_M = 30e-12         # somatic capacitance, farads
G_LEAK = 5e-9        # leak conductance, siemens
E_LEAK = -0.058      # leak reversal, volts
G_P2X_MAX = 2e-9     # peak purinergic conductance, siemens
EC50 = 8.0           # half activating ATP, micromolar
V_THRESH, V_RESET, REFRACTORY = -0.045, -0.060, 0.003

def p2x_conductance(atp_um):
    """P2X2 and P2X3 activation, Hill slope 2."""
    a = atp_um * atp_um
    return G_P2X_MAX * a / (a + EC50 * EC50)

def taste_response(frames):
    v, spikes, blocked_until, t, charge = E_LEAK, 0, -1.0, 0.0, {}
    for frame in frames:
        g_sum = 0.0
        for quality, atp_um in frame.items():
            g = p2x_conductance(atp_um)
            charge[quality] = charge.get(quality, 0.0) + g * DT
            g_sum += g
        v += DT * (G_LEAK * (E_LEAK - v) + g_sum * (0.0 - v)) / C_M
        if t < blocked_until:
            v = V_RESET
        elif v >= V_THRESH:
            spikes, v, blocked_until = spikes + 1, V_RESET, t + REFRACTORY
        t += DT
    best = max(charge, key=charge.get) if charge else "none"
    return best, spikes / (len(frames) * DT)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    print(taste_response([{"sweet": 20.0, "sour": 1.0}] * 20000))   # two seconds of sucrose

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron whose cell body sits at the knee of the facial nerve and whose far tip answers to a drop of sugar.

Phox2b positive, lodged in the temporal bone, with an axon that crosses the eardrum: that combination belongs to no other cell.

CHAPTER 234. PETROSAL GANGLION NEURONS (Oxygen-And-Pressure Reporting Neuron) (NON-COG)

Climb a mountain and your breathing deepens within seconds, and the alarm that triggered it was rung by neurons tucked into a shallow pit in the base of your skull.

Petrosal simply means rocky and refers to the petrous part of the temporal bone where these cell bodies happen to sit, which teaches a student nothing about what the cells do.

Oxygen names the first duty, since their peripheral endings wrap the glomus cells of the carotid body, the main peripheral organ that measures the oxygen, carbon dioxide and acidity of arterial blood, and their firing drives the reflex increase in breathing when oxygen falls.

Pressure names the second duty, carried by a separate set of endings in the wall of the carotid sinus that measure how hard the blood is pushing on the artery, the signal behind moment to moment control of heart rate and blood vessel tone.

Reporting Neuron names the direction of traffic, since every one of these cells is a one-way messenger delivering its news to the nucleus of the solitary tract in the medulla.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is the pseudounipolar sensory neuron of the glossopharyngeal nerve, the ninth cranial nerve, with its cell body in the inferior ganglion, called the petrosal ganglion.

It does three unrelated jobs at once: reporting taste from the back third of the tongue, oxygen shortage from the carotid body, and blood pressure from the carotid sinus.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The soma is round with one stalk that forks into a peripheral and a central branch.

Peripheral branches leave in three named nerves, the lingual branches to the tongue, the carotid sinus nerve of Hering to the neck arteries, and the tympanic nerve of Jacobson to the middle ear, and at the carotid body the ending forms a cup around a cluster of glomus cells.

SIZE:

Cell bodies measure about 20 to 50 micrometres across and the ganglion is a swelling only a few millimetres long.

The carotid body it listens to is a speck about 2 millimetres across weighing roughly 12 milligrams.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Chemoreceptor afferents that innervate the carotid body make up only about one fifth of the ganglion.

The rest are baroreceptor afferents on the stretchy carotid sinus wall, gustatory afferents marked by Phox2b serving the circumvallate and foliate papillae, and a general sensory group for pharynx, tonsil and eustachian tube.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The ganglion lies in the petrosal fossula, a dimple on the under surface of the petrous temporal bone just below the jugular foramen, exactly at the interface between skull cavity and neck, with the smaller superior glossopharyngeal ganglion still inside the foramen above it.

Peripheral endings sit in the carotid body and carotid sinus at the fork of the common carotid artery, in circumvallate and foliate taste buds and in the pharyngeal lining, while central endings reach the caudal nucleus of the solitary tract for cardiorespiratory signals and the rostral part of the same nucleus for taste.

NUMBER:

No dependable human count exists, so we know the order of magnitude and little more.

The regional budget places this ganglion below the nodose figure of about 5,000 per side, so 2,000 to 5,000 per side, or 4,000 to 10,000 in total, is the defensible range, with low confidence.

That is about one neuron in every 11 million in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Chemoreceptor afferents are never silent, ticking over at 0.5 to 3 spikes per second while you breathe room air and climbing to 30 to 80 spikes per second when arterial oxygen pressure falls toward 40 millimetres of mercury.

Baroreceptor afferents instead fire volleys locked to each heartbeat, so their message is a rhythm rather than a rate.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

At the carotid body, glomus cells release adenosine triphosphate and acetylcholine onto P2X2, P2X3 and nicotinic receptors, and the junction is reciprocal, so the nerve talks back to the glomus cell.

Dopamine and serotonin from the same glomus cells tune the gain, and the central branch makes glutamate synapses in the nucleus of the solitary tract.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The carotid sinus nerve carries thinly myelinated A delta fibres at roughly 5 to 20 metres per second and unmyelinated C fibres at under 2 metres per second.

The run from neck to brainstem is only a few centimetres, so even slow fibres deliver a hypoxia warning in well under a second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The central output transmitter is glutamate, and subsets also carry substance P and calcitonin gene related peptide, abbreviated CGRP, which they release from their peripheral tips.

On the receiving side they carry purinergic, nicotinic, dopaminergic and serotonergic receptors, an unusually crowded pharmacology for a sensory ending.

MYELINATION:

Mixed, with Schwann cells providing thin myelin to faster fibres and bundling the rest as bare axons in Remak bundles, where one Schwann cell cradles many fibres in shallow grooves.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The ending is ordinary but works inside the most lavishly perfused tissue in the body, since the carotid body receives roughly 2,000 millilitres of blood per 100 grams per minute, about forty times the flow to the brain, precisely so it samples arterial blood before any oxygen has been consumed.

PLASTICITY:

Two days at altitude and the carotid body enlarges while its afferents become measurably more sensitive, which is the cellular basis of acclimatisation.

The same sensitisation turns harmful in obstructive sleep apnoea and heart failure, where an over reactive reflex drives chronic sympathetic overactivity and high blood pressure.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glia surround the soma in the usual way, but the special partner is the type II sustentacular cell of the carotid body.

That glia like cell, carrying nestin and glial fibrillary acidic protein, releases adenosine triphosphate through pannexin 1 channels to amplify the signal and can act as a stem cell that becomes a new glomus cell during chronic low oxygen, one of very few places where glia turn into sensory cells in an adult.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and a person stops responding to suffocation, because the hypoxic ventilatory response depends almost entirely on it.

The carotid baroreflex also fails so blood pressure swings on standing, the gag reflex loses its sensory limb, and bitter taste disappears from the back of the tongue where the body makes its last poison check before swallowing.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The nerve ending and glomus cell form a reciprocal synaptic pair, so the afferent is part of the sensor rather than merely reading it.

Spikes travelling outwards release substance P into the carotid body and dilate its vessels, a local blood flow loop run by a sensory cell.

The terminal also senses carbon dioxide, acid, temperature and circulating inflammatory proteins directly, making the carotid body an immune sensor as well as a gas sensor.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Arterial oxygen partial pressure, 20 to 120 millimetres of mercury.

◦ Arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure, 20 to 80 millimetres of mercury, and arterial pH 6.9 to 7.6.

◦ Carotid sinus wall strain, 0 to 0.2 fractional stretch, updated at the pulse rate.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spike train to the caudal nucleus of the solitary tract, 0 to 100 hertz, driving ventilation and sympathetic outflow.

◦ Substance P released backwards into the carotid body.

• STATE.

◦ Instantaneous rate, adaptation level, sensitisation gain set by chronic hypoxia, refractory timer.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Baseline rate about 1 hertz, maximum about 80 hertz, half maximal oxygen pressure about 55 millimetres of mercury, curve steepness about 8 millimetres of mercury, carbon dioxide gain about 0.01 per millimetre of mercury.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Hypoxic response onset 1 to 5 seconds, adaptation about 20 seconds, acclimatisation 1 to 3 days.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Loss on both sides abolishes the drive to breathe in low oxygen, sensitisation drives hypertension in sleep apnoea, and irritation of the same ganglion produces glossopharyngeal neuralgia, a stabbing throat pain affecting fewer than 1 person in 100,000 per year that can trigger reflex fainting.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to convert arterial blood gas values into the firing rate of one petrosal chemoreceptor afferent.
Create a number variable called oxygen_pressure with initial value 40.
Create a number variable called carbon_dioxide_pressure with initial value 40.
Create a number variable called hypoxic_drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called carbon_dioxide_gain with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 300, repeat the following steps.
    Set hypoxic_drive to the quotient of 1 divided by the sum of 1 and the exponential of the quotient of the difference of oxygen_pressure and 55 divided by 8.
    Set carbon_dioxide_gain to the sum of 1 and the product of 0.01 and the difference of carbon_dioxide_pressure and 40.
    Set firing_rate to the sum of 1 and the product of 80 and the product of hypoxic_drive and carbon_dioxide_gain.
    Set firing_rate to the difference of firing_rate and adaptation.
    Check if firing_rate is less than 0.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set firing_rate to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set adaptation to the sum of adaptation and the product of 0.005 and the difference of the product of 0.2 and firing_rate and adaptation.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display firing_rate to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the model is a few smooth curves and clarity beats raw speed here.
import math

DT = 0.1                 # seconds per step
BASELINE_HZ, MAX_HZ = 1.0, 80.0
P50_MMHG = 55.0          # oxygen pressure giving half maximal drive
STEEPNESS = 8.0          # millimetres of mercury per e fold
CO2_GAIN = 0.01          # per millimetre of mercury above 40
TAU_ADAPT, ADAPT_FRACTION = 20.0, 0.2

def chemoreceptor(pao2_series, paco2=40.0):
    """Spike rate of one carotid body afferent over time."""
    adaptation, trace = 0.0, []
    for pao2 in pao2_series:
        hypoxic = 1.0 / (1.0 + math.exp((pao2 - P50_MMHG) / STEEPNESS))
        co2 = 1.0 + CO2_GAIN * (paco2 - 40.0)
        rate = max(BASELINE_HZ + MAX_HZ * hypoxic * co2 - adaptation, 0.0)
        adaptation += DT * (ADAPT_FRACTION * rate - adaptation) / TAU_ADAPT
        trace.append(rate)
    return trace

if __name__ == "__main__":
    sea_level = [95.0] * 100          # ten seconds of normal air
    summit = [40.0] * 300             # thirty seconds of thin air
    result = chemoreceptor(sea_level + summit)
    print(round(result[50], 2), round(result[110], 2), round(result[-1], 2))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only sensory neuron that never stops firing while you are alive and well, because its resting discharge is the running proof that your blood still carries oxygen.

No other cell type reports at the same moment how much oxygen you have, how hard your arteries are being pushed, and whether the thing at the back of your tongue is bitter.

CHAPTER 235. NODOSE GANGLION NEURONS (Gut-And-Lung Status Neuron) (NON-COG)

The feeling of being full after a large meal is not made in your stomach: it is manufactured by a few thousand neurons in a red, cigar shaped swelling on the vagus nerve in your neck.

Nodose means knotty and describes the swelling of the vagus nerve that holds these cell bodies, which is a landmark rather than a function.

Gut-And-Lung names the two great territories these cells listen to, with separate specialists detecting stomach and intestinal stretch, the arrival of nutrients, and the inflation of the lung during each breath, including the only vagal fibres that reach into the alveolar region where gas exchange happens.

Status names the character of the message, which is a continuous background readout of how the internal organs are doing rather than an emergency signal.

Neuron marks it as part of a traffic overwhelmingly one way and inward, since roughly ninety percent of the fibres in the vagus nerve below the diaphragm carry information toward the brain rather than commands away from it.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is the pseudounipolar visceral sensory neuron of the inferior, or nodose, ganglion of the vagus nerve, the tenth cranial nerve, and like its relatives it has one forked stalk and no dendrites.

It is the body's internal reporter, telling the brainstem how full the stomach is, how stretched the lungs are, what nutrients have arrived in the gut, and how hard the heart is working.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

What makes this cell distinctive is the shape of its endings, which are sculpted structures rather than free tips.

Intraganglionic laminar endings spread as flat plates over nerve bundles in the gut wall to sense stretch, intramuscular arrays run alongside muscle fibres, and mucosal endings fan out inside the finger like villi of the intestine to sample the contents.

SIZE:

Cell bodies span about 20 to 50 micrometres, and the human nodose ganglion is a reddish spindle classically described as about 2.5 centimetres long, the longest sensory ganglion in the head and neck.

Its axons are the longest in the body outside the spinal cord, reaching from neck to transverse colon, close to a metre.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

A single cell survey of the mouse vagal ganglia identified 18 distinct nodose types, each apparently dedicated to one internal measurement.

Named examples include stomach stretch receptors carrying the glucagon like peptide 1 receptor, gut nutrient detectors carrying the acid sensor Gpr65, airway stretch receptors carrying Npy2r that make breathing rapid and shallow, aortic baroreceptors, and taste neurons serving the epiglottis.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The ganglion sits on the vagus nerve just below the jugular foramen, inside the carotid sheath beside the internal carotid artery and internal jugular vein, at the interface between skull base and neck.

Its endings are scattered through the larynx and epiglottis, the lungs and airways, the aortic arch, oesophagus, stomach, pancreas, liver and intestine as far as the transverse colon, and its central terminals map onto the nucleus of the solitary tract with airway inputs in the middle third and gut inputs in the caudal third.

NUMBER:

The regional budget allots about 5,000 per side, so about 10,000 in total.

Direct human counts are lacking and rat nodose ganglia contain roughly 6,000 neurons, so 5,000 to 10,000 per side is defensible, with low to moderate confidence.

That is about one neuron in every 9 million in the nervous system, a startlingly small crew for the entire conversation between your organs and your brain.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Chemosensitive C fibre cells use tetrodotoxin resistant Nav1.8 and Nav1.9 channels and fire broad spikes with a shoulder, while fast mechanoreceptors use tetrodotoxin sensitive channels and fire narrow spikes.

Stomach stretch receptors are slowly adapting, holding a steady 5 to 30 spikes per second for as long as the stomach stays full, which is exactly what a fullness signal requires.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The peripheral endings carry a dense receptor field: PIEZO2 for stretch, 5-HT3 receptors for serotonin from gut enterochromaffin cells, CCK-A receptors for cholecystokinin, and receptors for glucagon like peptide 1, peptide YY, leptin and ghrelin.

Enteroendocrine cells even form synapse like contacts called neuropods that release glutamate onto these endings within milliseconds, and centrally the terminals make powerful glutamate synapses in the nucleus of the solitary tract.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

The cervical vagus is roughly 80 percent afferent, meaning it is mostly a cable carrying information up rather than commands down.

Between about 65 and 85 percent of its fibres are unmyelinated C fibres conducting at 0.4 to 2 metres per second, so a gut signal can take a full second to arrive, while the myelinated minority manages 4 to 15 metres per second.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

The central transmitter is glutamate.

Unlike its neighbour the jugular ganglion, the nodose cell largely lacks substance P, and that single chemical difference is the cleanest way to tell the two apart, though some subsets carry calcitonin gene related peptide, abbreviated CGRP.

MYELINATION:

Mostly unmyelinated and carried in Remak bundles, where one Schwann cell cradles many bare fibres, with the myelinated minority wrapped by Schwann cells outside and oligodendrocytes inside the medulla.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The soma must supply an axon up to a metre long, so axonal transport dominates the energy bill, and proteins made in the cell body take days to reach the intestinal terminal, which is why vagal neuropathy in diabetes recovers so slowly.

PLASTICITY:

A sustained high fat diet blunts the mechanical sensitivity of stomach stretch receptors within weeks, so the same meal reports as less filling, a peripheral contribution to obesity.

Bariatric surgery and drugs acting at the glucagon like peptide 1 receptor work partly by resetting this gain, and electrical vagus nerve stimulation drives the same afferents deliberately.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glia envelop the soma in the ordinary way, but the distinctive partner is peripheral.

Intraganglionic laminar endings sit inside myenteric ganglia and are physically wrapped by enteric glia, the only glia outside the brain and spinal cord that behave like astrocytes, releasing adenosine triphosphate and taking up glutamate around these endings.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the brainstem goes deaf to the body.

Meals no longer end because fullness never arrives, the Hering Breuer reflex that stops you over inflating your lungs disappears, blood pressure control loses its aortic sensor, and the whole gut to brain axis that shapes mood, nausea and appetite falls silent while the organs keep working.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

Gain control here is chemical, since a hormone such as cholecystokinin does not fire the cell by itself but multiplies its response to stretch, so the same stomach volume reports as fuller after a fatty meal.

The ending is also a mechanical transducer in its own right through PIEZO2, converting membrane tension into current with no intermediary.

These cells read the immune system through receptors for interleukin 1 beta, which is how gut infection becomes the feeling of sickness, and they form the sensory arm of the inflammatory reflex that lets the brain damp inflammation down.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Organ wall strain, 0 to 0.4 fractional stretch, from stomach, airway, oesophagus and aorta.

◦ Cholecystokinin 0 to 20 picomolar, glucagon like peptide 1 0 to 100 picomolar, serotonin 0 to 10 micromolar.

◦ Luminal nutrients and pH from mucosal endings, pH 2 to 8.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spike train to the nucleus of the solitary tract, 0 to 60 hertz, mapped by organ.

◦ Glutamate per spike, with organ identity encoded by terminal location rather than transmitter.

• STATE.

◦ Current strain, previous strain for the rate term, hormonal gain, adaptation level, firing rate.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Static sensitivity about 80 hertz per unit strain, dynamic sensitivity about 15 hertz per unit strain per second, hormonal gain 1.0 to 2.5, maximum rate about 60 hertz, threshold strain about 0.02.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Mechanotransduction under 1 millisecond, slow adaptation 5 to 30 seconds, hormonal gain change 5 to 30 minutes, diet induced change days to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Diabetic vagal neuropathy produces gastroparesis, in which the stomach neither empties nor reports, and blunted vagal signalling contributes to overeating.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn stomach wall stretch and gut hormone levels into the slowly adapting fullness signal of one nodose ganglion neuron.
Create a list variable called strain_samples with initial value empty list.
Create a number variable called strain with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called previous_strain with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called strain_rate with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called hormonal_gain with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called static_drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called dynamic_drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called adaptation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called firing_rate with initial value 0.
For each sample in strain_samples, perform the following operations.
    Set previous_strain to strain.
    Set strain to sample.
    Set strain_rate to the quotient of the difference of strain and previous_strain divided by 0.05.
    Check if strain is less than 0.02.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set static_drive to 0.
    Otherwise, perform the following actions.
        Set static_drive to the product of 80 and the difference of strain and 0.02.
    End the conditional block.
    Set dynamic_drive to the product of 15 and strain_rate.
    Set firing_rate to the product of hormonal_gain and the sum of static_drive and dynamic_drive.
    Set firing_rate to the difference of firing_rate and adaptation.
    Set adaptation to the sum of adaptation and the product of 0.005 and the difference of the product of 0.3 and firing_rate and adaptation.
    Display firing_rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python is chosen because the whole model is one short state update and readability matters most.
DT = 0.05                 # seconds per sample
THRESHOLD_STRAIN = 0.02
STATIC_HZ = 80.0          # hertz per unit strain
DYNAMIC_HZ = 15.0         # hertz per unit strain per second
MAX_HZ = 60.0
TAU_ADAPT, ADAPT_FRACTION = 10.0, 0.3

def nodose_afferent(strain_series, hormonal_gain=1.0):
    """Slowly adapting stomach stretch afferent with hormone set gain."""
    adaptation, previous, rates = 0.0, 0.0, []
    for strain in strain_series:
        rate_of_change = (strain - previous) / DT
        previous = strain
        static = STATIC_HZ * max(strain - THRESHOLD_STRAIN, 0.0)
        dynamic = DYNAMIC_HZ * max(rate_of_change, 0.0)
        rate = min(max(hormonal_gain * (static + dynamic) - adaptation, 0.0), MAX_HZ)
        adaptation += DT * (ADAPT_FRACTION * rate - adaptation) / TAU_ADAPT
        rates.append(rate)
    return rates

if __name__ == "__main__":
    meal = [0.0] * 20 + [0.02 * i for i in range(20)] + [0.38] * 200
    print(round(nodose_afferent(meal)[-1], 1),
          round(nodose_afferent(meal, hormonal_gain=2.0)[-1], 1))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only neuron whose cell body sits in a finger long red spindle in your neck and whose far tip is draped over a nerve bundle in your intestine.

A vagal sensory cell built from an embryonic placode rather than neural crest, lacking substance P and answering to a gut hormone, is nodose and nothing else.

CHAPTER 236. JUGULAR GANGLION NEURONS (Airway-Irritation Cough Neuron) (NON-COG)

The choking tickle of a cough that will not stop for months usually begins in a ganglion the size of a peppercorn, wedged in a hole in the base of your skull.

Jugular names the throat region the ganglion sits in and nothing more, while these cells have one of the most recognisable jobs in the body.

Airway-Irritation names what they detect, acids, smoke, inflammatory mediators and mechanical insult in the trachea and conducting airways, sensed by neural crest derived fibres whose properties match skin pain fibres rather than the visceral cells beside them.

Cough names the reflex they command, and current work treats this population as the direct target for drugs against chronic cough and cough hypersensitivity.

Neuron marks it as anatomically distinct from its larger neighbour in two hard ways, since the neighbouring nodose ganglion holds roughly five to ten times as many neurons and these cells terminate in the paratrigeminal nucleus rather than the nucleus of the solitary tract.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is the pseudounipolar sensory neuron of the superior, or jugular, ganglion of the vagus nerve, and its defining fact is where it came from.

Unlike its downstream neighbour the nodose ganglion it is built from neural crest cells, the embryonic stock that makes the pain cells of the spinal cord, so it reports damage and irritation rather than routine housekeeping.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The soma is round and jacketed by satellite glia, and in a study of human jugular ganglia the mean cell body cross section measured 1,128.8 plus or minus 99.7 square micrometres with a nucleus of 127.7 plus or minus 20.8 square micrometres.

Peripheral endings are simple bare fibres weaving between the surface cells of the airway lining and ear canal skin, not the sculpted plates of the nodose cell.

SIZE:

That cross section corresponds to a cell body roughly 38 micrometres across with a nucleus about 13 micrometres across.

The ganglion itself is classically described as spherical and about 4 millimetres in diameter, a peppercorn.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

Single cell surveys show this ganglion mirrors the spinal dorsal root ganglion rather than the nodose ganglion.

Its classes are C fibre low threshold mechanoreceptors, A fibre low threshold mechanoreceptors, A delta nociceptors, cold nociceptors and mechano heat C nociceptors carrying capsaicin sensitive TRPV1 channels, and most are peptidergic, meaning they carry substance P and calcitonin gene related peptide, abbreviated CGRP.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The ganglion sits inside the jugular foramen, the opening in the temporal bone through which the vagus, glossopharyngeal and accessory nerves leave the skull, often fused with the superior glossopharyngeal ganglion, so it is literally a cell body sitting in a doorway in bone at the interface between cranial cavity and neck.

Its endings reach the external ear canal and eardrum through the auricular branch called Arnold's nerve, the dura of the posterior cranial fossa, and the larynx, trachea, bronchi and oesophagus, while its central terminals go not to the nucleus of the solitary tract but to the paratrigeminal nucleus and spinal trigeminal nucleus, the territory of facial pain.

NUMBER:

This is the one ganglion in this group with a real human count.

A stereological study estimated 2,721.8 to 9,301.1 sensory neurons per side, mean 7,975.1 plus or minus 3,312.8, so roughly 16,000 across both sides, with moderate confidence limited by the wide spread between individuals.

That is about one neuron in every 5 million in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

These are high threshold cells that stay silent until something is wrong, then fire slowly and irregularly at 1 to 20 spikes per second from a resting voltage near negative 55 to negative 60 millivolts.

They rely on tetrodotoxin resistant Nav1.8 and Nav1.9 sodium channels, which is why anaesthetics that block ordinary sodium channels are poor cough suppressants.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The peripheral ending has no presynaptic partner and senses tissue directly through TRPV1 for heat, acid and capsaicin, TRPA1 for smoke and irritants, and the purinergic receptor P2X3.

The detail that separates jugular from nodose is that jugular cells carry P2X3 alone while nodose cells add P2X2 to form a more sensitive combined channel, and centrally the terminal releases glutamate with substance P onto neurokinin 1 receptors in the paratrigeminal nucleus.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Most fibres are unmyelinated C fibres conducting at 0.5 to 1 metre per second, with a minority of thinly myelinated A delta fibres at about 4 to 8 metres per second.

The airway branches are short, but conduction is so slow that tens of milliseconds pass between tracheal irritation and the first cough.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the fast transmitter and substance P is the signature peptide, with CGRP alongside it.

Airway nociceptors with cell bodies here widely express substance P while their nodose counterparts do not, which is the cleanest chemical fingerprint in this whole section.

MYELINATION:

Predominantly unmyelinated and gathered into Remak bundles by Schwann cells, with the thinly myelinated minority handed over to oligodendrocytes on entering the medulla.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Firing rates are low so the electrical bill is small, but peptide production is expensive, since substance P and CGRP must be made in the cell body, packed into large dense core vesicles and shipped the length of the axon.

PLASTICITY:

Nerve growth factor released during airway inflammation raises the amount of TRPV1 and substance P these cells carry, sometimes within hours.

That is the accepted mechanism of cough hypersensitivity syndrome, in which a chest infection clears but the cough continues for months because the sensor has been permanently turned up.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glia here do something unusual, raising their levels of the gap junction protein connexin 43 after inflammation and electrically coupling neighbouring cell bodies that should be independent.

Out in the airway the functional support cells are not glia at all but mast cells and eosinophils, immune cells that park beside these endings and release histamine, prostaglandin E2 and nerve growth factor onto them.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and the cough reflex from larynx and trachea largely dies, so inhaled food and fluid are no longer expelled.

Arnold's reflex, the odd cough some people get when a doctor puts an instrument in the ear, disappears, and the airway loses its alarm system while keeping its stretch sensors intact.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The axon reflex is the headline behaviour, because a spike generated at one branch tip travels back down the others and dumps substance P and CGRP into the tissue, making vessels leak, airways narrow and immune cells gather.

The sensory neuron therefore causes inflammation as well as reporting it, a loop called neurogenic inflammation.

Coupling through satellite glia lets one irritated cell partly excite its silent neighbours, and the same peptides feed back onto mast cells, closing a nerve to immune circuit that runs without the brain.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Capsaicin or equivalent TRPV1 agonist, 0 to 10 micromolar.

◦ Tissue pH 4.0 to 7.4 and tissue temperature 20 to 50 degrees Celsius.

◦ Extracellular adenosine triphosphate, 0 to 100 micromolar, from damaged surface cells.

◦ Nerve growth factor and prostaglandin E2 levels setting the sensitisation multiplier.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spike train to the paratrigeminal nucleus, 0 to 30 hertz, driving the cough motor pattern.

◦ Substance P and CGRP released backwards into airway tissue.

• STATE.

◦ Generator potential, sensitisation multiplier, slow accommodation term, releasable peptide pool, spike count.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ TRPV1 half activating capsaicin about 0.5 micromolar, heat threshold about 43 degrees Celsius, acid half point about pH 5.4, P2X3 half activating adenosine triphosphate about 12 micromolar, spike threshold about 12 millivolts above rest, sensitisation 1.0 to 4.0.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane about 20 milliseconds, accommodation about 400 milliseconds, peptide refill tens of seconds, inflammatory sensitisation hours to weeks.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ Persistent sensitisation produces refractory chronic cough, and the drug gefapixant, which blocks P2X3 and P2X2 or P2X3 receptors, was developed to silence these cells, while losing them causes silent aspiration and pneumonia.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to decide whether one jugular ganglion airway nociceptor fires and triggers a cough.
Create a number variable called capsaicin with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called tissue_acidity with initial value 0.8.
Create a number variable called atp_level with initial value 2.
Create a number variable called sensitisation with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called generator_potential with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called accommodation with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called channel_opening with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called purinergic_opening with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 3000, repeat the following steps.
    Set channel_opening to the quotient of the sum of capsaicin and tissue_acidity divided by the sum of the sum of capsaicin and tissue_acidity and 1.
    Set purinergic_opening to the quotient of atp_level divided by the sum of atp_level and 12.
    Set drive to the product of sensitisation and the sum of the product of 18 and channel_opening and the product of 9 and purinergic_opening.
    Set drive to the difference of drive and accommodation.
    Set generator_potential to the sum of generator_potential and the product of 0.05 and the difference of drive and generator_potential.
    Set accommodation to the sum of accommodation and the product of 0.0025 and the difference of the product of 0.3 and generator_potential and accommodation.
    Check if generator_potential is greater than or equal to 12.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set spike_count to the sum of spike_count and 1.
        Set generator_potential to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display spike_count to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C is chosen because a simulator holds thousands of these and the per neuron step must be fixed cost. */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>

#define DT 0.001                 /* seconds per step */

typedef struct {
    double v;                    /* generator potential, mV above rest */
    double sensitisation;        /* 1.0 healthy, up to 4.0 after nerve growth factor */
    double accommodation;        /* slow shunting term */
    int    spikes;
} Jugular;

static double trp_open(double capsaicin_uM, double pH, double degC)
{
    double cap  = capsaicin_uM / (capsaicin_uM + 0.5);        /* TRPV1 half point 0.5 uM */
    double acid = 1.0 / (1.0 + pow(10.0, pH - 5.4));          /* acid half point pH 5.4 */
    double heat = 1.0 / (1.0 + exp((43.0 - degC) / 1.5));     /* threshold 43 C */
    double open = cap + acid + heat;
    return open > 1.0 ? 1.0 : open;
}

int jugular_step(Jugular *n, double cap, double pH, double degC, double atp_uM)
{
    double p2x3 = atp_uM / (atp_uM + 12.0);                   /* homomeric P2X3, half point 12 uM */
    double drive = n->sensitisation * (18.0 * trp_open(cap, pH, degC) + 9.0 * p2x3);
    double net = drive - n->accommodation;
    n->v += DT * (net - n->v) / 0.020;                        /* 20 ms membrane */
    n->accommodation += DT * (0.3 * n->v - n->accommodation) / 0.400;
    if (n->v >= 12.0) { n->spikes++; n->v = 0.0; return 1; }
    return 0;
}

int main(void)
{
    Jugular n = {0.0, 1.0, 0.0, 0};
    int i, fired = 0;
    for (i = 0; i < 3000; i++)                                /* three seconds of inhaled citric acid */
        fired += jugular_step(&n, 0.0, 4.8, 37.0, 2.0);
    printf("action potentials in 3 s: %d\n", fired);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the vagus nerve cell that is not really a vagus nerve cell, a neural crest pain neuron sitting in a hole in the skull and reporting to trigeminal pain territory instead of the visceral relay.

Substance P plus P2X3 without P2X2, an ending in the trachea and a terminal in the paratrigeminal nucleus identify it beyond argument.

CHAPTER 237. TRIGEMINAL GANGLION NEURONS (Facial Touch-And-Pain Neuron) (NON-COG)

Touch your cheek, sip something scalding, feel a single eyelash on your cornea: one crescent of cells the size of a thumbnail, lying in a pouch of membrane on the floor of your skull, reports every bit of it.

Trigeminal means three twins and records only that the nerve leaves the ganglion in three branches, so the name is a piece of anatomical bookkeeping.

Facial names the territory, since this single ganglion supplies almost all sensation from the face, the front of the scalp, the teeth, the sinuses, the eye and the lining of the mouth and nose.

Touch-And-Pain names the two duties that dominate the population, from delicate mechanoreceptors that register a hair moving to polymodal nociceptors that fire to mechanical, chemical and heat injury together and form the largest single class in the cornea.

Neuron marks it as one of the twenty thousand to thirty five thousand pseudounipolar cells of the human ganglion, among whose corneal afferents about forty five percent carry the heat and irritant sensor, twenty eight percent a pure mechanical sensor and eight percent a cold sensor.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

This is the pseudounipolar sensory neuron of the trigeminal ganglion, also called the Gasserian or semilunar ganglion, the largest sensory ganglion in the head, and it supplies the face's entire sense of touch, temperature, itch and pain, including cornea, teeth, sinuses, jaw joint and the membranes covering the brain.

One correction is worth making early: the cells that sense jaw muscle stretch are not here at all, because they uniquely sit inside the brainstem in the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

The ganglion is a flat crescent, convex forwards, from which the three divisions fan out like the ribs of a hand held fan.

Each neuron is a round soma sheathed in satellite glia with one stalk forking at a T junction, and its peripheral endings range from elaborate encapsulated touch corpuscles in the lips to completely bare fibres in the cornea and tooth pulp.

SIZE:

The ganglion measures roughly 15 to 20 millimetres along its convex edge, about 5 millimetres high and 2 to 3 millimetres thick.

Cell bodies span an unusually wide 15 to 100 micrometres, small dark ones feeding pain fibres and large pale ones feeding fast touch fibres, and the sensory root carries about 154,000 myelinated fibres, making it the thickest cranial nerve.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

A combined human and mouse single cell atlas published in 2022 resolved 15 cell types here, about eight of them neuronal and seven support cells: fast A beta low threshold mechanoreceptors for touch, A delta nociceptors for sharp first pain, peptidergic C nociceptors carrying calcitonin gene related peptide, abbreviated CGRP, for burning second pain, non peptidergic C nociceptors marked by MRGPRD, cold neurons carrying TRPM8, and C fibre low threshold mechanoreceptors for pleasant stroking.

A notable species difference is that in humans, but not mice, the CALCA gene encoding CGRP is strongly expressed in an itch related class.

WHERE IT LIVES:

The ganglion lies in Meckel's cave, a pouch of dura mater on the trigeminal impression at the apex of the petrous temporal bone, bathed in cerebrospinal fluid, at the interface between the posterior cranial fossa where the root leaves the pons and the middle cranial fossa where the three divisions depart.

Its peripheral fields cover cornea and conjunctiva, nasal and sinus linings, all teeth and gums, the anterior two thirds of the tongue for touch, the temporomandibular joint and the dura and large arteries of the front and middle of the brain, while its central branch ends in the principal sensory nucleus in the pons and the spinal trigeminal nucleus running down to the second or third cervical segment.

NUMBER:

Published stereological counts disagree badly, ranging from about 20,000 to about 160,000 neurons per side with reported means from roughly 27,000 to 80,600.

Since the sensory root alone carries about 154,000 myelinated fibres before any unmyelinated ones are counted, the true figure is almost certainly at the upper end, so 100,000 to 200,000 per side is the working number, with moderate confidence in the order of magnitude and low confidence in the exact value.

The regional budget allots up to about 1 million per side, comfortably containing every published estimate, and at roughly 300,000 across both sides this is about one neuron in every 300,000 in the nervous system.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Large touch cells fire narrow spikes and conduct at 30 to 70 metres per second, while small pain cells fire broad tetrodotoxin resistant spikes using Nav1.8 and conduct at 0.5 to 2 metres per second.

The sodium channel Nav1.7 sets the firing threshold, and inherited mutations that make it open too easily cause attacks of scorching facial pain, while mutations that disable it abolish pain altogether.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

In a healthy ganglion there are no synapses between neurons at all, which makes what happens after injury remarkable, because injured cells begin to excite silent neighbours through the shared satellite glial envelope, a phenomenon called cross excitation.

The central terminals make glutamate synapses in the spinal trigeminal nucleus and co release CGRP and substance P during strong or repeated firing.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

Each cell has one stem axon that forks, and the fork itself matters because it acts as a low pass filter: at high firing rates some spikes fail to turn the corner and never reach the brain.

Peripheral fibres range from 0.2 to 20 micrometres across and can run 10 centimetres or more to reach a tooth root or the tip of the nose.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate is the fast transmitter for every subtype, and roughly a third to a half of these neurons additionally carry CGRP, with many carrying substance P, somatostatin or pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide.

CGRP is the most powerful vasodilator known in human tissue, and that is why this ganglion is now a major drug target.

MYELINATION:

Peripheral branches are myelinated by Schwann cells and central branches by oligodendrocytes, with the handover at a short transition called the Obersteiner Redlich zone a few millimetres from the pons.

That zone is the weak point of the whole nerve, because a small artery pressing there strips myelin and lets neighbouring fibres short circuit into each other.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

Total demand is high because hundreds of thousands of cells support long axons and continuous peptide manufacture.

One detail matters enormously for medicine: the vessels inside this ganglion are fenestrated, meaning leaky, so there is no blood brain barrier here and antibody drugs that cannot enter the brain reach these cells easily.

PLASTICITY:

Repeated activation drives central sensitisation, in which the brainstem relay becomes so responsive that brushing the hair hurts, the cutaneous allodynia most people report during a migraine.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 lies dormant in these cell bodies for life, with TrkA positive neurons making up about 62 percent of the human ganglion, and reactivation produces cold sores or sight threatening eye disease.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glia here are unusually active, each soma having its own glial capsule, and after injury these cells raise glial fibrillary acidic protein and connexin 43, forming gap junctions that let one neuron's activity leak into another's.

Resident macrophages sit permanently between the capsules and release inflammatory signals during migraine, and combined with the leaky vessels this makes the ganglion an outpost of the nervous system deliberately left open to the bloodstream.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Remove this cell type and half the face becomes a numb mask that still moves normally, because the facial muscles are driven by a different nerve.

The corneal blink reflex dies so the eye dries and can be lost to neurotrophic keratitis, teeth feel nothing, hot drinks cause silent burns, and migraine becomes impossible, because the throbbing pain of a migraine is carried by precisely these cells and by nothing else.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

The axon reflex is the defining extra behaviour, since a spike arriving at one branch invades the others and releases CGRP into the meninges, dilating arteries and recruiting mast cells, so the pain neuron actively changes the blood supply of the tissue it reports on.

The T junction filters its own traffic, satellite glia cross couple neighbours, herpes viruses hijack the cell body as a lifelong hiding place, and local protein synthesis lets a damaged axon begin repair before the cell body knows.

Corneal fibres also secrete substance P and insulin like growth factor that the corneal surface needs to stay alive, which is why a numb cornea disintegrates.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS.

◦ Mechanical force at the ending, 0 to 100 millinewtons.

◦ Temperature 0 to 55 degrees Celsius, with cold sensing below 25 and heat sensing above 42.

◦ Tissue pH 5.0 to 7.4, plus bradykinin, prostaglandin E2 and nerve growth factor levels.

• OUTPUTS.

◦ Spike train to the spinal trigeminal and principal sensory nuclei, 0 to 200 hertz for touch cells and 0 to 40 hertz for pain cells.

◦ CGRP and substance P released backwards into skin, cornea, tooth pulp and dura.

◦ A meningeal vessel calibre signal, since CGRP directly dilates dural arteries.

• STATE.

◦ Generator potential, releasable CGRP store, dural vessel tone, sensitisation level, viral latency flag, spike count.

• PARAMETERS.

◦ Mechanical half point about 8 millinewtons, heat threshold about 42 degrees Celsius, acid half point about pH 6.0, spike threshold about 15 millivolts above rest, CGRP released per spike about 2 percent of store, dilation gain about 4.

• TIME CONSTANTS.

◦ Membrane 8 to 15 milliseconds, CGRP refill about 30 seconds, vessel tone recovery about 2 seconds, central sensitisation minutes to hours.

• FAILURE MODE.

◦ An artery pressing on the root at the Obersteiner Redlich zone causes trigeminal neuralgia, electric shock pain triggered by a breath of wind, while runaway CGRP release causes migraine, now treated with antibodies against CGRP that work because this ganglion has no blood brain barrier.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to fire one trigeminal nociceptor and let its axon reflex dilate a meningeal blood vessel.
Create a number variable called mechanical_force with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called generator_potential with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called cgrp_store with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called dural_tone with initial value 1.
Create a number variable called mechanical_drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called heat_drive with initial value 18.
Create a number variable called total_drive with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called released with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called spike_count with initial value 0.
Create a number variable called step with initial value 0.
While step is less than 20000, repeat the following steps.
    Set mechanical_drive to the product of 12 and the quotient of mechanical_force divided by the sum of mechanical_force and 8.
    Set total_drive to the sum of mechanical_drive and heat_drive.
    Set generator_potential to the sum of generator_potential and the product of 0.0333 and the difference of total_drive and generator_potential.
    Set cgrp_store to the sum of cgrp_store and the product of 0.0000167 and the difference of 1 and cgrp_store.
    Set dural_tone to the sum of dural_tone and the product of 0.00025 and the difference of 1 and dural_tone.
    Check if generator_potential is greater than or equal to 15.
    If that check is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set released to the product of 0.02 and cgrp_store.
        Set cgrp_store to the difference of cgrp_store and released.
        Set dural_tone to the sum of dural_tone and the product of 4 and released.
        Set spike_count to the sum of spike_count and 1.
        Set generator_potential to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Set step to the sum of step and 1.
End the loop.
Display spike_count to the console.
Display dural_tone to the console.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

/* C is chosen because a whole ganglion means hundreds of thousands of instances in a tight inner loop. */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <math.h>

#define DT 0.0005                /* 0.5 ms step */

typedef struct {
    double v;                    /* generator potential, mV above rest */
    double cgrp_store;           /* releasable CGRP, 0 to 1 */
    double dural_tone;           /* 1.0 is resting vessel calibre */
    int    spikes;
} Trigeminal;

static const double THRESHOLD_MV = 15.0;
static const double TAU_MEMBRANE = 0.015;   /* 15 ms */
static const double TAU_REFILL   = 30.0;    /* CGRP store refills over 30 s */
static const double TAU_VESSEL   = 2.0;     /* vessel calibre relaxes over 2 s */

int trigeminal_step(Trigeminal *n, double force_mN, double degC, double pH)
{
    double mech = 12.0 * force_mN / (force_mN + 8.0);          /* PIEZO2, half point 8 mN */
    double heat = 20.0 / (1.0 + exp((42.0 - degC) / 1.2));     /* TRPV1 threshold 42 C */
    double acid =  8.0 / (1.0 + pow(10.0, pH - 6.0));          /* ASIC3, half point pH 6.0 */
    n->v += DT * (mech + heat + acid - n->v) / TAU_MEMBRANE;
    n->cgrp_store += DT * (1.0 - n->cgrp_store) / TAU_REFILL;
    n->dural_tone += DT * (1.0 - n->dural_tone) / TAU_VESSEL;

    if (n->v >= THRESHOLD_MV) {
        double released = 0.02 * n->cgrp_store;                /* antidromic axon reflex */
        n->cgrp_store -= released;
        n->dural_tone += 4.0 * released;                       /* CGRP dilates dural arteries */
        n->spikes++; n->v = 0.0; return 1;
    }
    return 0;
}

int main(void)
{
    Trigeminal n = {0.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0};
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i < 20000; i++)                                /* ten seconds of noxious dural heat */
        trigeminal_step(&n, 0.0, 45.0, 7.3);
    printf("spikes %d, dural tone %.3f, CGRP left %.3f\n", n.spikes, n.dural_tone, n.cgrp_store);
    return 0;
}

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the only sensory neuron that lives in a dural pouch bathed in cerebrospinal fluid, sits behind leaky vessels rather than a blood brain barrier, and can dilate the arteries of the brain covering simply by firing.

A cell body in Meckel's cave whose axon reaches a tooth, a cornea or the dura, and which shelters herpes simplex for a lifetime, can only be a trigeminal ganglion neuron.


PART FIFTEEN: DORSAL ROOT GANGLION NEURONS - BODY SENSATION

CHAPTER 238. PROPRIOCEPTORS (NON-COG)

Close your eyes and touch your nose, and thank a cell that has never shown you a picture, a sound, or a feeling you could name.

WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES:

A proprioceptor is a sensory neuron whose cell body sits in a dorsal root ganglion (DRG), a bead of nerve cell bodies parked just outside the spinal cord.

Its far end wraps a stretch detector inside a muscle or tendon and reports muscle length, the speed of length change, and tendon force.

Proprioception means the sense of where your own body is, and this cell is its hardware.

STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY:

It is pseudounipolar: one stalk leaves the round cell body and splits at a T junction into a muscle branch and a spinal branch, with no dendrites at all.

At the muscle it coils in a spiral around thin fibres inside a capsule called a muscle spindle, or braids among collagen in a Golgi tendon organ.

SIZE:

Cell bodies have a median diameter near 90 to 100 micrometres in the 2025 human DRG reference atlas built from 126 donors, among the largest neurons in the body.

The fibre is 12 to 20 micrometres thick and can run a full metre, serving a spindle only 4 to 10 millimetres long.

STRUCTURAL SUBTYPES:

• Group Ia, the spiral spindle primary, reporting stretch velocity, matching the atlas cluster A-Propr.HAPLN4.

• Group II, the spindle secondary, reporting static length, matching cluster A-Propr.EPHA3, unusually small at about 67 micrometres.

• Group Ib, the Golgi tendon organ ending, reporting force, matching cluster A-Propr.PCDH8.

• Joint capsule and ligament afferents, reporting extreme angles rather than everyday posture.

WHERE IT LIVES:

Cell bodies fill all 31 pairs of dorsal root ganglia, wedged in the intervertebral foramen, the bony gap between two vertebrae, with cervical ganglia most enriched.

Endings sit in muscle spindles and at the musculotendinous junction, the interface where muscle becomes tendon, and in joint capsules.

Central branches reach lamina IX, laminae VI and VII, Clarke's column from about T1 to L2, and the cuneate and external cuneate nuclei.

The defining interface is the dorsal root entry zone, where Schwann cell myelin hands the axon to oligodendrocyte myelin.

NUMBER:

The body holds roughly 50,000 muscle spindles, and spindles outnumber Golgi tendon organs by one to two to one.

Each spindle takes one Ia and several group II fibres, giving about 250,000 proprioceptors, plausible range 200,000 to 350,000.

That is 2 to 3.5 percent of the roughly 10 million DRG neurons and about 0.0003 percent of all neurons.

Confidence is moderate, because nobody has counted human proprioceptors, and the spindle census rests on Hermann Voss's tally of nearly 22,000 spindles in 139 muscles.

ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES:

Resting voltage is about minus 60 millivolts, with a narrow spike and no shoulder on its falling phase.

Group Ia endings hold 20 to 100 spikes per second during steady stretch and burst above 200 during a fast pull.

Conduction reaches 80 to 120 metres per second in cat, but human recordings give 50 to 70 metres per second in the arm.

SYNAPTIC CONNECTIONS:

The Ia fibre contacts motor neurons of its own muscle directly, the only one step reflex in the body, which is the tendon jerk.

It also drives inhibitory interneurons that relax the opposing muscle, and Clarke's column cells feeding the cerebellum.

Uniquely, its own terminals are synapsed upon by GABA releasing spinal cells, so the cord turns its input down before arrival.

AXON CHARACTERISTICS:

These are the thickest and fastest sensory wires in the body.

The stem axon before the T junction is long, around 230 micrometres against about 60 in small pain cells, and the junction drops spikes at high rates.

NEUROTRANSMITTERS:

Glutamate, the main excitatory messenger, loaded into vesicles by VGLUT1, the vesicular glutamate transporter type 1.

They carry parvalbumin, and about 90 percent of parvalbumin positive DRG neurons are proprioceptors.

Identity is set by RUNX3 and ETV1, and survival needs neurotrophin 3 acting through the receptor TrkC, also written NTRK3.

MYELINATION:

Roughly 100 wrapped layers of Schwann cell membrane, with a g ratio, the ratio of axon width to fibre width, near 0.6 to 0.7.

Internodes, the insulated stretches between bare gaps called nodes of Ranvier, reach 1 to 1.5 millimetres, which buys the speed.

METABOLIC DEMANDS:

The most expensive sensory neuron in the body, firing all day and feeding a metre of thick axon.

Its mitochondria need frataxin to build iron sulphur clusters, which is why Friedreich ataxia, a frataxin shortage, kills these cells first.

PLASTICITY:

The flexibility is mechanical, because gamma motor neurons contract the fibres inside the spindle and reset its sensitivity, a setting called the fusimotor set.

The Ia to motor neuron synapse depresses within a few impulses, which is why a rapidly tapped reflex fades.

SUPPORT SYSTEM:

Satellite glial cells wrap each cell body about 20 nanometres away and soak up potassium through Kir4.1 channels, and a giant soma needs several.

At the spindle, terminal Schwann cells stop short of the sensory tip, leaving bare membrane where the stretch sensor PIEZO2 sits.

Ganglion capillaries are leaky, with no blood nerve barrier, and in Friedreich ataxia the satellite cells swell into residual nodules before the neuron dies.

HOW IT COLOURS ITS REGION:

Delete this cell and the cord loses its only direct sensory line into motor neurons, and the limb becomes an open loop machine.

Tendon reflexes vanish and muscle tone collapses.

People who lose these fibres still feel touch and pain, yet cannot stand with their eyes shut, and must move by watching their limbs like a puppeteer.

BEYOND INTEGRATE AND FIRE:

PIEZO2 opens under membrane tension, but mechanics shape the signal first, because sticky cross bridges inside the spindle create the initial burst and a history dependence called thixotropy.

The brain writes back down the same wire twice, through gamma motor neurons that reset the encoder and GABAergic presynaptic inhibition that gates the terminal.

The afferent keeps its own sense organ alive, since a denervated spindle degenerates, and mouse work shows proprioceptor PIEZO2 is required for normal skeletal shape.

SYSTEMS INTERFACE:

• INPUTS: fascicle length as a fraction of rest length, lengthening velocity in rest lengths per second, tendon force in newtons for Ib units, gamma drive as a gain from 0.5 to 3.

• OUTPUTS: glutamate onto lamina IX motor neurons, Ia inhibitory interneurons, Clarke's column and the cuneate nucleus, at 0 to 320 spikes per second.

• STATE: previous length, adaptation level, thixotropy state, refractory timer, fusimotor gain.

• PARAMETERS: position gain about 60 spikes per second per unit fractional stretch, velocity gain about 12 per square root unit, resting rate about 10, conduction 50 to 120 metres per second.

• TIME CONSTANTS: transduction under 1 millisecond, initial burst decay 20 to 50 milliseconds, thixotropic recovery seconds to minutes, fusimotor change 50 to 200 milliseconds.

• FAILURE MODE: in Friedreich ataxia and in large fibre sensory neuronopathy from cisplatin or vitamin B6 overdose these cells die first, giving sensory ataxia and absent tendon reflexes, while PIEZO2 loss of function causes distal arthrogryposis with impaired proprioception and touch.

ENGLISH READABLE CODE:

The purpose of this procedure is to turn muscle length and the speed of length change into the firing rate of a group Ia spindle afferent.
Create a number variable called previous_length with initial value 1.0.
Create a number variable called fusimotor_gain with initial value 1.0.
For each sample in the length recording, perform the following operations.
    Calculate the difference of sample and 1.0.
    Set stretch to the result.
    Calculate the difference of sample and previous_length.
    Calculate the quotient of the result divided by 0.001.
    Set velocity to the result.
    Check if velocity is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set velocity to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Check if stretch is less than 0.
    If that condition is true, then perform the following actions.
        Set stretch to 0.
    End the conditional block.
    Calculate the product of stretch and 60.
    Calculate the sum of the result and 10.
    Set firing_rate to the result.
    Calculate the product of the square root of velocity and 12.
    Calculate the sum of firing_rate and the result.
    Calculate the product of the result and fusimotor_gain.
    Set firing_rate to the result.
    Set previous_length to sample.
    Display firing_rate to the console.
End the loop.
The procedure is complete.

CODE SAMPLE:

# Python: plain arithmetic in a loop, no libraries, and the language most
# simulation agents can already run unchanged.
import math

DT = 0.001        # time step in seconds
K_POS = 60.0      # spikes/s per unit of fractional stretch
K_VEL = 12.0      # spikes/s per square root unit of velocity
BIAS = 10.0       # background discharge at resting length
GAMMA = 1.0       # fusimotor gain set by gamma motor neurons
MAX_RATE = 320.0  # ceiling imposed by the refractory period

def ia_rate(length, prev_length, rest=1.0):
    """Group Ia rate for one time step, Houk and Prochazka form."""
    stretch = max(0.0, length - rest)                  # a spindle cannot be pushed
    velocity = max(0.0, (length - prev_length) / DT)   # unloading silences it
    dynamic = K_VEL * math.pow(velocity, 0.5)          # compressive velocity term
    return min(GAMMA * (BIAS + K_POS * stretch + dynamic), MAX_RATE)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    length, prev = 1.0, 1.0            # ramp and hold, 5 percent over 100 ms
    for step in range(300):
        t = step * DT
        length = 1.0 + 0.05 * min(t / 0.1, 1.0)
        r = ia_rate(length, prev)
        prev = length
        if step % 100 == 0:
            print("t=%.3f s  length=%.4f  Ia rate=%6.1f spikes/s" % (t, length, r))

WHAT MAKES IT UNMISTAKABLE:

It is the biggest cell body, wearing the thickest myelin, on the fastest wire, and the only sensory neuron that speaks to a motor neuron with no relay in between.

It is silent to touch, heat and pain, and busy while you stand perfectly still.
